This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 

We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 


at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/ 


V  11^ 


© 


WORD    STUDIES 


IN  THB 


NEW   TESTAMENT 


BY 

MARVIN   R.  VINCENT,   D.D. 

BALOWm  PtOrSSSOK  OW  SACRBD  LTnUATUMI  IN  UMIOM  TIOOUXSICAL  SBMINABT* 
KKW  VOKK 


VOLUME  IV. 

THE  THESSALONIAN  EPISTLES 
THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIANS 
THE  PASTTORAL  EPISTLES 
THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS 


••    ..-• 


NEW  YORK 

CHARLES  SCRIBNER'S  SONS 

1906 


•••••      •••• 

•••••     • 


•  ••• 


Vim 


COPYRIGHT,  1900,  BY 
CHARLES  SCRIBNER'S  SOUS 


THE   THESSALONIAN   EPISTLES 


^•<L<i»XlL 


ABBREVIATIONS,  ETC. 


A.  V.    Aathoriaed  Veraion  of  IdlL 

Apoo.    Apocalypse. 

Cit    ated. 

Citn.    Citation. 

Claas.    Greek  and  Boman  olaaaical  authoiBi 

Comm.    Commentary. 

Comp.    Compare. 

Const    Constraa 

=    Equivalent  to. 

t  and  ff.    Following. 

LXX.  Septuagint  Version  of  the  Old  Testament.  For  the  sake  of  hreyity 
the  Apocrjrphal  books  are  included  under  this  sign.  The  numbers 
of  the  Psalms  when  cited  from  the  LXX  are  given  according  to 
the  enumeration  of  the  LXX,  and  not  of  the  English  Bible. 

Lit    Literally. 

O.  T. :  N.  T.    Old  Testament:  New  Testament 

Rend.    Bender. 

Bev.    Bevised  Version  of  the  New  Testament,  1881. 

Bev.  T.    Bevisers*  Text  of  the  New  Testament 

T.  B.    Textus  Beceptus. 

Vulg.    Vulgate  or  Latin  Translation  of  the  New  Testament 

F>.    The  word  or  phrase  occurs  only  in  Paul's  writings. 

op.    The  word  or  phrase  does  not  occur  in  Paul's  writings. 

^LXX.    The  word  or  phrase  does  not  occur  in  the  Septuagint. 

oClass.    The  word  or  phrase  does  not  occur  in  classical  writers. 

N.  T.o.    The  word  or  phrase  occurs  in  the  New  Testament  only  here. 

Pasto.    The  word  or  phrase  occurs  only  in  the  Pastoral  Epistlea. 

Pasts.    Pastoral  Epistles. 

opast    The  word  or  phrase  does  not  occur  in  the  Pastoral  Epistlea. 


THE  THESSALONIAN  EPISTLES, 


INTRODUCTION. 

THE    FIB8T    EPIBTLB. 


Thebsaloniga  was  situated  on  the  Thermaic  Oulf ,  a  fine 
harbour,  affording  anchorage  for  large  ships  directly  in  front 
of  the  city.*  The  situation  commanded  the  trade  of  the 
Macedonian  waters,  and  was  connected  inland  with  the  plain 
of  the  Axius,  one  of  the  great  levels  of  Macedonia,  and  with 
the  plain  of  the  Strymon,  by  a  pass  across  the  peninsula  of 
Chalcidice.  It  was  the  chief  station  on  the  Via  Egnatia,  the 
great  Roman  road  which  ran  from  Dyrrhachium  through 
Epirus,  Macedonia,  and  Thrace  to  Byzantium. 

In  Paul's  day  it  was  a  free  city,  the  capital  of  the  whole 
province  and  the  most  populous  of  its  towns.  Its  extensive 
trade  with  all  parts  of  the  world  accounts  in  part  for  the 
rapid  spread  of  the  news  of  the  success  of  the  gospel  (1  Th. 
i.  8).  The  population  consisted  of  the  original  Graeco- 
Macedonian  inhabitants,  mixed  with  many  Romans  and  some 
Jews.  The  same  heathen  deities  were  worshipped  as  in  other 
Graeco-Roman  communities,  and  the  worship  of  the  Cabeiri 
had  been  introduced  from  Samothrace.f 

Paul's  first  visit  to  Thessalonica  is  related  in  Acts  xvii. ; 
and  the  account  must  be  filled  out,  as  far  as  possible,  by  means 

•  "  Medio  flexu  Uteris."    Pliny,  H.  N.  iv.  10. 

t  The  Cabeiri  were  Pelasgic  deiUes  worshipped  in  the  islands  between 
Eaboea  and  the  Hellespont,  on  the  adjacent  coasts  of  Asia  Biinor,  and  at 
Thebes  and  Andania  in  Greece.  They  were  f onr  in  number,  answering  to 
Demeter,  Persephone,  Hades,  and  Hermes  in  the  Greek  m3rthology.  Throned 
out  the  Boman  period  of  Greek  history  the  Cabeiric  mysteries  were  held  only 
second  to  the  Elensinian,  and  many  Bomans  of  high  position  were  initiated. 

8 


4         INTBODncnON  TO  THE  THE8SAL0KIAN  EPISTLES. 

of  the  references  in  the  two  letters. .  From  the  Acts  it  appears 
that  he  remained  only  three  weeks;  but  the  first  Epistle 
indicates  that  a  large  and  flourishing  church  had  been  formed, 
chiefly  of  Gentiles  (i.  8, 9);  and  from  this,  and  from  the  facts 
that  the  Philippians,  twice  during  his  stay,  sent  him  pecuniary 
aid  (Philip,  iv.  16),  and  that  he  labored  for  his  own  support, 
his  visit  would  seem  to  have  been  longer. 

According  to  the  narrative  in  Acts,  he  secured  some  con- 
verts from  among  the  Jews,  but  more  from  the  pious  Oreeks 
or  Proselytes,  and  many  prominent  women.  Nothing  is  said 
of  his  labours  among  the  heathen.  The  author  of  the  Acts 
has,  apparently,  recorded  the  least  important  part  of  his  work, 
which  was  evidently  begun,  according  to  his  usual  practice, 
in  the  synagogue.  The  principal  part  of  it,  however,  was 
Hot  done  in  the  synagogue. 

The  cause  of  Paul's  departure  from  Thessalonica  was  a 
persecution  instigated  by  the  Jews,  who  used  the  vulgar  pagan 
rabble  as  their  instruments.  Most  of  the  Christian  converts 
were  from  the  better  classes,  and  the  Politarchs  were  not  dis- 
posed to  interfere  actively.  But  the  riot  was  a  serious  matter. 
A  powerful,  dangerous,  lasting  sentiment  was  aroused  in  the 
class  which  fostered  it  (see  ch.  ii.  14).  The  charge  against 
Paul  was  that  of  treason  ag^nst  the  Emperor,  and  the  Poli- 
tarchs were  forced  to  take  active  measures  lest  they  should 
incur  the  charge  of  condoning  treason.  Their  course  was  the 
mildest  for  which  they  could  find  precedent.  The  accused 
were  bound  over  to  keep  the  peace,  and  as  security  was 
exacted  from  Jason  and  the  leading  Christians  of  Thessa- 
lonica, it  implied  that  they  were  under  obligation  to  prevent 
Paul  from  coming  to  the  city  again. 

Paul,  after  his  departure,  was  distressed,  lest  his  converts, 
who  had  been  only  partially  instructed,  might  fall  from  their 
faith.  He  had  twice  made  the  attempt  to  revisit  them,  but 
in  vain.  He  had  sent  Timothy  to  inquire  into  their  condition 
and  to  establish  and  comfort  them  (iii.  2).  Timothy  had  now 
rejoined  him  at  Corinth,  and  the  information  which  he  brought 
called  forth  the  first  letter. 

The  letter,  though  official,  is  not  stiff  nor  condescending. 


rNTBODUGmOK  TO  THB  THBS8ALONIAN  SPIBTLB8.         5 

It  reveals  a  quick,  intelligent  sympathy  with  the  burdens  and 
sufferings  of  the  church,  and  a  full  appreciation  of  their 
patience  and  fidelity.  They  are  the  subject  of  the  Apostle's 
thoughts,  wishes,  and  prayers ;  they  are  Ids  joy  and  his  crown. 
The  tone  of  the  Epistle,  while  peculiarly  affectionate,  is  never- 
theless decided,  and  exacting  in  moral  demand.  It  has  nothing 
of  the  legal  or  ecclesiastical  character.  It  is  pervaded,  in  parts, 
with  the  tension  and  anxiety  of  the  interval  between  Paul's 
departure  from  Thessalonica  and  the  reception  of  Timothy's 
report.  Timothy's  news  had  been  substantially  good.  The 
church  had  remained  true  to  the  faith  against  all  assaults. 
But  a  degree  of  mistrust  had  arisen  concerning  the  sincerity 
of  Paul's  interest  for  the  church,  which  must  have  come  from 
the  outside.  Accordingly  in  the  second  chapter  he  takes 
on  an  apologetic  tone.  Some  lack  of  religious  steadfastness 
among  the  members  has  made  itself  evident,  and  some  signs  of 
not  fully  appreciating  the  relations  of  their  faith  to  Christian 
morality.  There  has  arisen  a  tendency  to  assume  that  the 
second  coming  of  Christ  is  close  at  hand,  and  that  all  old 
relations  and  duties  are  therefore  done  away.  On  the  other 
hand,  an  opposite  tendency  has  shown  itself,  a  reaction 
against  the  enthusiasm  evoked  by  the  expectation  of  the 
parousia,  which  calls  for  the  admonitions, /^Quench  not  the 
spirit :  despise  not  prophesyings :  prove  all  things :  hold  fast 
that  which  is  good."  Mistakes  have  become  current  respect- 
ing the  lot  of  such  Christians  as  may  die  before  the  Lord's 
coming.  There  is  a  possible  hint  of  strained  relations  with 
the  church-superintendents  (v.  12-15)  and  of  occasions  given 
to  the  enemies  of  Christianity  for  malicious  criticism  (iv.  12). 
But  the  main  objects  of  the  letter  are,  to  strengthen  the  bond 
between  the  writer  and  the  church,  to  detach  the  church  from 
the  errors  and  abominations  of  heathen  life,  and  to  correct 
misunderstandings  and  give  comfort  as  regards  the  dead 
in  Christ. 

The  language  of  the  letter  is  simple,  taking  on  a  rhetorical 
character  only  in  certain  isolated  passages  (ii.  19  f. ;  iii.  8  f.). 
It  is  not  without  picturesqueness  (i.  8,  9;  ii.  1,  6, 16, 17, 19, 
iii.  3,  8,  11;  iv.  1,  6,  12;  v.  2,  3,  6,  8,  19).     There  is  an 


6         INTBODUCTION  TO  THE  THBSSALONLAN  EPI8TLBS. 

occasional  tendency  to  amplification  (i.  2  f.,  8 ;  ii.  11,  13 : 
iii.  2, 7,  9, 10 ;  v.  1,  8,  6,  28,  etc.))  and  to  round  off  the  ends 
of  sentences  with  adverbial  phrases  (i.  6,  6;  ii.  2,  16,  17; 
iii.  8, 9,  etc.).  There  is  to  be  noted  the  frequent  introduction 
of  expressions  which  recognise  the  knowledge  and  remem- 
brance of  the  writer's  correspondents,  as  Ka$w^  olBare  even  a9 
ye  know:  also  the  forms  of  adjuration  and  comparison  (ii.  5, 
10 ;  iii.  6).  A  certain  ruggedness  and  lack  of  symmetry  in 
the  structure  of  sentences  appears  at  times  (i.  2  ff.,  8 ;  ii.  10 
ff.,  17  f.,  19  f.;  iv.  1  f.,  8  ff.}.  The  vocabulary  is  relatively 
small.     Repetitions  and  similarities  of  expression  occur. 

There  are  no  citations  from  the  Old  Testament,  and  no  use 
of  apocryphal  writings  can  be  shown.  The  mode  of  expression 
is  thoroughly  Pauline.  The  character  of  the  Epistle  does  not 
lead  us  to  expect  many  of  the  technical  terms  of  the  Pauline 
dogmatic;  but  such  as  we  do  find  are  Pauline,  as  ifcXoyi^ 
election;  teaXetv  to  caU;  i^ioi  eainte;  ayuurfM/fk  eanetification ; 
fn^  ej&frc?  riv  de6v  not  knowing  God.  There  are  also  to  be 
noted  the  characteristic  play  of  words  (ii.  4);  paradox  (i.  6); 
mixed  metaphor  (v.  6),  and  antithesis  of  prepositions  (i.  5 ; 
iv.  7;  ii.  8,  etc.).  There  are  relatively  few  hapaxlegomena, 
some  peculiar  uses  of  words  common  in  the  New  Testament; 
possibly  a  dozen  words  and  modes  of  expression  which  appear 
only  in  the  deutero-Pauline  writings,  and  a  few  which  are 
almost  exclusively  confined  to  the  writings  of  Luke  and  the 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews. 

The  authenticity  of  the  Epistle  is  generally  conceded.  It 
has  been  assailed  by  Baur,  Steck,  Holsten,  and  Lfoman. 

THE  SECOND  EPISTLE. 

The  authenticity  and  genuineness  of  this  Epistle  have 
been  challenged  since  the  beginning  of  the  present  century.* 
Its  integrity  has  also  been  questioned  on  the  assumed  ground 
of  a  combination  of  a  genuine  Pauline  epistle  with  interpo- 
lated matter  (P.  W.  Schmidt).      It  has  been  ascribed  to 

•  J.  £.  C.  Schmidt,  DeWette,  Kern,  Baar,  Hilgenfdd,  Pfleiderer,  Weis- 
sicker,  Loman,  Holtznuum,  SchmiedeL 


ENTBODUCnON  TO  THB  THB88AL0NIAlf  BPISTLE8.         7 

Timothy.  Attempts  have  also  been  made  to  prove  that  it 
was  earlier  in  date  than  the  first  Epistle  (Ewald,  Baur, 
Davidson) ;  but  there  seems  to  be,  on  the  whole,  no  suf- 
ficient reason  for  refusing  it  a  place  among  the  genuine 
Pauline  Epistles.  The  external  testimony  in  its  favor  is 
ancient  and  good,  while  the  resemblances  in  manner  and 
phraseology  to  the  other  Pauline  writings  cannot  be  evaded. 
The  vocabulary  is  Pauline.  The  list  of  non-Pauline  words 
is  small  and  not  important.  As  distinguished  from  all  other 
Pauline  letters,  the  two  Thessalonian  epistles  exhibit  a 
striking  relationship,  extending  to  sequences  of  thought, 
articulation  of  sentences,  and  peculiar  expressions  and 
usages.  In  not  a  few  cases,  the  same  subjects  are  treated 
with  almost  the  same  words.*  Both  letters  have  an  eschato- 
logical  drift ;  both  exhibit,  wiiihout  specially  emphasising  it, 
the  writer's  apostolic  consciousness ;  both  treat  moral  ques- 
tions from  the  religious  point  of  view.f 

The  second  Epistle  appears  to  have  been  written  some 
months  after  the  first,  because  of  some  later  information 
received  by  Paul,  who  was  probably  still  in  Corinth.  The 
circumstances  of  the  church  were  substantially  the  same, 
although  there  appears  to  have  been  a  growth  in  faith  and 
charity  (i.  3,  4) ;  but  the  idea  of  the  imminent  second 
coming  of  the  Lord  had  assumed  such  proportions  as  to 
cause  restlessness  and  impatience,  and  a  measure  of  social 
disorganisation  and  fanaticism.  A  spurious  epistle  in  Paul's 
name,  announcing  the  immediate  advent  of  the  Lord,  appears 
to  have  been  circulated  (ii.  2).  The  main  design  of  this 
second  letter  is  to  correct  false  views  concerning  the  second 
advent,  and  to  rebuke  the  idleness  and  disorder  into  which 
some  of  the  Thessalonian  Christians  had  fallen. 

•  Comp.,  for  instance,  2  Th.  i.  1-7  ;  ii.  13-17  ;  iii.  1,  8,  12,  and  1  Th.  i.  8, 
4f.,  6,  7 ;  U.  13,  15,  16;  iii  8,  4,  6,  8,  0,  10,  11,  12. 

t  The  authenticity  of  the  2d  Epistle  is  defended  by  Jowett,  Qodet,  Weiss, 
Ltinemann,  Schenkel,  Beuss,  Bleek,  Kenan,  Salmon,  Klttpper,  Jttlicher, 
Bornemann,  Zahn,  McOiifert. 


COMMENTARIES,  ETC.,  ON  THE  THESSALONIAN 

LETTERS.* 


GERMAN. 

W.  Bomemann.  In  the  Meyer  Series.  6th  ed.  Die  ThesaalO' 
rUcherbriefe,  1894  P.  W.  Schmiedel,  in  the  HandrCommentar 
zum  Netien  Testament,  by  Holtzmann,  Lipsius,  Schmiedel,  and 
Von  Soden,  1893.  P.  Schmid,  Der  erste  ThesscUanicherbnef  neu 
erTddrty  with  Exciirsus  on  2d  Epistle,  1885.  F.  Zinuner,  Der  TeaA 
der  ThesscUonicherbriefef  etc  Textual  Apparatus  and  Commen- 
tary, 1893. 

ENGLISH. 

J.  B.  Lightfoot,  both  Epistles,  in  Notes  on  Epistles  of  St.  Paul 
from  Unpublished  Commentaries,  1895.  C.  J.  Ellicott,  A  Critical 
and  Grammatical  Commentary  on  St,  PauVs  Epistles  to  the  Thessor 
lonians.  B.  Jowett,  The  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  to  the  Thessalonians, 
Oatatians  arid  Romans.  Translation  and  CommeiUary,  3d  ed. 
1894.  J.  Eadie,  A  Commentary  on  the  Oreek  Text  of  the  Epistles 
of  Paul  to  the  Thessalonians,  1877.  J.  Hutchison,  Lectures, 
chiefly  Expository,  on  PauVs  1st  and  2d  Epistles  to  the  Thessaloni^ 
ans,  1883.  J.  B.  Lightfoot,  Biblical  Essays,  chs.  VI.,  VII.  G.  G. 
Findlay,  in  Cambridge  Bible  for  Schools.  J.  Denney,  in  Exposi- 
tor's Bible. 

On  Macedonia,  L.  Heuzey  and  H.  Daumet,  Mission  ArchMo- 
gique  de  Maddoine,  1876.  Account  of  the  expedition  under  the 
auspices  of  Napoleon  III.  for  the  exploration  of  Macedonia. 
M.  R.  Vincent,  Philippians  and  Philemon,  Introduction.  Intemor 
tional  Commentary,  1897. 


*  No  attempt  is  made  to  present  au  exhaustiye  catalogue  of  the  Literature. 

8 


THE   FIRST   EPISTLE   TO   THE 
THESSALONIANS. 


CHAPTER  I. 


1.  The  address  of  the  first  Epistle  is  shorter  than  that  of 
any  of  the  Pauline  letters.  In  the  other  Epistles  Paul  either 
indicates  the  contents  of  the  letter,  or  adds  details  concern- 
ing the  writer  or  his  correspondents,  or  amplifies  the  apos- 
tolic greeting.  The  names  of  Silvanus  and  Timothy  are 
added  to  that  of  Paul  as  the  senders  of  the  letter.  They 
were  with  him  at  Corinth  when  it  was  written  (Acts  xviii. 
5;  2  Cor.  i.  19).  They  had  assisted  him  in  the  foundation 
of  the  Thessalonian  Church  (Acts  xvi.  1-3 ;  xvii.  4, 10, 14). 
Paul's  ofl&cial  title  "  Apostle  "  is  omitted  in  the  addresses  of 
both  Epistles,  although  in  1  Th.  ii.  6  he  uses  aircforoXot 
apo$tle$^  including  Silvanus  and  Timothy  under  that  title. 
The  title  appears  in  all  the  other  Epistles  except  Philippians 
and  Philemon.  The  reason  for  its  omission  in  every  case 
appears  to  have  been  the  intimate  and  affectionate  character 
of  his  relations  with  the  parties  addressed,  which  rendered 
an  appeal  to  his  apostolic  authority  unnecessary.  Paul  does 
not  confine  the  name  of  apostle  to  the  twelve.* 

Silvanus.  The  Silas  of  the  Acts,  where  alone  the  form 
2/Xa9  occurs.  By  Paul  always  SiXoi/avJ?,  of  which  2/\a9  is 
a  contraction,  as  Aovtea<;  from  Aovteavtk.  Similar  contract- 
ions occur  in  Class.,  as  'AXcf 09  for  'AXJ^apSpo^ ;  *A/M-a9  for 

*  See  Rom.  zri.  7  ;  1  Cor.  ix.  6,  6,  and  Bp.  Lightfoot  on  «*The  Name  and 
Office  of  an  Apostle,*'  Com,  on  OalatiaM,  p.  92. 

0 


10  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  I. 

*Afyr€fjka^^  and  that  for  *Afn€/AiS»po^.  Silas  first  appears  in 
Acts  XV.  22,  as  one  of  the  bearers  of  the  letter  to  the  Gen- 
tile Christians  at  Antioch.  He  accompanied  Paul  on  his 
second  missionary  tour,  and  was  left  behind  with  Timothy 
when  Paul  departed  from  Macedonia  after  his  first  visit. 
He  was  probably  a  Jewish  Christian  (see  Acts  xvi.  20),  and 
was,  like  Paul,  a  Roman  citizen  (Acts  xvi.  37,  88).  Hence 
his  Roman  name.  He  cannot  with  any  certainty  be  identi- 
fied with  the  Silvanus  of  1  Pet.  v.  12. 

Timothy.  Appears  in  all  the  Pauline  Epistles  except  Gala- 
tians  and  Ephesians.  He  was  associated  with  Paul  longer 
than  any  one  of  whom  we  have  notice.  First  mentioned  Acts 
xvi.  1,  2 :  comp.  2  Tim.  iii.  10, 11.  He  accompanied  Paul  on 
his  second  missionary  tour  (Acts  xvi.  8),  and  was  one  of  the 
founders  of  the  churches  in  Thessalonica  and  Philippi.  He 
is  often  styled  by  Paul  "  the  brother "  (2  Cor.  i.  1 ;  Col.  i. 
1 ;  1  Th.  iii.  2 ;  Philem.  1)  ;  with  Paul  himself  ^*  a  bondser-< 
vant  of  Jesus  Christ "  (Philip,  i.  1)  ;  comp.  1  Tim.  ii.  18 ; 
2  Tim.  i.  2.  Paul's  confidence  in  him  appears  in  Philip,  ii. 
19-22,  and  is  implied  in  his  sending  him  from  Athens  to  the 
Thessalonian  church  to  establish  and  comfort  its  members 
(1  Th.  iii.  2).  Paul  sent  him  again  to  Macedonia  in  com- 
pany with  Erastus  (Acts  xix.  22),  and  also  to  Corinth 
(1  Cor.  iv.  17).  To  the  Corinthians  he  writes  of  Timothy 
as  "  his  beloved  and  faithful  child  in  the  Lord "  who  shall 
remind  them  of  his  ways  in  Christ  (1  Cor.  iv.  17),  and  as 
one  who  worketh  the  work  of  the  Lord  as  he  himself  (1  Cor. 
xvi.  10).  He  joined  Paul  at  Rome,  and  his  name  is  associ- 
Itted  with  Paul's  in  the  addresses  of  the  letters  to  the  Colos- 
sians  and  Philemon.  In  every  case  where  he  is  mentioned 
by  name  with  Silvanus,  the  name  of  Silvanus  precedes. 

To  the  church  of  the  Thessalonians.  This  form  of 
address  appears  in  1st  and  2d  Corinthians,  Galatians,  2d 
Thessalonians.  The  other  letters  are  addressed  to  ^^the 
saints,"  "the  brethren,"  "the  saints  and  faithful  brethren." 
The  use  of  the  genitive  of  the  national  name  is  peculiar. 


Cb.  L]      THB  FIB8T  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THBSSALONIAKS.  11 

Comp.  1  Cor.  i.  22 ;    2  Cor.  i.  1 ;    Gal.  i.  2  ;   Philip,  i.  1  $ 
Col.  i.  2, 

The  church  (iKicXfiadf).  From  he  out,  and  icaXeiv  to 
call  or  iumman.  Originally  with  a  secular  meaning,  an 
a$9embly  of  citizens  regularly  nmmoned.  So  Acts  xix.  89. 
LXX  uses  it  for  the  congregation  of  Israel,  either  as  con- 
vened for  a  definite  purpose  (1  Kings  yiii.  65 ;  Deut.  iy.  10 ; 
xviii.  16),  or  as  a  community  (2  Chr.  i.  8,  5  ;  xxiii.  8 ;  Neh. 
yiii.  17).  The  yerbs  iKickfiauU^tiv  and  i^€/cK\ffa-id^€iv  to  nim- 
mon  formally^  which  do  not  occur  in  N.  T.,  are  found  in 
LXX  with  avpaymyifv  gathering^  \a6v  people^  and  irpeafiv- 
ripov^  elders.  J,wa^<oyif  is  constantly  used  in  LXX  of  the 
children  of  Israel  as  a  body  (Ex.  xii.  6, 19,  47  ;  Ley.  iy.  13, 
etc.),  and  is  the  more  common  word  in  N.  T.  for  a  Jewish 
as  distinguished  from  a  Christian  assembly ;  sometimes  with 
the  addition  of  the  Jews  (Acts  xiii.  6  ;  xiy.  1 ;  xyii.  1).  It 
is  once  used  of  a  Christian  assembly  (Jas.  ii.  2).  ^IS^urw- 
aymyif  gathering  together^  occurs  2  Th.  ii.  1 ;  Heb.  x.  25. 
The  Ebionites  retained  awayeayif  in  preference  to  iKie\ija-(a. 
The  LXX  translators  found  two  Hebrew  words  for  ^^  assem- 
bly" or  "congregation,"  rrro  and  hrtp^^  and  rendered  the 
former  by  avpaycayif  in  the  g^at  majority  of  instances. 
^EtcKXtja-la  does  not  appear  as  the  rendering  of  rrro.  They 
were  not  as  consistent  in  rendering  hr/S)^  since  they  used 
both  awaywyif  and  iKKXtfo-ia^  though  the  latter  was  the  more 
frequent :  see  Ley.  iy.  18  ;  Deut.  y.  22,  etc.  The  A.  V. 
renders  both  words  by  "congregation"  and  "assembly" 
indiscriminately.  'EKKXtja-Ca  is  only  once  used  in  N.  T.  of  a 
Jewish  congregation.  Acts  yii.  88;  yet  there  are  cases  where 
there  is  an  apparent  attempt  to  guard  its  distinctiyely 
Christian  sense  against  being  confounded  with  the  uncon- 
yerted  Jewish  communities.  Hence  the  addition  ip  Kpurr^ 
in  Christy  Gal.  i.  22 ;  iv  0€^  irarpl  xal  KvpCtp  ^Itfo-ov  Xpurr^ 
in  Ood  the  Father  and  the  Lord  Jemu  Chrietj  1  Th.  i.  1 ; 
comp.  2  Th.  i.  1.  In  both  Hebrew  and  N.  T.  usage,  iKtcXtf- 
a(a  implies  a  community  based  on  a  special  religious  idea, 
and  established  in  a  special  way.     In  N.  T.  it  is  also  used  in 


12  WOED  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  1 

a  narrower  sense,  of  a  single  church,  or  of  a  church  confined 
to  a  single  place.     So  Rom.  xvi.  5,  etc. 

In  Qod  the  Father,  etc.  Const,  with  the  churchy  and 
comp.  2  Th.  i.  1.  The  phrase  "the  church  in  God"  is  pecul- 
iar to  the  Thessalonian  Epistles.  Elsewhere  "©/  God" 
(1  Cor.  X.  32;  xi.  16,  22;  xv.  9,  etc.);  "of  the  saints" 
(1  Cor.  xiv.  33).  Lightfoot  suggests  that  the  word  itctcXr}- 
cla  can  scarcely  have  been  stamped  with  so  definite  a 
Christian  meaning  in  the  minds  of  these  recent  and  early 
converts  as  to  render  the  addition  "in  God  the  Father,"  etc., 
superfluous. 

Grace  to  you  and  peace  (x^pi9  viuv  icaX  elpiivrf).  In 
Romans,  1st  and  2d  Corinthians,  Galatians,  Ephesians,  Phi- 
lippians,  the  salutation  is,  Orace  to  you  and  peace  from  God 
our  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  Colossians  omits  the 
last  five  words  of  this:  2  Thessalonians  omits  our  before 
Father.  On  the  union  of  the  Greek  and  Jewish  forms  of 
salutation,  see  on  1  Cor.  i.  3. 

2.  We  give  thanks  (evxf^purrovfiev).  According  to  Paul's 
habit,  a  thanksgiving  follows  the  salutation,  commonly  with 
the  verb  evxapiorai^,  as  here;  but  in  2d  Corinthians  and  Ephes- 
ians, 6^X0717x09  6  0€(k  blessed  be  God.  The  thanksgiving  is 
omitted  only  in  Galatians.  The  verb  eifxaptaretv  occurs  only 
in  later  Greek,  and  there  but  rarely.  In  LXX  only  in 
Apocr.  See  Judith  viii.  25 ;  2  Mace.  i.  11 ;  x.  7 ;  3  Mace, 
vii.  16.  In  the  N.  T.  Epistles,  P^.  Originally  to  do  a  good 
turn;  hence,  to  return  a  favour.  The  meaning  to  give  thanks 
is  late.  The  kindred  noun  evxapifrrCa  giving  of  thanks^  is 
found  often  in  Paul.  As  a  designation  of  the  Lord's  Supper 
(JEkicharist)  it  is  not  found  in  the  N.  T.  Perhaps  the 
earliest  instance  of  its  use  in  that  sense  is  in  Ignatius.  See 
Philad.  iv. ;  Smyrn.  vi.,  viii.  ;  Eph.  xiii.  Comp.  Just. 
Mart.  Apol.  i.,  64,  65. 

In  we  give  thanks^  it  is  not  easy  to  decide  whether  Paul 
uses  we  as  plural,  or  in  the  sense  of  J.     Bom.  iii.  9  seems  to 


Ch.  I.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  13 

be  a  clear  case  of  the  latter  usage.  In  1  Tb.  iii.  1,  2, 
ijvSoKija'afiev  we  thought  it  good^  and  hr^/iyp^afiev  we  sent^  can, 
apparently,  refer  only  to  Paul ;  and  similarly,  in  1  Tb.  iii.  6, 
irpoi  fllJLas:  unto  t«,  can  hardly  include  Silvanus  who  came  with 
Timothy  (comp.  iii.  5).  But  it  is  significant  that,  in  the  Epis- 
tles which  are  written  in  Paul's  name  alone  (Romans,  Gala* 
tians,  Ephesians),  only  /  is  used,  unless  we  except  Gral.  i.  8, 
which  is  doubtful.  Paul  and  Timothy  appear  jointly  as  cor- 
respondents in  Philippians,  but  the  first  person  predominates 
throughout  the  letter.  The  same  is  true  of  1st  Corinthians, 
where  Paul  and  Sosthenes  are  associated  in  the  address,  but 
the  singular  pronoun  is  used  almost  throughout.  (See  iv. 
10-13 ;  ix.  4,  5,  25,  26).  In  Colossians  Paul  and  Timothy 
appear  in  the  address.  The  plural  prevails  to  i.  23,  and 
alternates  with  the  singular  throughout  the  remainder.  The 
alternations  in  2d  Corinthians  are  very  bewildering. 

On  the  whole,  I  think  that  occasional  instances  of  the 
epistolary  plural  must  be  granted.  It  is  not,  however,  PauPs 
habitual  usage.  We  is  often  employed  as  in  ordinary  corre- 
spondence or  argument,  where  the  writer  or  speaker  associates 
himself  with  his  readers  or  hearers.  Abundant  illustrations 
of  this  may  be  seen  in  Rom.  vi.  and  viii. ;  but  in  other  cases, 
when  Paul  speaks  in  the  plural,  he  usually  associates  his 
fellow-ministers,  mentally,  with  himself.* 

Making  mention  (^/Aveiav  iroiovfievoi).  For  the  phrase  see 
Rom.  i.  9 ;  Eph.  i.  16 ;  Philem.  4.  ,  Always  in  connection 
with  prayer.  In  the  sense  of  remember  it  appears  in  LXX, 
Job  xiv.  13.  In  Ps.  cxi.  4,  to  make  a  memoriaL  See  further, 
on  without  ceasing^  ver.  3. 

In  my  prayers  (hrl).  When  engaged  in  offering  my  prayers. 
'Eirl  here  blends  the  local  with  the  temporal  sense. 

Prayers  (wpoo'evx&v).  The  more  general  term,  and  limited 
to  prayer  to  God ;  while  SdrfCK  petitionary  prayer,  tupplica- 

*  The  discussion  in  detail  may  be  found  in  Bomemann^s  Tkesaalonicher' 
hr^fe,  p.  37  f.  and  p.  53.  See  also  Spitta,  Urchristenthum,  p.  120  f.,  and 
Lightfoot,  Notes  on  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,  p.  22. 


14  WOBD  STUDIES  TS  THE  NBW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  L 

tiauy  may  be  addressed  to  man.  Paul  alone  associates  the 
two  words.  See  Philip,  iy.  6 ;  Eph.  yi.  18.  In  classical 
Greek  the  word  does  not  occur  in  the  sense  of  prayer.  It  is 
found  in  later  Greek,  meaning  a  place  for  prayer^  in  which 
sense  it  appears  in  Acts  xvi.  18,  16.  It  signified  either  a 
synagogue^  or  an  open  praying^laee  outside  of  a  city.* 

3.  Without  ceasing  {aSiaXehnw).  P^  In  LXX  see 
1  Mace.  xii.  11;  2  Mace.  iii.  26;  ix.  4;  xiii.  12;  xv.  7; 
8  Mace.  vi.  88.  Should  be  construed  with  making  mention^ 
not  with  remembering^  as  A.  V.  and  Rev.  The  salutations 
of  Paul  reproduce  ordinary  conventional  forms  of  greeting. 
Thus  the  familiar  Greek  greeting  x^^^^  ^^  Jot/ftUj  hail^ 
welcome^  appears  in  x^P^  grace.  This  was  perceived  by 
Theodore  of  Mopsuestia  (860-428  a.d.),  who,  in  his  com- 
mentary on  Ephesians,  says  that  in  the  preface  to  that  letter 
Paul  does  very  much  as  we  do  when  we  say  ^*  So  and  so  to  So 
and  so,  greeting  "  (o  Seiva  r^  Scm  ;^a4'€iy).  Deissmann  gives 
some  interesting  paraUels  from  ancient  papyri.  For  instance, 
a  letter  dated  172  B.C.,  from  an  Egyptian  lady  to  her  brother 
or  husband :  **  Isias  to  her  brother  Hephaestion,  greeting 
(;^a//>6ti').  If  you  are  well,  and  other  things  happen  as  you 
would  wish,  it  would  be  in  accordance  with  my  constant 
prayer  to  the  gods.  I  myself  am  well,  and  the  boy ;  and  all 
at  home  make  constant  remembrance  of  youJ*^  Gomp.  Rom. 
i.  9 ;  Eph.  i.  16  ;  Philem.  4.  Again  :  ^*  Ammonios  to  his 
sister  Tachnumi,  abundant  greeting  (tA  irT^j&rra  ;^a4'€ii'). 
Before  all  things,  I  pray  that  you  may  be  in  health ;  and 
each  day  I  make  the  act  of  worship  for  you.''    In  these 

*  There  has  been  some  dispute  as  to  whether  it  was  applied  to  a  syna- 
gogue, but  the  usage  of  Josephus  and  Philo  seems  decisive  in  favour  of  that 
meaning.  See  Jos.  VUa,  64 ;  Juvenal,  8ai.  OX  296 ;  Schttrer,  The  Jewish 
People  in  theTime  of  Jesus  Christ,  Div.  IL,  Vol.  BE.,  p.  73 ;  Wendt,  Apostel- 
gesMchUt  on  Acts  xvi.  13.  An  inscription  preserved  in  the  Berlin  Egyptian 
Museum  testifies  to  the  meaning  synagogue  as  early  as  the  third  century  B.a 
Zenobia  and  Yaballath,  about  270  a.d.,  decree  the  restoration  of  an  inscrip. 
tion  on  a  synagogue,  as  follows :  Boo'iXedt  HroXe/iaibf  Ete^/riff  r^9  wpoawx^^ 
Aav\op  King  Ptolemy  Euergetes  [decrees^  that  the  place  of  prayer  [be}  an 
asylum.    See  Deissmann,  Neue  Bibelstudieny  p.  40. 


ch.  l]    the  first  epistle  to  the  thessalonians.        15 

specimens  the  conventional  salutations  in  correspondence 
include  the  general  greeting  (xa/joeii^)  and  the  statement 
that  prayer  is  made  for  the  correspondent's  welfare  j  and 
the  words  constant  and  dailt/  are.  attached  to  the  act  of 
prayer.  It  is  further  to  be  noticed  that  many  passages  of 
Paul's  Epistles  give  evidence  of  having  been  shaped  by 
expressions  in  letters  received  by  him  from  the  parties  he 
is  addressing.  In  his  answer  he  gives  them  back  their  own 
words,  as  is  common  in  correspondence.  Thus,  making  men- 
tion of  f/ou  and  remembering  your  work^  etc.,  together  with  the 
statement  that  Timothy  reports  that  you  have  a  good  remem- 
brance of  us  (ch.  iii.  6),  all  together  suggest  that  Paul  had 
before  him,  when  writing  to  the  Thessalonians,  a  letter  which 
Timothy  had  brought  from  them.  Other  instances  will  be 
noted  as  they  occur.* 

Work  —  labour  —  patience  (^Ipyov — tcSirov  —  ifTro/ioi^?). 
"Epyov  work^  may  mean  either  the  act^  the  simple  trans- 
action, or  the  process  of  dealing  with  anything,  or  the  restdt 
of  the  dealing,  —  as  a  book  or  a  picture  is  called  a  work. 
Kdiro^  labour^  from  tcdirreiv  to  strike  or  hew;  hence,  laborious^ 
painful  exertion.  'Tiro/ioi/^  patience^  patient  endurance  and 
faithful  persistence  in  toil  and  suffering.  See  on  2  Pet.  i.  6 ; 
Jas.  V.  7.  The  genitives,  of  faith^  love^  hope^  mark  the  gen- 
erating principles  of  the  work  and  labour  and  patience, 
which  set  their  stamp  upon  each  ;  thus,  work  which  springs 
iromfaitJi^  and  is  characteristic  of  faith.  The  phrase  patience 
of  hope  is  found  only  here  ;  but  see  Rom.  v.  4  ;  viii.  25 ; 
XV.  4  ;  1  Cor.  xiii.  7 ;  Heb.  vii.  11,  12.  For  wrofiovif  in 
LXX,  see  1  Chron.  xxix.  15 ;  Job  xiv.  19 ;  Ps.  ix.  18  ; 
xxxviii.  7 ;  Jer.  xiv.  8.  We  have  here  the  great  triad  of 
Christian  graces,  corresponding  to  1  Cor.  xiii.  Hope  is 
prominent  throughout  the  two  Epistles.  The  triad  appears, 
1  Th.  V.  8 ;  Gal.  v.  5,  6  ;  1  Cor.  xiii.  13  ;  Eph.  iv.  2-5  ; 


•  See  an  interesting  article  by  J.  Rendel  Harris,  Expositor^  Vol.  IV.,  No. 
IIL,  1898,  "A  Study  in  Letter-writing."  Also  an  article  by  Walter  Lock, 
Expositor,  Vol.  IL,  No.  L,  1897,  **  1  Corinthians  viiL  1-9.    A  Suggestion." 


16  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  L 

Col.  i.  4,  5;  Heb.  x.  22-24;  1  Pet.  i.  21-22.  Comp.  1  Th. 
ii.  9;  V.  8;  2 Th.  iii.  6,  8;  1  Cor.  xv.  10,  58;  2  Cor.  xi.  27; 
Apoc.  ii.  2. 

In  our  Lord,  etc.  (rov  tcvpCov).  Lit.  of  our  Lord.  For  a 
similar  use  of  the  genitive,  see  J.  v.  42 ;  1  J.  ii.  5,  15 ; 
Acts  ix.  81;  Rom.  i.  6;  iii.  18,  22,  26,  etc.  Connect  with 
hope  only. 

Before  our  Qod  and  Father.  Const,  with  remembering^ 
and  comp.  ch.  ii.  19;  iii.  9. 

4.  Election  of  Qod.  Incorrect.  Const,  of  or  by  (yn-ii) 
God  with  beloved.  'EfeXoyi^  election^  in  N.  T.,  mostly  by  Paul. 
Elsewhere  only  Acts  ix.  15,  and  2  Pet.  i.  10.  This,  and 
the  kindred  words,  ix^Jyeiv  to  choose^  and  ixXeKTo^  chosen  or 
electa  are  used  of  God's  selection  of  men  or  agencies  for 
special  missions  or  attainments  ;  but  neither  here  nor  else- 
where in  the  N.  T.  is  there  any  warrant  for  the  revolting 
doctrine  that  God  has  predestined  a  definite  number  of  man- 
kind to  eternal  life,  and  the  rest  to  eternal  destruction.* 
The  sense  in  this  passage  appears  to  be  defined  by  the  suc- 
ceeding context.  The  Thessalonians  had  been  chosen  to  be 
members  of  the  Christian  church,  and  their  conduct  had 
justified  the  choice.     See  vv.  5-10. 

5.  For  (^i).  Incorrect.  Rend,  haw  that.  It  is  explana- 
tory of  your  election.     For  similar  usage  see  1  Cor.  i.  26. 

Our  gospel.  The  gospel  as  preached  by  Paul  and  his 
colleagues.  Comp.  Rom.  ii.  16 ;  xvi.  25 ;  Gal.  i.  11 ;  ii.  2 ; 
1  Th.  ii.  4.  My  gospel  is  sometimes  used  in  connection 
with  an  emphasis  upon  some  particular  feature  of  the  gospel, 
as  in  Rom.  ii.  16,  where  Paul  is  speaking  of  the  judgment  of 
the  world  by  Christ;  or  in  Rom.  xvi.  25,  where  he  is  refer* 
ring  to  the  extension  of  the  messianic  kingdom  to  the  Gen* 
tiles. 

*  See  the  note  in  YoL  m.,  p.  1881L 


Ch.  L]     the  FIB8T  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THES8ALOKIAK8.  17 

In  word  (jtv  T^tp).  The  gospel  did  not  appeal  to  them  as 
mere  eloquent  and  learned  discourse. 

In  power  (^i^  Svvafiei).  Power  of  spiritual  persuasion 
and  conviction  :  not  power  as  displayed  in  miracles,  at  least 
not  principally,  although  miraculous  demonstrations  may  be 
included.  Paul  rarely  alludes  to  his  power  of  working 
miracles. 

Assurance  (irXripo^pUf).  Assured  persuasion  of  the 
preacher  that  the  message  was  divine.  The  word  not  in  pre- 
Christian  Greek  writers,  nor  in  LXX.  Only  in  one  o^er 
passage  in  Paul,  Col.  ii.  2.     See  Heb.  vi.  11 ;  x.  22. 

We  were  (irfofrfiriiiai).  More  correctly,  we  shewed  or 
proved  ourselves. 

6.  Followers  (^fUfjurraV).  More  literally  and  better,  tmt- 
tators.  Only  once  outside  of  Paul's  writings,  Heb.  vi.  12. 
Comp.  1  Th.  iii.  9 ;  2  Th.  iii.  7  ;  1  Cor.  iv.  16  ;  xi.  1 ;  Gal. 
iv.  12 ;  Philip,  iii.  17  ;  iv.  9. 

And  of  the  Lord.  Guarding  against  any  possible  impu- 
tation of  self-assertion  or  conceit.     Comp.  1  Cor.  xi.  1. 

Tribulation  (dX/^0-  See  on  Matt.  xiii.  21.  Referring 
especially  to  persecutions  at  the  hands  of  the  Jews  (Acts 
xvii.  5ff.),  which  probably  continued  after  Paul's  departure 
from  Thessalonica. 

7.  An  ensample  (rihrov).    See  on  1  Pet.  v.  3. 

Macedonia  and  Achaia.  Shortly  after  146  B.C.,  all 
Greece  south  of  Macedonia  and  Epirus  was  formed  into  a 
Roman  province  under  the  name  of  Achaia,  and  Macedonia 
with  Epirus  into  another  province  caUed  Macedonia. 

8.  Hath  sounded  forth  (iSnxnrcu)'  N.  T.o.  LXX  Joel 
iii.  14 ;  Sir.  xl.  13,  of  thunder;  3  Mace.  iii.  2,  of  a  report. 
It  means  a  Umd^  unmistakable  proclamation. 

VOL.  rr. — 8 


18  WORD   STUDIES   IN   THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  I. 

The  word  of  the  Lord  (6  XcPyo?  roO  Kvplov),  The  phrase 
in  Paul  only  in  these  Epistles.  Comp.  2  Th.  iii.  1 ;  iv.  15. 
Comparatively  frequent  in  Acts.  Paul  has  XcPyo?  0€ov  or 
Tov  0€ov  word  of  God^  eight  times,  and  \6yo^  rov  ^^arroi) 
word  of  the  Christy  once,  Col.  iii.  16.  The  meaning  here  is 
the  gospel^  regarded  either  as  the  message  proceeding  from 
the  Lord,  or  concerning  him.  It  is  the  evayyeKiov  Oeov  the 
gospel  of  God:  see  ch.  ii.  2,  8,  9;  Rom.  i.  1;  xv.  16; 
2  Cor.  xi.  7.  As  Professor  Sanday  remarks  on  Rom.  i.  1, 
"  it  is  probably  a  mistake  in  these  cases  to  restrict  the  force 
of  the  genitive  to  one  particular  aspect:  all  aspects  are 
included  in  which  the  gospel  is  in  any  way  related  to  God 
and  Christ." 

In  every  place.  A  rhetorical  exaggeration,  signifying 
the  whole  known  world.  It  is  explained  by  the  extensive 
commercial  relations  of  Thessalonica.  Comp.  Rom.  i.  8; 
Col.  i.  6,  23  •  2  Cor.  ii.  14. 

Is  spread  abroad  Ci^eKriKuO^v).  Lit.  and  better,  ha%  gone 
forth* 

9.  They  themselves  shew  (airrol  cnrayy^Wovatv).  They 
themselves  in  contrast  with  we^  ver.  8.  We  need  not  speak  of 
anything  :  they  themselves  volunteer  testimony  to  your  faith. 
Shew^  more  correctly  announce  or  report,^ 

*  Much  discussion  has  arisen  as  to  the  proper  connection  of  this  passage. 
As  punctuated  and  rendered  in  A.V.  and  Rev.  the  sequence  is  irregular. 
There  is  a  clear  antithesis  between  dXX'  but  and  oi  ijMvov  not  only ;  and  the 
sentence,  if  regular,  would  have  closed  with  in  every  place.  As  it  is,  a  new 
subject  and  predicate  {your  faith — has  gone  forth)  is  introduced  with  in 
every  place.  The  simplest  and  best  solution  of  the  difficulty  is  to  accept  the 
irregular  construction  as  characteristically  Pauline.  Others  place  a  colon 
after  of  the  Lord,  and  begin  a  new  clause  with  not  only, 

t  Dr.  J.  Rendel  Harris  offers  as  a  conjectural  reading  diro77AX€T€  ye 
report,  taking  the  passage  as  an  exact  parallel  to  ch.  ii.  1,  ye  know  that  our 
entrance  was  not  in  vain.  He  thmks  that  thus  a  reference  would  be  shown 
to  a  letter  from  the  Thessalonians  to  Paul,  and  that  the  difficulty  would  be 
relieved  which  grows  out  of  the  improbability  of  a  newly  founded  church 
exerting  so  extenalYe  an  influence.    Expositor,  VoL  IV.,  No.  III.,  1898. 


ch.  l]    the  fibst  epistle  to  the  thessalonians.        19 

Entering  in  (eiaoBov).  Comp.  ch.  ii.  1.  The  thought  of 
ver.  5  is  resumed.  The  repetition  of  the  word  in  ch.  ii.  1, 
and  of  in  vain  in  ch.  iii.  5,  may  point  to  expressions  in  a 
letter  of  the  Thessalonians. 

Unto  you  (wpi^').  The  preposition  combines  with  the 
sense  of  direction  that  of  relation  and  intercourse.  Comp. 
Matt.  xiii.  56  ;  Mk.  ix.  16 ;  J.  i.  1 ;  Acts  iii.  25 ;  Col.  iv.  5 ; 
Heb.  ix.  20. 

Ye  turned  unto  God  (hrearpiy^aTe  iTfm  rov  Oehv).  Comp. 
Acts  xiv.  15.  The  exact  phrase  only  here.  The  verb  is 
common  in  LXX,  with  both  Kvpiov  Lord  and  0€ov  God. 

Idols.  See  on  1  Cor.  viii.  3.  The  word  would  indicate 
that  the  majority  of  the  converts  were  heathen  and  not  Jews. 

Living  and  true  (^^Snm  Kal  aXrjdiv^).  The  only  instance 
in  N.  T.  of  this  collocation.  It  does  not  occur  in  O.  T.  For 
aXtfOiim  genuine^  see  on  J.  i.  9 ;  iv.  37 ;  vii.  28.  Mostly  in 
the  Johannine  writings. 

10.  To  wait  for  {avafidveiv).  N.  T.^.  Several  times  in 
LXX,  as  Job  ii.  9 ;  vii.  2  ;  Isa.  lix.  11.  Paul's  usual  word 
is  aireKB^ofMii :  see  Rom.  viii.  19,  23,  25;  1  Cor.  i.  7; 
Philip,  iii.  20. 

From  heaven  (^«c  r&v  ovpav&v).  Lit.  from  the  heavens. 
Comp.  1  Cor.  xv.  47 ;  1  Th.  iv.  16  ;  2  Th.  i.  7.  Paul  uses 
the  unclassical  plural  much  oftener  than  the  singular. 
Although  the  Hebrew  equivalent  has  no  singular,  the  sin- 
gular is  almost  universal  in  LXX,  the  plural  occurring 
mostly  in  the  Psalms.  Ovpaptk  is  from  a  Sanscrit  word 
meaning  to  cover  or  encompass.  The  Hebrew  shamayim  sig- 
nifies height^  high  district^  the  upper  regions.  Similarly  we 
have  in  N.  T.  &  tr^iaroi^  in  the  highest  (jplaces).  Matt.  xxi.  9; 
L.  ii.  14  :  iv  in^Tioh  in  the  high  (places),  Heb.  i.  3.  Paul's 
usage  is  evidently  coloured  by  the  Rabbinical  conception  of 


20  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Cr.  H 

a  series  of  heavens :  see  2  Cor.  xii.  2 ;  Eph.  iv.  10.  Some 
Jewish  teachers  held  that  there  were  seven  heavens,*  others 
three.  The  idea  of  a  series  of  heavens  appears  in  patristic 
writings,  in  Thomas  Aquinas^s  doctrine  of  the  celestial  hie- 
rarchies, and  in  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.  Through  the 
scholastic  theologians  it  passed  into  Dante's  ParadUo  with 
its  nine  heavens,  f  The  words  to  await  his  Son  from  heaven 
strike  the  keynote  of  this  Epistle. 

Jesus  which  delivered  {'Itfa-ow  riv  ^fAcvov).  More  cor- 
rectly, deliver eth.  See  on  Matt.  i.  21.  ^Fvea-Ocu  to  deliver, 
mostly  in  Paul.  Lit.  to  draw  to  one^s  self.  Almost  invaria- 
bly with  the  specification  of  some  evil  or  danger  or  enemy. 
^&%ti,v  to  save  is  often  used  in  a  similar  sense,  of  deliverance 
from  disease,  from  sin,  or  from  divine  wrath:  see  Matt.  i.  21; 
Mk.  vi.  56 ;  L.  viii.  36 ;  Acts  ii.  40 ;  Rom.  v.  9  :  but  am^eip 
is  a  larger  and  more  comprehensive  term,  including  not  only 
deliverance  from  sin  and  death,  but  investment  with  all  the 
privileges  and  rewards  of  the  new  life  in  Christ. 

The  wrath  to  come  (r^  opyfj^  7^9  ifrxpiUvrfi^.  Lit.  the 
wrath  which  is  coming.  The  wrath,  absolutely,  of  the  wrath 
of  God,  as  Rom.  v.  9 ;  xii.  19 ;  1  Th.  ii.  16.  Sometimes  for 
the  punishment  which  wrath  inflicts,  as  Rom.  xii.  4 ;  Eph. 
V.  6 ;  Col.  iii.  6.  See  on  J.  iii.  36.  The  phrase  wrath  to 
come  is  found  in  Matt.  iii.  7  ;  L.  iii.  7.  Coming  does  not 
necessarily  imply  the  thought  of  speedy  or  imminent  approach, 
but  the  general  tone  of  the  Epistle  points  in  that  direction. 


CHAPTER  n. 

1.  Was  not  In  vain  (ov  icevii  ydyovep).  More  accurately, 
hath  not  proved  vain.  Kevif  is  empty.  MaraCa,  also  rendered 
vain,  is  fruitless. 

*  See  Stanley^B  condenaation  of  Wetstein,  in  Com,  on  Corinthians,  on 
S  Cor.  xii  2. 

t  See  B.  F.  Weitcott,  Religious  nought  in  the  West. 


Cb.  n.]     THB  FIRST   EPISTLE  TO   THE  THESSALONIANS.  21 

2.  Having  suffered  before  (iriHyira06vT€si).  N.  T.^. 
Although  we  had  suffered. 

Having  been  shamefully  entreated  (yfipurOiuTe:),  Comp. 
Matt.  xxii.  6 ;  L.  xviii.  82 ;  Acts  xiv.  6.  This  may  have 
been  added  because  irpoTraOSvre^  alone  might  denote  the 
experience  of  something  good;  but  it  is  more  probably 
intended  as  an  expansion  and  illustration  of  that  word. 
Paul's  sensitiveness  to  personal  indignity  appears  in  the  nar- 
rative in  Acts  xvi.,  which  gives  the  historical  explanation  of 
the  two  words.    It  appears  frequently  in  2d  Corinthians. 

As  ye  know  (jcaOiK  olBare).  One  of  the  many  character- 
istic expressions  of  these  Epistles  which  indicate  community 
of  experience  and  sentiment  on  the  part  of  Paul  and  his 
readers.  See  1  Th.  i.  5,  8 ;  u.  1,  5, 10, 11 ;  iii.  8,  4, 12  ; 
iv.  1,  2,  6, 11 ;  V.  1, 11 ;  2  Th.  u.  16;  iii.  1,  2.* 

Philippi.     See  Acts  xvi.  ld-40 ;  Philip.  1,  80. 

We  waxed  bold  (^hrapprfa-taadfieOd).  Only  once  elsewhere 
in  Paul,  Eph.  vi.  20.  Frequent  in  Acts.  Always  in  N.  T. 
in  connection  with  speaking.  Derived  from  irav  every ^  and 
jtrjcL^  speaking.  Hence  wapptfala  boldne88^  bold  speaking  out 
of  every  word.  The  noun  is  very  often  used  adverbially,  as 
irappt^aUf  boldly  or  openly^  Mk.  viii.  32  ;  see  also  J.  xviii.  20. 
In  Acts  always  fieri^  irapprja-ia^  with  boldne$Sy  comp.  Heb. 
iv.  16.  *Ep  irapptfaia  in  boldness^  J.  vii.  4 ;  xvi.  29 ;  Eph. 
vi.  19 ;  Philip,  i.  20.  Both  the  verb  and  the  noun  are 
found  in  LXX.  See  Lev.  xxvi.  13;  Prov.  x.  10;  Wisd. 
V.  1 ;  1  Mace.  iv.  18 ;  Sir.  vi.  11. 

in  our  Qod  (iv  r^  ^e^  ^/a&v).  Const,  with  we  waxed  bold. 
Their  boldness  was  not  mere  natural  courage,  but  was 
inspired  by  God.     There  is  a  slight  emphasis  on  our  God,  as 

*Dr.  HarriB  nyB  that  the  expreaBion  must  be  nndentood  here  in  the 
•enae  **  ye  have  admitted  in  yoor  letter,''  or  **  ye  have  testified.^'  I  do  not 
think  that  this  can  be  shown.    It  looka  a  little  like  a  piece  of  special  pleading. 


22  WORD  STUDIES   IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  a 

contrasted  with  the  idols  from  which  they  had  turned  (ch. 
i.  9).     The  phrase  only  here  in  N.  T. 

Gospel  of  God  (evayy^Xiop  tov  Oeov).  For  the  phrase  see 
Mk.  i.  14 ;  Rom.  i.  1 ;  xv.  16;  2  Cor.  xi.  7 ;  1  Th.  ii.  8,  9; 
1  Pet.  iy.  17.  It  points  to  the  monotheistic  character  of  the 
gospel. 

In  much  contention  (^i^  ttoXX^  ay&vi).  Better  conflict. 
Comp.  Col.  ii.  1 ;  Philip,  i.  27 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  12  ;  Heb.  xii.  1. 
*A7ft)v  originally  of  a  contest  in  the  arena ;  but  it  is  used  of 
any  struggle,  outward  or  inward. 

3.  Exhortation  (ira/^a^Xiyo-w).  See  on  L.  vi.  24  and  1  Cor. 
xiv.  3.     Exhortation  or  counsel  is  Paul's  usual  sense. 

Of  deceit  (iK  irXdvr)^^.  Better,  of  error.  It  may  imply 
deceit  as  accompanying  or  causing  error,  but  it  does  not 
occur  in  the  sense  of  deceit.  Our  exhortation  did  not  pro- 
ceed from  any  false  teaching  which  we  had  ourselves  received. 
We  were  guided  by  "  the  spirit  of  truth " ;  see  1  J.  iv.  6, 
and  comp.  2  Pet.  i.  16. 

Of  uncleanness  (^f  atca0apaui<;}.  ^KKaOapala  in  Matt, 
xxiii.  27  of  the  corruption  of  the  sepulchre.  Elsewhere  in 
N.  T.  of  sensual  impurity.  See  Rom.  i.  24 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  21 ; 
Eph.  iv.  19.  Here  in  the  sense  of  impurity  on  the  side  of 
8ordidne88.*  In  Eph.  iv.  19,  Paul  speaks  of  working  unclean- 
ness {cLKaOapalav)  in  a  spirit  of  selfish  desire  (ir\€ov€^Cd)^  which 
is  the  spirit  of  covetousness.  In  Eph.  v.  3,  uncleanness  and 
covetousness  are  closely  associated.  Paul  means  that  his 
exhortation  did  not  proceed  from  greed  for  gain  or  lust  for 
power. 

In  guile  (^i'  hSktp).  While  uncleanness  expresses  impure 
purpose  or  motive^  guile  has  reference  to  improper  mean^; 

*  Lightfoot'8  view,  that  the  word  is  used  with  a  reference  to  the  impori* 
ties  of  the  worship  of  Aphrodite  at  Corinth  and  of  the  Cabeiri  at  Theasa- 
lonica,  seems  far-fetched. 


ch.  u.]    the  first  epistle  to  the  thessalonians.       28 

plausible  but  insincere  methods  of  winning  converts ;  sup- 
pression of  the  truth  ;  "  huckstering  the  word  of  God  "  (see 
on  2  Cor.  ii.  17)  ;  adulterating  it  for  purposes  of  gain  or 
popularity. 

4.  We  were  allowed  (^BeSofcifuiafieOa).  More  correctly, 
approved.  See  on  1  Pet.  i.  7.  We  came  and  spoke  to  you 
as  tested  men. 

I 
Pleasing  (JipdaKovrei).  As  being  those  who  seek  to  please. 
Corap.  Gal.  i.  10,  and  avOpanrdpeaKoi  man-pleasers^  Eph.  vi.  6  ; 
Col.  iii.  22.  Comp.  LXX,  Ps.  lii.  5 :  "  God  hath  scattered 
the  bones  of  men-pleasers."  The  fourth  Psalm  of  Solomon 
is  entitled  :  Against  the  menrpleasers  (avOfmirapiaKOiM'). 

Who  proveth  (So/ci/Aafovri).  Word-play  with  BeBotcifida- 
fi€0a  we  were  approved. 

5.  Used  we  flattering  words  (ip  \tSy^  KoXaxia^  iyeprj- 
Oi^fiep).  Better,  were  we  found  using  flattering  discourse. 
Very  literally  and  baldly  it  is,  we  came  to  pass  in  discourse  of 
flattery.  It  means  more  than  the  mere  fact  that  they  were 
not  flatterers :  rather,  they  did  not  prove  to  be  such  in  the 
course  of  their  work.  Similar  periphrases  with  iv  are  found, 
L.  xxii.  44 ;  Acts  xxii.  17 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  7  ;  Philip,  ii.  7 ;  with 
€&,  Matt.  xxi.  42 ;  Mk.  xii.  10 ;  L.  xx.  17 ;  Acts  iv.  11 ; 
1  Th.  iii.  5.  KoXaKia  flaUery,  N.  T.^.  ^LXX.  Rare  in 
Class.  Arf79>  is  explained  by  some  as  report  or  rumour. 
Common  report  did  not  charge  us  with  being  flatterers.  This 
meaning  is  admissible,  but  the  other  is  simpler.  Paul  says 
that  they  had  not  descended  to  flattery  in  order  to  make  the 
gospel  acceptable.  They  had  not  flattered  men's  self-com- 
placency so  as  to  blind  them  to  their  need  of  the  radical  work 
which  the  gospel  demands. 

Cloke  of  covetousness  (Trpo^daei  ttXcoi^^^?).  For  irpi- 
^>aaui  sqe  on  J.  xv.  22.  }?TopQT\y  pretext :  irpd  before^  <f>dai^ 
a  word  or  saying.     Others,  less  probably,  from  irpo<^Cvuv  to 


^Z4  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NBW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  IL 

cause  to  shine  forth  or  before.  Paul  means  that  he  had  not 
used  his  apostolio  office  to  disguise  or  conceal  avaricious 
designs. 

God  is  witness  {0€^  fidfnv^^.  Comp.  Rom.  i.  9;  2  Cor. 
i.  23  ;  Philip,  i.  8  ;  1  Th.  ii.  10.  O-od  or  tJie  Lord  i$  witness 
is  a  common  O.  T.  formula:  see  Gen.  xxxi.  44,  50 ;  1  Sam. 
xii.  5,  6 ;  xx.  23,  42 ;  Wisd.  i.  6.  For  testimony  to  his  con- 
duett  he  appeals  to  the  Thessalonians  (as  ye  know^  :  for  testi- 
mony to  his  motives^  he  appeals  to  God.  Comp.  ver.  10, 
where  there  is  the  double  appeal. 

6.  Of  men  (if  avOpmrnv).    To  extract  glory /ram  men. 

When  we  might  have  been  burdensome  (Svpdfievoi  iv 
fidpei  ehai).  Lit.  being  able  to  be  in  weight.  The  phrase  iv 
fidpei  in  weight  is  unique  in  N.  T.,  and  does  not  occur  in 
LXX.  The  better  rendering  here  iBto  be  in  authority.  Paul 
means  that  his  position  as  an  apostle  would  have  warranted 
him  in  asserting  authority  or  standing  on  his  dignity,  which 
he  did  not  do.  Bdpo^  weighty  in  the  sense  of  injltience^  is 
found  in  late  Greek.  Paul's  Epistles  were  called  weighty 
(fiapeUu)^  2  Cor.  x.  10 :  others  explain  as  referring  to  the 
apostolic  right  to  exact  pecuniary  support.* 

7.  Qentle  (Ijinoi).  This  reading  is  adopted  by  Tischen- 
dorf,  Weiss,  and  the  Rev.  T.  Westcott  and  Hort  read  vi/iinoi 
babes.  This  gives  a  stronger  and  bolder  image,  and  one 
which  falls  in  better  with  the  course  of  thought,  in  which 
Paul  is  asserting  his  innocence  of  guile  and  flattery,  and  not 
of  harshness. 

•  This  interpretation  is  urged  on  the  ground  that  ^i/Sap^cu,  ver.  0,  and 
2  Th.  iii.  8,  itarc/Sdpi^ra,  2  Cor.  xiL  16,  and  d/3ap^,  2  Cor.  xi.  9,  all  refer  to 
pecuniary  support  Accordingly  these  words  are  connected  with  eovetouS' 
nessp  ver.  6.  But  they  are  separated  from  wXtowe^la  by  a  new  idea,  seeking 
glory,  with  which  their  connection  is  immediate.  Moreover,  it  is  unlikely 
that  Paul  would  have  attached  the  idea  of  covetousneas  to  a  rightful  daim 
for  support.  Our  explanation  is  farther  favoured  by  the  oontrasted  miriM* 
ver.  7. 


cb.  u.]    the  first  epistle  to  the  thessalokians.       25 

Among  you  (h  fjtda^  vfi&v).  Better,  and  more  literally, 
in  the  midst  of  yau^  which  implies  more  intimate  intercourse 
than  among  you.     Comp.  L.  xxii.  27. 

Nurse  (rpoitxk^.  N.  T.^.  In  Class,  sometimes  of  a  mother, 
and  so  probably  here.     See  Gal.  iv.  19. 

Cherlsheth  (^BdXirjf}.  P^.  Here  and  Eph.  v.  29.  The 
verb  originally  means  to  warm.     See  LXX,  Deut.  xxii.  6. 

Her  own  children.  Note  the  inversion  of  metaphor.  Paul 
is  first  the  babe,  then  the  nurse  or  mother.  For  similar 
instances  see  ch.  v.  2,  4 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  13-16 ;  Rom.  vii.  1  flf. 
See  Introduction  to  2  Cor.,  Vol.  III.,  p.  xix. 

8.  Being  affectionately  desirous  (piuipdin^evoi).  N.  T.^. 
Once  in  LXX,  Job  iii.  21.  The  figure  of  the  nursing  mother 
is  continued.  She  is  not  satisfied  with  nursing  the  child,  but 
interests  herself  affectionately  in  all  that  concerns  it. 

We  were  willing  (riv&oKo{>iA€ii).  Better,  we  were  plea$ed. 
Imperfect  tense :  we  continued  to  entertain  and  manifest  our 
affectionate  solicitude.  The  verb  occasionally  in  later  Greek, 
and  often  in  LXX.  In  N.  T.  it  is  used  of  God's  decrees,  as 
L.  xii.  82;  1  Cor.  i.  21 ;  Gal.  i.  15;  CoL  i.  19;  and  of  the 
free  determination  and  plans  of  men,  as  Rom.  xv.  26 ;  2  Cor. 
V.  8 ;  1  Th.  iii.  1. 

Souls  (V^t^o^).  Better  lives.  See  on  Rom.  xi.  3;  1  Cor. 
xv.  45 ;  Mk.  xii.  30. 

9.  Labour — travail  (jc6irov — /u^ov).  The  two  words  are 
associated  in  2  Cor.  xi.  27;  2  Th.  iii.  8.  Mrf^^o?  travail,  P^. 
Frequent  in  LXX.  K((iro9  emphasises  fatigue^  i»j^oi^  hard- 
ship. 

Because  we  would  not  be  chargeable  (wpi^  ro  ftif  hn- 
fiaprjo'ai).  Incorrect.  Rend,  that  we  might  not  burden.  Put 
you  to  expense  for  our  support.     Comp.  2  Th.  iii.  8. 


26  WORD  STUDIES   IN  THE   NEW   TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  IL 

10.  Holiiy  —  justly  —  unblameably  (oalw  —  hiKalm  — 
afiefiiTTcof;^.  For  oaiayi  holiiy^  see  on  L.  i.  75;  for  Sitcai<D^ 
Justly  or  righteouBly^  on  Rom.  i.  17;  Vc  7.  *Afi^fiirray;  un- 
blameably^ only  in  these  Epistles.  See  ch.  iii.  18;  v.  23. 
For  the  distinction  between  &rio9  and  SUaio^^  see  Plato, 
Gory.  607. 

11.  Comforted  (irapa/jLvffovfievoi).  The  A.  V.  renders  the 
three  participles  in  this  verse  as  finite  verbs,  we  exhorted,  etc. 
Rev.  retains  the  participial  construction.  Better  than  com- 
forted^ persuading.  Persuasion  is  the  form  which  the  ex- 
hortation assimied.  JlapaKKriai^  exhortation^  and  jrapafivOiov 
persuasion^  are  associated  in  Philip,  ii.  1.  The  verb  Trapa- 
^vO^ofiai  to  persuade  occurs  only  four  times  in  N.  T.  See  on 
Philip,  ii.  1.     Neither  verb  nor  noun  in  LXX. 

Charged  (^fiaprvpSfievoC).  Rev.  testifying;  but  the  A.  V.  is 
more  correct.  Rend,  charging.  Tlie  verb  means  to  conjure^ 
or  appeal  to  by  something  sacred.  So  Eph.  iv.  17.  Comp. 
Acts  XX.  26 ;  Gal.  v.  3,  and  Siafiaprvpofiai  I  charge,  1  Tim. 
V.  21 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  14 ;  iv.  1.     Comp.  Thucyd.  vi.  80. 

12.  Walk  (irepiirarelv).  By  Paul  exclusively  in  the  meta- 
phorical sense  of  behaving  or  conducting  one's  self.  Similarly  in 
Hebrews.  In  the  Synoptic  Gospels,  with  one  exception  (Mk. 
vii.  5),  of  the  physical  act.  Both  senses  in  the  Fourth  Gospel, 
but  only  the  metaphorical  sense  in  John's  Epistles.  Once  in 
the  metaphorical  sense  in  Acts,  xxi.  21.  In  LXX  almost 
exclusively  literal ;  but  see  2  K.  xx.  23;  Pro  v.  viii.  20 ;  Eccl. 
xi.  9.  The  phrase  a^la^  irepiiraretp  to  walk  worthily,  in  Eph. 
iv.  1 ;  Col.  i.  10. 

Worthy  of  God  (af /w  Oeov).  Better  woHhily.  For  af  &)9 
comp.  LXX,  Wisd.  vii.  15 ;  xvi.  1 ;  Sir.  xiv.  11.  The  for- 
mula af ^  0€ov  is  found  among  the  Pergamum  papyri.  A 
priest  of  Dionysus  is  described  as  having  performed  his  sacred 
duties  af  ^  0€ov.  A  priestess  of  Athene  as  having  served 
af  ^  T^  0€ov  Kal  T^  irarpCho^  worthily  of  the  goddess  and  of 


Ch.  n.]     THE  FIRST  KPI8TLB  TO  THE  THE8SALONIANS.         27 

her  fatherland.  A  chief  herdsman  as  having  conducted  the 
divine  mysteries  a^los  rov  KaOrjye^po^  Aiovvaov  worthily  of  Mb 
chief  Dionysus.  The  dates  of  these  papyri  are  from  141  B.C. 
to  the  beginning  of  the  first  century  A.D.* 

Kingdom  and  glory.  The  only  instance  of  this  collocation. 
God's  kingdom  is  here  conceived  as  present  —  the  economy 
of  divine  grace  to  which  the  readers  are  called  as  Christians. 
O-lory  is  the  future  consummation  of  that  kingdom.  For 
ficurtXeia  kingdom^  see  on  L.  vi.  20.  A6^a  glory  is  not  used 
in  N.  T.  in  its  primary,  classical  sense  of  opinion  or  notion. 
It  signifies  reputationj  J.  xii.  48 ;  Rom.  ii.  7, 10 :  brightness 
or  splendour^  Acts  xxii.  11;  Rom.  ix.  4;  1  Cor.  xv.  40. 
O-lory  of  O-od  expresses  the  sum  total  of  the  divine  perfec- 
tions. The  idea  is  prominent  in  redemptive  revelation  :  see 
Isa.  Ix.  1 ;  Rom.  v.  2 ;  vi.  4.  It  expresses  the  form  in  which 
God  reveals  himself  in  the  economy  of  salvation :  see  Rom. 
ix.  28;  Eph.  i.  12;  1  Tim.  i.  11.  It  is  the  means  by  which 
the  redemptive  work  is  carried  on :  see  2  Pet.  i.  8 ;  Rom. 
vi.  4;  Eph.  iii.  16;  Col.  i.  11.  It  is  the  goal  of  Christian 
hope :  see  Rom.  v.  2 ;  viii.  18,  21 ;  Tit.  ii.  18. 

18.  Also — we.  ^^80  may  point  to  an  expression  of  thanks- 
giving in  a  letter  from  the  Thessalonians  to  Paul.  You  say 
"we  give  thanks  to  God."  We  also  give  thanks.  Comp. 
ch.  i.  2. 

When  ye  received  the  word  of  Qod  which  ye  heard  of  us 

(irapaXafiSvre^  Xrfyoi/  aKorj^  irap  fiii&v  tov  Oeov).  Rend,  when 
ye  received  the  word  of  the  message  (which  came)  from  us^  even 
the  word  of  God.  The  words  the  word  of  the  message  from  us 
form  one  conception,  governed  by  7rapa\a/36vT€^  heaving  re- 
ceived or  wJien  ye  received ;  therefore  from  us  is  not  to  be 
taken  as  depending  on  having  received^  as  Rev.  when  ye  re- 
ceived from  UfS  the  word^  etc.  Of  God  (supply  the  word)  is 
added  in  order  to  correct  any  possible  false  impression  made 

*  Deissmann,  Neue  Bibelstudien^  p.  76  f. 


28  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.        [Cb.  U, 

by  from  us.  *Akoi/j  in  N.  T.  means  the  seme  of  hearing^  as 
Matt.  xiii.  14 ;  1  Cor.  xii.  17 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  8 :  or  the  organ  of 
hearing  s  ear^  as  Mk.  vii.  35;  L.  vii.  1:  or  a  thing  heard^  a 
report^  rumour^  as  J.  xii.  88;  Rom.  x.  16.  The  phrase  XiSyo^ 
oKorj^  or  7^9  atcori^  the  word  of  hearing^  or  word  of  the  message^ 
signifies  the  word  which  is  heard,  Comp.  Heb.  iv.  2.  See 
on  the  fame^  L.  iv.  37. 

Effectually  worketh  (ipepyetrai).  Referring  to  the  wordy 
not  to  God.  Comp.  Philip,  ii.  13.  In  the  middle  voice  as 
here,  used  only  by  Paul  and  James,  and  only  of  things.  See 
Eph.  iii.  20;  Col.  i.  29;  Jas.  v.  16,  and  footnote  on  Col.  i.  29. 
The  noun  MpyeiOy  P^.  It  means  power  in  exercise^  and  is 
used  only  of  superhuman  power. 

14.  In  Christ  Jesus.  Seems  to  be  added  to  distinguish 
the  Christian  churches  in  Judaea  from  the  synagogues  of  the 
Jews,  which  would  claim  to  be  churches  of  God.  Comp.  Gal. 
i.  22,  and  see  on  ch.  i.  1.  In  Christ  Jesus^  in  Christy  in  Jesus^ 
in  the  Lordy  in  him^  are  common  Pauline  formulas  to  denote 
the  most  intimate  communion  with  the  living  Christ.  These 
phrases  are  not  found  in  the  Synoptic  Gospels.  *£v  ifiol  in 
me  (Christ)  is  frequent  in  the  Fourth  Gospel.  The  concep- 
tion is  that  of  a  sphere  or  environment  in  which  a  Christian 
or  a  church  lives,  as  a  bird  in  the  air,  or  the  roots  of  a  tree  in 
the  soil.*  f 

Countrymen  (w/i^i/Xrrw).  N.  T.^.  ^LXX.  Not  in  pre- 
Christian  Greek  writers.  Lit.  belonging  to  the  same  tribe  or 
elan.  The  reference  is  to  the  Gentile  persecutors  who  were 
instigated  by  the  Jews. 

15.  Persecuted  (iKSuo^dimiop).  Rev.  more  literally  and 
correctly,  drave  out.  The  word  only  here,  though  it  occurs 
as  an  alternative  reading,  L.  xi.  49.  Probably  with  special 
reference  to  his  own  expulsion  from  Thessalonica.  Acts 
xvii.  6-10. 

*  See  G.  A.  Deiawnann^s  excellent  monograph,  Die  nevtettamewUick^ 
Forma  ''in  Chriito  Juu.''     Marburg.    1S02. 


Ch.  n.]     THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THE8SALONIA178.         29 

Contrary  to  all  men.  Tacitus  (^Bist.  v.  5)  describes  the 
Jews  as  stubborn  in  their  faith,  prompt  in  kindly  offices 
to  each  other,  but  bitterly  hostile  toward  everybody  else. 
Juvenal  (^Sat.  xiv.  102  f.)  says  that  they  observe  and  respect 
whatever  Moses  has  taught  in  his  mystical  volume ;  not  to 
show  the  way  except  to  one  who  practises  the  same  rites,  and 
to  show  the  well  only  to  the  circumcised. 

16.  To  speak — that  they  might  be  saved  (XaX^oi  tva 
awOAaiv).  Not,  to  Bpeak  to  the  Gentiles  in  order  that  they 
might  be  saved^  but  to  teU  the  O-entiUn  that  they  might  he  saved. 
Comp.  1  Cor.  x.  88. 

To  fill  up  (^apairXfjp&o'ai).  The  verb  means  the  making  up 
of  what  is  lacking  to  perfect  fulness  ;  the  filling  of  a  partifd 
void.  Comp.  Philip,  ii.  80.  Once  in  LXX  of  filling  up  of 
sins.  Gen.  xv.  16.  Always  blind  and  stubborn,  the  Jews 
filled  up  the  measure  of  their  sins  by  their  treatment  of 
Christ  and  his  apostles. 

Alway  (irdvTtnt).  Emphatically  placed  at  the  end  of  the 
sentence.  At  all  times — before  Christ,  in  Christ's  time, 
now  —  the  Jews  by  their  resistance  to  the  divine  word  fill 
up  their  sins. 

Is  come  (i^aa€if).  The  verb  not  frequent  in  N.  T.  and 
used  mostly  by  Paul.  See  on  2  Cor.  x.  14,  and  comp.  Rom. 
ix.  81 ;  Philip,  iii.  16. 

To  the  uttermost  {m  t^Xo9).  This  is  not  the  meaning  of 
the  phrase  in  N.  T.  It  is  to  the  end:  see  Matt.  x.  22 ;  xxiv. 
18;  L.  xviii.  5;  J.  xiii.  1.  The  wrath  of  Grod  had  not  come 
upon  them  to  the  uttermost.  The  meaning  is  that  the  divine 
wrath  had  reached  the  point  where  it  passed  into  judgment.* 

•  It  has  been  urged  that  yy.  14-16  are  unbecoming  one  who  had  been  him- 
•elf  a  persecutor  of  the  Jewish-Christian  churches  (so  Baur,  Apostel  Paulus), 
and  further  that  this  diatribe  is  inconsistent  with  the  patriotism  which  Paul 
displays  in  Bom.'  iz.  zL    These  considerations,  it  is  claimed,  go  to  show  that 


80  WORD  STUDIES   IN  THE   NEW  TESTAMENT.        FCh.  II 

17.  Being  taken  from  you  (airop^avurBimei).  N.  T.^. 
^LXX.  Rev.  better,  being  bereaved  of  you.  From  op^avik 
bereft.  See  Mk.  xii.  40 ;  J.  xiv.  18 ;  Jas.  i.  27.  The  word 
suggests  the  intimate  personal  fellowship  of  the  writer  with 
his  readers.  The  separation  was  like  that  between  parents 
and  children.     Comp.  w.  7,  8. 

For  a  short  time  (tt/w  Koipov  £pa9).  N.  T.^.  Lit.  for  the 
season  of  an  hour.  Comp.  Lat.  horae  momentum.  Stronger 
than  the  usual  phrase  irpo^  &pavfor  an  hour :  see  2  Cor.  vii.  8; 
Gal.  ii.  5 ;  Philem.  15.  Comp.  tt/w  Kaipbv  for  a  season^  L. 
viii.  13 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  5. 

The  more  abundantly  (irepuraor^pay:^.  Rev.  the  more  ex- 
ceedingly.  Paul  uses  this  adverb  very  freely,  and  outside  of 
his  letters  it  appears  only  Heb.  ii.  1 ;  xiii.  19.  He  is  much 
given  to  the  use  of  comparatives,  and  sometimes  heaps  them 
together:  see  Rom.  viii.  37;  2  Cor.  vii.  13;  iv.  17;  Eph* 
iii.  20 ;  Philip,  i.  23. 

18.  We  would  (jfiOOJjaayuai).  Implying  more  than  a  mere 
inclination  or  desire.  It  was  our  will  to  come.  See  on  Matt, 
i.  19. 

I  Paul.  Not  implying  any  less  desire  on  the  part  of  his 
associates,  but  emphasising  his  own.  See  on  the  use  of  the 
epistolary  plural,  ch.  i.  2. 

Satan  (^aravasi).  From  the  Aramaic  Sdtund,  adversary. 
In  the  canonical  LXX  the  name  appears  only  three  times, 
1  K.  xi.  14,  23,  25,  and  in  each  case  is  applied  to  a  man. 
In  LXX  Sid/SoXo^  is  used,  almost  without  exception,  as 
the   translation  of  the   Heb.  Satan.      Of   22  instances  of 

the  Epistle  is  a  forgery,  or  at  least  that  w.  14-16  are  interpolated.  Sucb 
criticism  is  hardly  worthy  of  notice.  Any  allusion  here  to  Paul's  part  in 
Jewish  persecutions  would  have  been  in  singularly  bad  taste.  As  for  Paul's 
patriotism,  genuine  and  deep  though  it  was,  it  was  secondary  to  his  consuming 
zeal  for  Christ  and  his  gospel.  What  he  here  says  about  the  Jews  he  had 
long  known,  and  his  recent  experience  in  Macedonia  might  have  moved  even 
a  patriot  to  fierce  indignation  against  his  own  people. 


Oh.  n.]     THE  FIBST  EPISTLB  TO  THE  THB8SALONIAN8.         31 

BtdfioXo^  only  9  are  outside  of  the  book  of  Job.  From  the 
more  genersLl  conception  of  an  adversary,  there  is,  in  the 
O.  Tm  a  gradual  development  toward  that  of  an  evil  per- 
sonality. For  instance,  in  2  Sam.  xxiv.  1,  the  numbering 
of  the  people  is  ascribed  to  the  anger  of  the  Lord.  The 
later  historian,  in  1  Chron.  xxi.  1,  ascribes  the  act  to  Satan. 
See  also  Job,  Wisd.  ii.  24  ;  Zech.  iii.  1.  The  specialising  oi 
the  conception  was  due,  in  part,  to  the  contact  of  the  Jews 
with  the  religions  of  Babylon  and  Persia.  In  N.  T.  Satan 
appears  as  the  personal  spirit  of  evil  —  the  same  who  is 
called  the  devils  the  wicked  one^  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the 
air,  the  prince  of  this  worlds  the  serpent^  the  god  of  thi$  world, 
the  tempter.  He  tempts  to  evil,  opposes  God's  work,  inspires 
evil  dispositions,  torments  God's  people.  The  word  Satan 
occurs  only  once  in  the  Fourth  Gospel,  not  in  the  Epistles, 
but  often  in  the  Apocalypse.  Mark  never  uses  &a^oXo9, 
Matthew  never  Satan.  Paul  seldom  Bui/SoXo^,  often  Satan. 
Satan  alone  in  Pastorals.  Luke  uses  both.  It  is  clear 
that  Paul  here  as  elsewhere  employs  the  word  in  a  personal 
sense ;  but  any  attempt  to  base  the  doctrine  of  a  personal 
devil  on  this  and  similar  passages  is  unsafe.* 

Hindered  (iv^KO'^').    See  on  1  Pet.  iii.  7. 

19.  Hope.  Used  of  the  olject  of  hope,  as  CoL  i.  5; 
1  Tim.  i.  1 ;  Heb.  vi.  18. 

Joy — crown  ix^P^  —  orAf^aviK^.  Comp.  Philip,  iv.  1. 
The  phrase  crown  of  rejoicing  or  boasting^  in  Prov.  xvi.  81 ; 
Ezek.  xvi.  12;  xxiii.  42.  Comp.  Isa.  Ixxii.  8,  areiJHiiHK  tedXXov^ 
crown  of  beauty^  and  Soph.  Aj\  465,  or^.  emXeUi^  crown  of 
renown.  The  Thessalonians  were  "a  chaplet  of  victory  of 
which  Paul  might  justly  make  his  boast  in  the  day  of  the 
Lord"  (EUicott).     For  ar^^avo^  see  on  Apoc.  iv.  4. 

Coming  (irapowria).     See  on  Matt.  xxiv.  3,  and  on  iiri- 

^dtma  appearing^  1  Tim.  vi.  14  and  2  Th.  ii.  8. 
^^•^  ' 

•  As  Ellieott  on  thia  passage,  who  aaaerta  that  a  denial  of  that  doctrine 
**can  be  only  compatible  with  a  practical  denial  of  Scripture  inspiration.** 


82  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Gk  Uk 


CHAPTER  m. 

1.  Forbear  (ar^ovre?).  Lit.  no  lon^^T  fiyrbearing.  See 
on  1  Cor.  ix.  12:  LXX,  Sir.  viii.  17.  For  Class,  parall. 
Soph.  0.  a  16 ;  EUc.  1118  ;  Eurip.  HippoL  844 ;  Ian  1412. 
He  means  that  his  longing  for  some  personal  communication 
from  the  Thessalonians  became  intolerable. 

To  be  left  —  alone  (jcardkei^rivai, — fidvoi).  Implying, 
as  we  Beivt  (ver.  2)  and  luent  (ver.  5),  the  previous  presence 
of  Timothy  with  him  at  Athens. 

2.  Our  brother.  Comp.  2  Cor.  i.  1 ;  Col.  i.  1 ;  Philem.  1 ; 
Rom.  xvi.  23 ;  1  Cor.  i.  1 ;  xvi.  12. 

Minister  (jkdKovov).     See  on  Matt.  xx.  26 ;  Mk.  ix.  35. 

Not  in  the  official  sense  of  deacon  which  occurs  only  in  the 
Pastorals.  LuiKovf^  minister  and  Suucovia  ministry  or  sertnce 
are  common  expressions  of  service  to  Christ  or  to  men.  Paul 
habitually  uses  them  in  this  way.  See  Acts  i.  25;  vi.  4. 
LidKovoi  is  used  of  ministers  of  Satan,  2  Cor.  xi.  15,  and 
hidKovo^  of  the  civil  magistrate,  Rom.  xiii.  4.  See  Intro- 
duction to  the  Pastoral  Epistles.* 

Fellow  labourer.    Omit  from  text*! 

To  establish  (jrrqpC^aC).  See  on  L.  xxii.  32;  Introd.  to 
Catholic  Epistles,  Vol.  I.,  p.  625 ;  1  Pet.  v.  10 ;  2  Pet.  i.  12. 

3.  Moved  (aa/v€(r^(u).  N.T.<^.  ^LXX.  In  Class.,  as  early 
as  Homer,  of  dog^ ;  to  wag  the  tail,,  fawn  (Hom.  Od.  x.  217; 
xvi.  6).  Hence  of  persons,  to  fawn  or  cringe.  The  word  is 
apparently  used  here  in  the  original  sense,  to  be  shaken.  | 

•  Also  Intemaiional  Commentary  on  PhUippians  and  PhUemony  Ezomras 
on  **  Bishops  and  Deacons." 

t  Weiss  sabstitates  it  for  Stdicowop. 

t  So  Hesyehins,  who  defines  movedy  shaken,  disturbed  (ffiv^sc,  wrnKt^tu^ 

TOfidTTtTmi). 


Cto.  UL]     THE  FIB8T  EPISTLB  TO  THE  THB88AL0NIAN8.        33 

We  are  appointed  (^/ceifA^a).  As  L.  ii.  84  (see  note); 
Philip.  L  n.  C!omp.  Acts  xiv.  22,  in  which  occur  four  of 
the  words  used  here.  For  the  thought,  see  Matt.  v.  10; 
z,  17;  rvL  24;  1  Pet.  ii.  21flE.;  iv.  12;  2  Tim.  iu.  12. 

6.  The  tempter  (o  vupd^wp).  Only  hen  and  Matt.  iv.  8. 
"^LXX.     See  on  Matt.  vi.  13. 

In  vain  (^ek  k§pop).  The  phrase  only  in  Paul.  See  2  Cor. 
yru  1 ;  Gal.  iL  2 ;  Philip,  ii.  16.  The  force  of  the  preposi- 
tion is  fairly  represented  by  ta  in  the  phrase  to  no  purpoie. 
UlK  has  €k  iwify^  tU  to  k€v6v^  and  tk  /ceviL 

6.  Now  (dpri).  See  on  J.  xiii.  88.  Const,  with  tve  w$n 
«mforUd  (ver.  7),  not  with  came. 

Qood  remembrance  (juv^iav  i^oBiiv).  Better  kindly  re* 
xeiubrance.  Comp.  Rom.  v. 7  (see  note);  vii.  12 ;  Tit.  ii.  5; 
1  Pet.  ii.  18.    See  on  ch.  L  8. 

T.  Affliction  (JofdyKrf).  Rev.  diitress.  The  derivation 
from  ifxi^v  to  press  tightly^  to  choke  (Lightfoot,  Ellicott)  is 
doubtful.  In  the  sense  of  urgency^  distress^  seldom  in  Class* 
See  1  Cor.  vii.  26;  2  Cor.  vi   4;  xii.  10  ;  L.  xxi.  23. 

8.  Stand  fast  (onJAcere).  The  sense  of  firm  standing  is 
derived  from  the  oontext,  and  does  not  inhere  in  the  word. 
In  Mk.  iii.  81 ;  x'.  S6,  it  means  simply  to  stand.  Comp. 
Philip,  iv.  1.     It  does  not  occur  earlier  than  N.  T. 

10.  Exceedingly  (pwepeicir^piaaov).  Comp.  Eph.  iii.  20. 
Plaol  is  fond  of  oompounds  with  fnrip  above.  Of  the  28  N.  T. 
words  compounded  «with  Inrip^  22  are  found  in  Paul,  and  20 
of  them  only  there. 

Perfect  (icaraprl^ai).  Primarily,  to  acffust^  fit  together  ;  so 
mmui^  Matt.  iv.  21.  Of  the  creation  of  the  world,  Heb.  xi.  8. 
^'3eonMatt.zxL16;  L.vi40;  1  Pet.  v.  10;  Rom.  ix.  2S. 

TOI»    IV  — S 


84  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THB  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ch.  IV* 

11.  Direct  (jcareuOwaC).  Lit.  make  straight.  Only  in 
Paul  and  Luke.  See  on  L.  i.  79,  and  comp.  2  Th.  iii.  6. 
Frequent  in  LXX. 

13.  With  ail  liis  saints  (/a6t^  iravrmv  t&v  ar^Ctav  ainov). 
Saints  is  often  explained  as  angels ;  but  the  meaning  is  the 
holy  and  glorified  people  of  Q-od.  Oi  S/^toi  is  unifonnly  used 
of  these  in  N.  T.  and  never  of  angels  unless  joined  with 
ayyeXoi.  See  L.  ix.  26 ;  Mk.  viii.  38 ;  Acts  x.  22.  It  is 
doubtful  if  ol  Syioi  is  used  of  angels  in  LXX.  Zech.  xiv.  5, 
which  is  confidently  cited  as  an  instance,  is  quoted  at  the 
conclusion  of  the  Didache  (xvi.  7),  clearly  with  the  sense 
of  glorified  believers.  '^A7toi  ayyeKoi  appears  Tob.  xi.  14 ; 
xii.  15  ;  Job  v.  1.  Angels  has  no  connection  with  anything 
in  this  Epistle,  but  glorified  believers  is  closely  connected 
with  the  matter  which  was  troubling  the  Thessalonians. 
See  ch.  iv.  13.  This  does  not  exclude  the  attendance  of 
angels  on  the  Lord's  coming  (see  Mk.  viii.  38 ;  L.  ix.  26), 
but  when  Paul  speaks  of  such  attendance,  as  2  Th.  i.  7,  he 
says,  tffith  the  angels  (^ayyiXmv)  of  his  power. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

1.  Furthermore  (Xoiirop).  Rev.  not  so  well,  finaUy, 
although  the  word  is  sometimes  rightly  so  rendered.  The 
formula  is  often  used  by  Paul  where  he  attaches,  in  a  some- 
what loose  way,  even  in  the  midst  of  an  Epistle,  a  new  sub- 
ject to  that  which  he  has  been  discussing. 

2.  Commandments  (wapayyeXla^^.  Better,  charges. 
Only  four  times  in  N.  T.  ®LXX.  The  verb  irapayy^Weiv 
to  command  or  charge  is  frequent,  and  is  often  used  in  Class. 
of  military  orders.     See  Xen.  Oyr.  ii.,  4,  2;  Hdt.  iii.,  26. 

3.  Fornication.  Paul  wrote  from  Corinth,  where  sensu- 
ality in  the  guise  of  religion  was  rife.  In  Thessalonica, 
besides  the  ordinary  licentious  customs  of   the   Gentiles, 


Ch.  IV.]      THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO   THE  THESSALONIANS.         86 

immorality  was  fostered  by  the  Cabeiric  worship  (see  Intro- 
duction). About  the  time  of  Paul,  a  political  sanction  was 
given  to  this  worship  by  deifying  the  Emperor  as  Cabeirus. 

4.  That  every  one  of  you  should  know  how  to  pos- 
sess his  vessel,  etc.  (jdhipcu  Skcuttov  vfx&v  to  iavrov  axeim 
KToa-dcu^.  The  interpretation  of  w.  3-6  usually  varies 
between  two  explanations:  1.  making  the  whole  passage 
refer  to  fornication  and  adultery :  2.  limiting  this  reference 
to  w.  8-5,  and  making  ver.  6  refer  to  honesty  in  business. 
Both  are  wrong.  The  entire  passage  exhibits  two  groups  of 
parallel  clauses ;  the  one  concerning  sexual,  and  the  other 
business  relations.  Thus:  1.  Abstain  from  fornication: 
deal  honourably  with  your  wives.  2.  Pursue  your  business  as 
holy  meru,  not  with  covetous  greed  as  the  heathen:  do  not 
overreach  or  defraud.  A  comma  should  be  placed  after 
axAo^  vessel^  and  teraaOa^  procure  or  acquire^  instead  of  being 
made  dependent  on  elShai  know^  should  begin  a  new  clause. 
Render,  tJiat  every  one  of  you  treat  his  own  wife  honorably. 
ElBdvai  is  used  Hebraistically  in  the  sense  of  have  a  care  for^ 
regard^  as  ch.  v.  12,  "  Know  them  that  labour^^*  etc. :  recog- 
nise their  claim  to  respect,  and  hold  them  in  due  regard. 
Comp.  Gen.  xxxix.  6  :  Potiphar  ovk  ^i  r&v  Kaff  abrhv  ovSkv 
^^ffave  himself  no  concern  about  anything  that  he  had." 
1  Sam.  ii.  12  :  the  sons  of  Eli  ovk  el&ire:  rip  Kvpiov  ^^ paying 
no  respect  to  the  Lord.'*  Ex.  i.  8  :  Another  King  arose  89 
OVK  yBei  TOP^ldMri^  ^^who  did  not  recognise  or  regard  Joseph"  : 
did  not  remember  his  services  and  the  respect  in  which  he 
had  been  held.  1,k€vo^  is  sometimes  explained  as  body^  for 
which  there  is  no  evidence  in  N.  T.  In  2  Cor.  iv.  7  the 
sense  is  metaphorical.  Neither  in  LXX  nor  Class,  does  it 
mean  body.  In  LXX  very  often  of  the  sacred  vessels  of  wor- 
ship:  sometimes,  as  in  Class.,  of  the  accoutrements  of  war. 
In  N.  T.  occasionally,  both  in  singular  and  plural,  in  the 
general  sense  of  appliances^  furniture^  tackling.  See  Matt, 
xii.  29;  L.  xvii.  81 ;  Acts  xxvii.  17  ;  Heb.  ix.  21.  For  the 
meaning  vessel^  see  L.  viii.  16  ;  J.  xix.  20 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  7  ; 
Apoc.  ii.  27.     Here,  metaphorically,  for  wife  ;  comp.  1  Pet. 


86  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW   TESTAMENT.      [Ck.  IV. 

iii.  7.  It  was  used  for  tvife  in  the  coarse  and  literal  sense  by 
Rabbinical  writers.  The  admonition  aptly  follows  the  charge 
to  abstain  from  fornication.  On  the  contrary,  let  each  one 
treat  honorably  his  own  wife.  The  common  interpretation 
is,  ^^  as  a  safeguard  against  fornication  let  every  one  know 
how  to  procure  his  own  wife."  It  is  quite  safe  to  say  that 
such  a  sentence  could  never  have  proceeded  from  Paul.  He 
never  would  have  offset  a  charge  to  abstain  from  fornication 
with  a  counsel  to  be  well  informed  in  the  way  of  obtaining  a 
wife.  When  he  does  touch  this  subject,  as  he  does  in  1  Cor. 
vii.  2,  he  says,  very  simply,.  "  to  avoid  fornication  let  every 
man  have  (ix^roai)  his  own  wife  "  ;  not,  know  haw  to  get  one. 
ElBdvcu  knowy  as  usually  interpreted,  is  both  superfluous  and 
absurd.  Besides,  the  question  was  not  of  procuring  a  wife, 
but  of  living  honorably  and  decently  with  her,  paying  her 
the  respect  which  was  her  right,  and  therefore  avoiding 
illicit  connections. 

That  he  pursue  his  gain-getting  in  sanctlficatlon  and 
honour  (jcrourdai  iv  aymafi^  Kal  ri^y).  As  a  holy  and  hon- 
orable man.  The  exhortation  now  turns  to  business  rela- 
tions. Kroo-^ai  cannot  mean  possess^  as  A.  V.  That  would 
require  the  perfect  tense.  It  means  procure^  acquire.  Often 
6uy,  as  Acts  xvii.  28 ;  LXX,  Gen.  xxxiii.  19 ;  xxxix.  1 ; 
xlvii.  19 ;  xlix.  80  ;  Josh.  xxiv.  33  ;  absolutely,  Ezek.  vii. 
12,  13. 

5.  Not  in  the  lust  of  concupiscence  (/i^  iv  irdOei  hnOv- 
)^Casi).  Lit.  in  pasaion  of  denire.  Not  with  avaricious  greed. 
For  hnOvfila  see  on  Mk.  iv.  19.  Its  meaning  is  by  no  means 
limited  to  sensual  lust ;  see,  for  instance,  L.  xxii.  15.  It  is 
used  as  including  all  kinds  of  worldly  desires,  as  Gal.  v.  16, 
24  ;  IJ.  ii.  17.     In  Rom.  vii.  7,  especially  of  covetousness. 

6.  That  no  man  go  beyond  (to  /a^  inrepfiatveiv^.  Lit. 
the  not  going  beyond.  Dependent  on  this  is  the  will  of  Q-od^ 
ver.  3.  The  verb  N.  T.^.  Often  in  LXX,  mostly  in  the 
literal  sense  of  overpassing  limits.    Also  of  overtaking^  parsing 


Ck.  IV.]     the  first  EPISTLB  to  the  THE88ALONIA17S.        87 

fty,  9urpa$$ingj  as  in  wickedness  or  cruelty.  It  is  an  expan- 
sion of  the  preceding  thought.  Pursue  your  business  as  holy 
men :  do  not  overreach  or  defraud. 

It  is  the  overstepping  of  the  line  between  mine  and  thine. 
It  is  used  absolutely,  being  defined  by  the  succeeding  clause. 
The  A.  V.  is  literal,  ffo  beyond.  Rev.  renders  transgresB. 
Weizsacker  and  Bomemann  *'*'  ubergreife  overreach.*^  So  Rev. 
margin.     This  last  is  the  best. 

Defraud  (wTuovacretp).  P®.  See  on  2  Cor.  ii.  11,  and 
eoveUmeneBB^  Rom.  i.  29.  It  emphasises  gain  as  the  motive 
of  fraud.  Three  times  in  LXX,  Judg.  iv.  11 ;  Hab.  ii.  9 ; 
Ezek.  xxii.  27.     Often  in  Class. 

In  any  matter  (iv  t^  irpdyfuiTi).  Rev.  correctly,  in  the 
matter.  Comp.  2  Cor.  vii.  11.  The  sense  is  the  business  in 
hand,  whatever  it  be.  The  r^  does  not  stand  for  nvi  any. 
For  irpdfyfuiTi  matter^  see  on  Matt,  xviii.  19.  Those  who 
connect  this  clause  with  the  preceding,  explain  t^  as  the 
matter  yiMf  mentioned — adultery. 

Avenger  (&Siico9).  P^.  Here  and  Rom.  xiii.  4.  In  LXX 
rarely,  and  in  the  same  sense  as  here.  In  this  sense  it  occurs 
only  in  late  Greek.  For  the  warning  comp.  Eph.  v.  6 ;  Col. 
iii.  6 ;  Rom.  xiii.  4 ;  Gal.  v.  21. 

7.  Unto  uncleanness  (hrl  iucaJBapala).  Better,  for 
uncleanness ;  iirl  denoting  aim  or  intention.  The  intention 
is  viewed  as  the  basis  of  the  act  (hrl  upon^.  Comp.  Gal. 
V.  18 ;  Eph.  ii.  10. 

In  sanctification  (iv).  Note  the  change  of  preposition. 
Sanctification  is  the  characteristic  life-element  of  the 
Christian,  in  which  he  is  to  live.  Comp.  in  peace^  1  Cor. 
vii.  15 ;  in  hope^  Eph.  iv.  4. 

8.  Despiseth  (aOer&v).  Better,  r^ecteth.  Setteth  aside. 
Comp.  Gal.  u.  21 ;  iii.  15 ;  1  Cor.  i.  19.  Used  in  N.  T. 
both  of  persons  and  things. 


88  WORD  STUDIES   IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ch.  IV. 

His  Holy  Spirit  (^t6  irveOfui.  avrov  to  S/iiov).  Solemn  and 
emphatic  :  HU  Spirit^  the  holy.  Similarly,  Acts  xv.  8,  28 ; 
xix.  6 ;  XX.  23 ;  Eph.  i.  18 ;  iv.  80. 

9.   Taught  Of  QodC^coSffioiCTot).    N.TA    ^LXX.    Not  in 

Class. 

11.  Study  QI>CkoTi,fjL€la0(u).  P^.  Make  it  your  aim. 
Comp.  Rom.  xv.  20  (see  note) ;  2  Cor.  v.  9.  Often  in 
Class.  Lit.  to  he  fond  of  honour  :  hence  to  itrive  for  honour, 
to  be  ambitious. 

To  be  quiet  (^javxd^eip).  Note  the  paradox,  strive  to  be 
quiet.  For  similar  instances  see  Rom.  i.  20,  unseen  things 
clearly  seen :  Rom.  i.  22,  unse^  be  fooled  (comp.  Horace,  Od. 
1,  34,  2,  insaniens  sapientid)  :  2  Cor.  viii.  2,  poverty  abounded 
unto  riches :  2  Cor.  vii.  10,  repentance^  not  to  be  repented  of. 
The  disturbances  rebuked  in  the  second  Epistle  may  have 
begun  to  show  themselves,  so  that  there  is  a  possible  aJlusion 
to  the  idle  busybodies  of  2  Th.  iii.  11. 

12.  Honestly  (tvaxntiivm).  P^.  Better,  seemly.  From 
€v  well  and  axrit»<i  figure  or  fashion.  The  literal  sense  is  sug- 
gested by  the  familiar  phrase  in  good  form.  The  contrast 
appears  in  ardKroa^  disorderly,  2  Th.  iii.  6.  Paul  has  in  view 
the  impression  to  be  made  by  his  readers  on  those  outside  of 
the  church.     See  on  Rom.  xiii.  18,  and  comp.  1  Cor.  xiv.  40. 

Of  nothing  (f&i/Sem).  Either  neuter,  of  nothing,  or  mas- 
culine, of  no  man.  In  the  latter  case  it  would  refer  to 
depending  upon  others  for  their  support,  which  some,  in  view 
of  the  immediately  expected  parousia,  were  disposed  to  do^ 
neglecting  their  own  business. 

13.  I  would  not  have  you  to  be  ignorant  (ov  64\oii^ 
vfia9  iiyvoelv).  The  Greek  is,  we  would  not,  etc.  A  formula 
often  used  by  Paul  to  call  special  attention  to  what  he  is 
about  to  say.     See  Rom.  i.  18 ;  xi.  25 ;  1  Cor.  x.  1,  etc.    He 


Ch.  ivj    the  first  epistle  to  the  thbssalonians.      39 

employs  several  similar  expressions  for  the  same  purpose,  as 
04\iD  vfia^  €ltiv<u  I  wish  you  to  know  (1  Cor.  xi.  3 ;  Col. 
ii.  1)  :  jvoi>p(iw  vfiiv  I  declare  unto  you  (1  Cor.  xv.  1 ;  2  Cor. 
viii.  1 ;  Gal.  i.  11)  :  yivdkrKecv  vfui^  /SovXofuu  I  would  have 
you  know  (Philip,  i.  12). 

Them  which  are  asleep  (r&v  KoifuofUwov).  Or,  who  are 
%leeping.  See  on  Acts  vii.  60 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  4,  and  comp.  1  Cor. 
vii.  89 ;  xi.  30 ;  xv.  6,  18,  20,  51 ;  J.  xi.  11,  etc.  The  dead 
members  of  the  Thessalonian  church. 

Ye  sorrow  (XvirrjaOe).  Opinions  differ  as  to  the  possible 
ground  of  this  sorrow.  According  to  some,  the  Thessaloni- 
ans  supposed  that  eternal  life  belonged  only  to  such  as  should 
be  found  alive  at  the  parousia,  and  therefore  that  those 
already  dead  would  not  share  the  blessings  of  the  second 
advent.  Others,  assuming  an  interval  between  the  advent 
and  the  general  resurrection,  think  that  the  Thessalonians 
were  anxious  lest  their  brethren  who  died  before  the  advent 
would  be  raised  only  at  the  general  resurrection,  and  there- 
fore would  not  share  the  blessings  of  communion  with  the 
Lord  during  the  millennial  reign.  It  is  impossible  to  decide 
the  question  from  Paul's  words,  since  he  does  not  argue,  but 
only  consoles.  The  value  of  his  consolation  does  not  depend 
upon  the  answer  to  the  question  whether  the  departed  saints 
shall  first  be  raised  up  at  the  general  resurrection,  or  at  a 
previous  resurrection  of  believers  only.  The  Thessalonians 
were  plainly  distressed  at  the  thought  of  separation  from 
their  departed  brethren,  and  had  partially  lost  sight  of  the 
elements  of  the  Christian  hope  —  reunion  with  them  and  fel- 
lowship with  the  Lord.  These  elements  Paul  emphasises  in 
his  answer.  The  resurrection  of  Jesus  involves  the  resurrec- 
tion of  believers.  The  living  and  the  dead  Christians  shall 
alike  be  with  the  Lord. 

Others  (ol  Xot^rol).  More  correctly,  the  rest.  Paul  makes 
a  sharp  distinction  between  Christians  and  all  others. 


40  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ch.  IV. 

Who  have  no  hope.  Only  believers  have  hope  of  life 
after  death.  The  speculations  and  sormisings  of  pagan 
philosophy  do  not  amount  to  a  hope. 

14.  Them  also  which  sleep  In  Jesus  will  God  bring 
with  him  (^koX  6  0m  rois  KOifirfBArra^  Biit  tov  *Irfaov  oi^€i  ainf 

(1)  Which  sleep  should  be,  which  have  been  laid  culeep  or 
have  fallen  culeep^  giving  the  force  of  the  passive. 

(2)  At^  TOV  *\riaov  can  by  no  possibility  be  rendered  in 
Je9U9^  which  would  be  iv  'IiycroO :  see  1  Cor.  xv.  18  ;  1  Th. 
iv.  16.     It  must  mean  through  or  by  means  of  Jesus. 

(3)  The  attempt  to  construe  hih  tov  *lrfaov  with  Toif^  ko^ 
fArfOdvTa^  those  who  have  fallen  asleep  by  means  of  Jesus^  givea 
an  awkward  and  forced  interpretation.  It  has  been  explained 
by  supposing  a  reference  to  martyrs  who  have  died  by  Jesus  ; 
because  of  their  faith  in  him.  In  that  case  we  should  expect 
the  accusative,  Biit  tov  ^Itjo-ovp  on  account  of  or  for  the  sake  of 
Jesus.  Moreover  Paul  is  not  accentuating  that  idea.  Kot- 
firfdArra^  would  be  universally  understood  by  the  church  as 
referring  to  the  death  of  Christians,  so  that  by  Jesus  would 
be  superfluous. 

(4)  At^  TOV  ^IrfiTov  should  be  construed  with  af ct  will  bring. 
Rend,  the  whole :  them  also  that  are  fallen  asleep  will  God 
through  Jesus  bring  with  him.  Jesus  is  thus  represented  as 
the  agent  of  the  resurrection.  See  1  Cor.  xv.  21 ;  J.  v.  28 ; 
vi.  39,  44,  54.  Bring  (a^ei)  is  used  instead  of  iycipel  shall 
raise  up^  because  the  thought  of  separation  was  prominent 
in  the  minds  of  the  Thessalonians. 

15.  By  the  word  of  the  Lord  (iv  Xiy^  icvpCov).  Or  in  the 
word.  Arf709  of  a  concrete  saying,  Rom.  ix.  9 ;  xiii.  9.  We 
do  not  say  this  on  our  own  authority.  Comp.  1  Cor.  vii.  10, 
12,  25.  No  recorded  saying  of  the  Lord  answers  to  this 
reference.  It  may  refer  to  a  sapng  transmitted  orally, 
or  to  a  direct  revelation  to  Paul.  Comp.  Gal.  i.  12 ;  ii.  2 : 
Eph.  iii.  8 :  2  Cor.  xii.  1,  9. 


Cb.  IV.]      THB  FIRST  EPISTLE   TO  THE  THBSSALONIAKS.        41 

Remain  (ir€piXevinifA€Poi).  P^.  and  only  in  this  Epistle. 
The  plural  we  indicates  that  Paul  himself  expected  to  be 
alive  at  the  parousia.* 

Shall  not  prevent  (ov  f^if  ^Adanikeii).  The  A.  V.  misses 
the  force  of  the  double  negative  —  shall  in  no  wise  prevent. 
Prevent  in  the  older  sense  of  awUeipate^  be  beforehand  with. 
See  on  Matt.  xvii.  25,  and  1  Th.  ii.  16.  The  living  shall 
not  share  the  blessings  of  the  advent  sooner  than  the  dead  in 
Christ. 

16.  The  word  of  the  Lord,  ver.  15,  is  apparently  not  in- 
tended to  include  the  specific  details  which  follow.  In  that 
word  the  revelation  was  to  the  effect  that  all  believers  simul- 
taneously should  share  the  blessings  of  the  advent.  The 
following  description  of  the  Lord's  descent  from  heaven  is 
intended  to  emphasise  the  fact  that  the  reunion  of  dead  and 
living  believers  will  be  accomplished  by  the  Lord  in  person 
(avT09).  "'Ort  does  not  indicate  the  contents  of  the  word  of 
the  Lord  (that,  as  A.  V.),  but  means /or  or  because;  and  the 
details  are  meant  to  strengthen  the  more  general  declaration 
of  ver.  15.  In  the  details  themselves  there  are  traces  of 
certain  O.  T.  theophanies,  as  Exod.  xix.  11-18;  Mic.  i.  S.f 

Shall  descend  from  heaven.  Used  nowhere  else  of  Christ's 
second  coming.  Frequently  in  the  Fourth  Gospel,  of  Christ's 
descent  to  earth  as  man.  See  iii.  13 ;  vi.  83,  38, 41,  etc.  In 
Eph.  iv.  9,  of  his  descent  by  the  Spirit  in  order  to  endow  the 
church. 


*  Tlie  explanadon  that  Pftul  uses  the  participle  strictly  in  its  present  sense, 
and  means  toe  who  are  now  being  I</t,  merely  distingoishing  himself  and  his 
readers  from  those  who  have  died,  is  strained  in  the  interest  of  a  particular 
theory  of  inspiration.    See  EUicott. 

t  Professor  Ropes  of  Harvard,  Die  8prUehe  Jesu,  holds  the  opposite  view. 
He  thinks  that  ver.  15  is  not  cited  as  the  word  of  the  Lord,  but  that  the  be- 
ginning of  the  citation  is  indicated  by  0rc,  ver.  16,  and  the  end  by  air,  ver.  17 
He  regards  the  citation  as  a  free  rendering  of  a  logion  of  Jesns,  akin  to  Matt, 
xxiv.  80  f . 


42  WORD  STUDIBS   IN   THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  IV. 

With  a  shout  (^i;  iccX^w/iaTt).  N.  T.^.  Once  in  LXX, 
Prov.  xxiv.  62  (English  Bib.  xxx.  27).  From  K€Kev€iv  to 
summon.  Often  in  Class.  Lit.  a  $hout  of  command,  as  of  a 
general  to  his  army,  an  admiral  to  his  oarsmen,  or  a  charioteer 
to  his  horses. 

Archangel  (apxayy^Xov).  Only  here  and  Jude  9.  Not  in 
O.  T.  The  Pauline  angelology  shows  traces  of  Rabbinical 
teachings  in  the  idea  of  orders  of  angels.  See  £ph.  i.  21 ; 
Col.  i.  16;  Rom.  viii.  88.  The  archangels  appear  in  the 
apocryphal  literature.  In  the  Book  of  Enoch  (see  on  Jude 
14)  four  are  named,  Michael,  Uriel,  Raphael,  and  Gabriel. 
Michael  is  set  over  the  tree  which,  at  the  time  of  the  great 
judgment,  will  be  given  over  to  the  righteous  and  humble, 
and  from  the  fruit  of  which  life  will  be  given  to  the  elect. 
In  Tob.  xii.  16,  Raphael  appears  as  one  of  the  seven  holy 
angels.  Comp.  Apoc.  viii.  2.  See  also  on  Jude  9,  and  comp. 
Dan.  xii.  1.* 

With  the  trump  of  God  (^i^  adkiriyyi  Oeov").  For  the 
trumpet  heralding  great  manifestations  of  God,  see  Ex. 
xix.  13,  16  ;  Ps.  xlvii.  5  ;  Isa.  xxvii.  13 ;  Zech.  ix.  14  ; 
Zeph.  i.  16  ;  Joel  ii.  1 ;  Matt.  xxiv.  31 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  52  ; 
Apoc.  i.  10;  iv.  1.  Of  God  does  not  indicate  the  size  or 
loudness  of  the  trumpet,  but  merely  that  it  is  used  in  God's 
service.  Comp.  harps  of  God,  Apoc.  xv.  2  ;  mimcal  instru- 
ments of  God,  1  Chron.  xvi.  42.  The  later  Jews  believed 
that  God  would  use  a  trumpet  to  raise  the  dead. 

17.  Together  with  them  (^ifia  ahv  aurofc).  "'Aaui  at  the 
same  time,  referring  to  the  Uving.  We  that  are  alive  shall 
simultaneously  or  one  and  all  (comp.  Rom.  iii.  12)  be  caught 
up.  J,in/  avToi^  along  with  them,  i.e.,  the  dead.  Thus  ifui  is 
to  be  const,  with  shall  he  caught  up.  The  A.  V.  and  Rev. 
are  inaccurate,  f  These  are  the  important  words  as  related 
to  the  disquietude  of  the  Thessalonians. 

*  See  0.  Everling,  Die  paulinische  Angelologie  und  D&monologie,  8.  80  ff. 
t  Lij^tfoot  nys  that  the  combination  d/ia  9^9  together  toUh,  ia  too  common 


Ch.  v.]     THE   FIRST   EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  48 

Shall  be  caught  up  (^ifyn-ayTjaofieffd).  By  a  swift,  resist- 
less, divine  energy.     Comp.  2  Cor.  xii.  2, 4 ;  Acts  viii.  39. 

In  the  air  (e^  aipa).  Rend,  into  the  air,  and  const,  with 
%hall  be  caught  up.  *A.ffp  the  atmosphere  with  the  clouds^  as 
distinguished  from  aiOrip  the  pure  ether ^  which  does  not  occur 
inN.  T. 

And  so.    After  having  met  the  Lord. 


CHAPTER  V. 

1 .  Times — seasons  (j(p6v<ov — tccup&p) .  See  on  Acts  i.  7. 
With  special  reference  to  the  Lord's  coming.  The  plural  is 
used  because  Paul  is  thinking  of  a  number  of  incidents 
attending  the  preparation  and  accomplishment  of  the  second 
advent,  and  occurring  at  different  times.  The  collocation 
timee  and  seasons  only  here  and  Acts  i.  7.  Kaiptk  is  the 
suitable  time,  ')(p6vo^  the  time  meatured  by  duration.  Hence 
Koi/xt?  a  juncture^  an  occasion^  as  Matt.  xvi.  8.  The  distinc- 
tion is  so  well  marked  that  we  have  the  phrases  yp6vov  Koipd^ 
the  right  moment  of  the  time^  and  eOiccupo^  'xpivo^  the  opportune 
moment.     See  Soph.  Elec.  1292. 

2.  Perfectly  (Jucpifim).    See  on  L.  i.  3. 

The  day  of  the  Lord  Cvf^P^  Kvplov).  The  day  of  Christ's 
second  coming.  In  Paul's  Epistles  this  is  expressed  by  fj 
illUpa  the  day^  absolutely,  1  Th.  v.  4 ;  1  Cor.  iii.  13 ;  Rom. 
xiii.  12  :  fi  tjfi^pa  iicetinj  that  day^  2  Th.  i.  10  :  fiiiipa  'xpi^rrov 
the  day  of  Christ,  Philip,  i.  10 ;  ii.  16  :  ^M^pa  icvplov  or  rov 
Kvptov  day  of  the  Lord^  1  Cor.  v.  5  ;  1  Th.  v.  2 ;  2  Th.  ii.  2  : 

to  allow  the  separation  of  the  two  words.  This  ia  not  the  case.  Liddell  and 
Soott  give  only  one  instance,  Eurip.  lon^  717.  They  give  one  other  with  ficrd, 
Flato,  CritkUf  110  A,  bat  here  the  words  are  separated.  **  Mythology  and 
antiquarian  research  come  together  (d^a)  into  the  cities,  along  toUh  (^<crd) 
leisure.** 


44  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Oh.  V. 

fiftApa  Tov  $cvplov  fifi&v  ^Ifiaov  (Kpurrou),  1  Cor.  i.  8 ;  2  Cor.  i. 
14  These  expressions  refer  to  a  definite  time  when  the 
Lord  is  expected  to  appear,  and  Paul  expects  this  appearance 
soon.  Attempts  to  evade  this  by  referring  such  expressions 
to  the  day  of  death,  or  to  the  advance  toward  perfection 
after  death  until  the  final  judgment,  are  forced,  and  are 
shaped  by  dogmatic  conceptions  of  the  nature  of  Biblical 
inspiration.*  In  the  O.  T.  the  phi-ase  day  of  the  Lard 
denotes  a  time  in  which  God  will  conspicuously  manifest  his 
power  and  goodness  or  his  penal  justice.  See  Isa.  ii.  12; 
Ezck.  xiii.  5;  Joel  i.  15;  ii.  11;  and  comp.  Bom.  ii.  5. 
The  whole  class  of  phrases  is  rare  in  N.  T.  outside  of  Paul's 
Epistles. 

As  a  thief  {&9  KKhmy;).  Oomp.  Matt  xxiv.  43  ;  L.  xii. 
89 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  10  ;  Apoc.  xvi.  16,  and  see  on  Apoc  iii.  8. 

In  the  night  {iv  wktC).  The  ancient  clmrch  held  that 
the  advent  was  to  be  expected  at  night,  on  an  Easter  eve. 
This  gave  rise  to  the  custom  of  vigils.  Jerome,  on  Matt. 
XXV.  6,  says:  ^^It  is  a  tradition  of  the  Jews  that  Messiah 
will  come  at  midnight,  after  the  likeness  of  that  season  in 
Egypt  when  the  Passover  was  celebrated,  and  the  Destroyer 
came,  and  the  Lord  passed  over  the  dwellings.  I  think  that 
this  idea  was  perpetuated  in  the  apostolic  cnstom,  that,  on 
the  day  of  vigils,  at  the  Pascha,  it  was  not  allowed  to  dismiss 
the  people  before  midnight,  since  they  expected  the  advent  of 
Christ.'^ 

It  is  noteworthy  how  many  of  the  gospel  lessons  on  watch- 
fulness are  associated  with  the  night  and  a  visit  by  night. 
See  Matt.  xxiv.  43 ;  xxv.  1-13 ;  Mk.  xiiL  85  ;  L.  xii.  35,  88  ; 
xvii.  34 ;  xii.  20. 

8.  When  they  shall  say.  The  prediction  is  thrown  into 
dramatic  form. 

*  See  B.  Jowett,  **0n  the  belief  of  the  Coming  of  Christ  in  the  Apostolical 
Age/'  in  Commentary  on  the  EpuUts  of  Paul 


ch.  v.]    the  first  epistle  to  the  thessalonians.       46 

Cometh  upon  (hrUrrarcu).  See  L.  xxi.  34,  36.  Often  in 
N.  T.  of  a  person  coming  suddenly  upon  another ;  as  L.  ii.  9 ; 
xxiv.  4 ;  Acts  iv.  1 ;  xii.  7. 

Travail  (ASlv).  Birth-throe.  Only  here  in  its  literal  sense. 
Elsewhere  as  a  strong  figure  of  sorrow  or  pain.  See  Matt. 
xxiv.  8 ;  Mk.  xiii.  8  ;  Acts  ii.  24.  For  the  figure  in  O.  T. 
see  Isa.  xiii.  6-8 ;  xxxyii.  3 ;  Mic.  iv.  9 ;  Hos.  xiii.  3 ;  Jer. 
xiii.  21. 

Shall  not  escape  (ov  ;a^  iK4>vy<o<nv).  A.  V.  misses  the 
force  of  the  double  negative.     They  shall  in  no  wise  escape. 

4.  Overtake  (^tcaraXd/Sjn'),     See  on  comprehended^  J.  i.  5. 

A  thief  (icXAm;?).  Tischendorf,  Weiss,  and  Rev.  T.  retain 
this  reading.  Westcott  and  Hort  read  icX^Trra?  thieves^  but 
with  icXJirnf^  in  margin.  The  weight  of  textual  evidence  is 
in  favour  of  the  singular. 

5.  Ye  are  all.  In  the  text  jiip  for  should  be  inserted 
after  iravre^  all.  Ye  are  not  in  darkness  for  ye  are  sons  of 
light. 

Children  of  light  (yUi  ^ornfe).  More  correctly,  som  of 
light.  See  on  Mk.  iii.  17,  and  comp.  L.  xvi.  8 ;  J.  xii.  36 ; 
Eph.  V.  8  ;  Col.  i.  12.  The  Christian  condition  is  habitually 
associated  in  N.  T.  with  Ught :  see  Matt.  v.  14, 16 ;  J.  iii.  21 ; 
viii.  12 ;  Acts  xxvi.  18 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  9 ;  IJ.  i.  7.  The  contrary 
condition  with  darkness :  see  J.  iii.  19,  20  ;  Eph.  v.  8  ;  1  Pet. 
ii.  9 ;  Matt.  iv.  16 ;  vi.  23,  etc. 

Of  the  night  —  of  darkness  (i/v/rr^  —  trKSrovi).  The 
genitive  marks  an  advance  of  thought  from  iv  a-Kdrei  in 
darkness,  ver.  4.  'Ev  indicates  the  element  in  which  one 
is.  The  genitive,  of  darknesi^  points  to  nature  and  origin. 
To  belong  to  darkness  is  more  than  to  be  in  darkness. 

6.  Others  (o/  XoiTro/).     The  rest,  as  ch.  iv.  18. 


46  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  V. 

Let  US  watch  (^yprfjop&fiev).  See  on  Mk.  xiii.  85,  and 
comp.  Eph.  V.  14. 

Be  sober  (i^it^/aci^).  Primarily  in  a  physical  sense,  aa 
opposed  to  excess  in  drink,  but  passing  into  the  ethical  sense 
of  ccUm^  collected^  circumspect.  Alert  wakefulness  and  calm 
assurance  will  prevent  their  being  surprised  and  confused  by 
the  Lord's  coming,  as  by  a  thief  in  the  night. 

7.  Be  drunken  {fieOva-KSfiei^i').  Lit.  who  are  made  drunk 
or  get  drunk.  See  on  J.  ii.  10.  In  N.  T.  always  of  intoxi- 
cation. In  LXX,  the  Heb.  ahekar  strong  drink  is  several 
times  rendered  by  fiSvafia ;  Judg.  xiii.  4, 7;  1  Sam.  i.  11, 15. 

8.  Putting  on  (ivBvadfievoi).  The  son  of  day  clothes 
himself  for  the  day's  work  or  battle.  The  same  association 
of  ideas  as  in  vv.  6,  8,  is  found  in  Rom.  xiii.  12-14 ;  Apoc. 
xvi.  IS;  1  Pet.  i.  18.     Comp.  LXX,  Bar.  v.  2. 

Breastplate  —  helmet.  Comp.  Eph.  vi.  14.  The  figures 
are  not  original  with  Paul.  See  Isa.  lix.  17 ;  Wisd.  v.  18, 
19.  Notice  that  only  defensive  armour  is  mentioned,  in 
accordance  with  the  darkness  and  uncertainty  of  the  last 
time ;  and  that  the  fundamental  elements  of  Christian  char- 
acter, faith,  hope,  and  love,  are  brought  forward  again  as  in 
ch.  i.  3 ;  1  Cor.  xiii.  13.  For  the  figure  of  the  armed  soldier, 
comp.  also  Rom.  xiii.  12 ;  2  Cor.  x.  4. 

9.  For  (Sri).  Special  emphasis  is  laid  on  the  hope  of 
salvation.  The  exhortation  to  put  it  on  is  enforced  by  the 
fact  that  God's  appointment  is  to  salvation  and  not  to  wrath. 

To  obtain  (ek  ir€pvirolriaiv).  More  Uterally,  unto  the  ob- 
taining.  See  on  Eph.  i.  14.  In  three  out  of  five  instances 
in  N.  T.  the  word  clearly  means  acquiring  or  obtaining.  In 
Eph.  i.  14  and  1  Pet.  ii.  9,  it  is  sometimes  rendered  poseesiion 
(so  Rev.).  But  in  Ephesians  the  meaning  is  redemption  or 
acquiiitionj  or  redemption  inrhich  will  give  possession ;  and  in 


Ch.V.]      the  FIB8T  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.         47 

Ist  Peter  a  people /or  aequisitian.     The  meaning  here  in  that 
we  might  obtain.     Comp.  LXX,  Mai.  iii.  17. 

10.  Who  died.  Frequently  the  resurrection  is  coupled 
with  the  death  of  Christ  by  Paul,  as  ch.  iv.  14 ;  Philip,  iii. 
10  ;  Col.  ii.  12 ;  iii.  1-4.  Not  so  here ;  but  the  thought  of 
resurrection  is  supplied  in  live  together  with  him. 

Wake  or  sleep.  Whether  we  are  alive  or  dead  at  Christ's 
appearing.  Comp.  Rom.  xiv.  9.  ILaOevieuf  in  N.  T.  always 
literally  of  sleep,  except  here,  and  possibly  £ph.  v.  14.  In 
Mk.  v.  89 ;  L.  viii.  52,  it  is  contrasted  with  death.  In  LXX 
in  the  sense  of  death,  Ps.  Ixxxvii.  5 ;  Dan.  xii.  2 ;  2  Sam. 
vii.  12. 

11.  Comfort  (7rapaKa\€lT€).  Rev.  renders  exhort;  but 
comfort  suits  better  the  general  drift  of  the  passage,  and  cor- 
responds with  ch.  iv.  18.  There  is  some  force  in  Borne- 
mann's  suggestion  that  the  two  meanings  may  be  combined. 
Exhort  each  other  to  be  of  good  heart. 

Edify  (oUohofielT€).  Lit.  build  up.  See  on  Acts  xx.  32. 
The  metaphorical  sense  habitually  in  Paul.  See  1  Cor. 
viii.  1, 10 ;  x.  28 ;  xiv.  4 ;  Eph.  ii.  20.  In  O.  T.  mostly  in 
the  literal  sense.  See  however  LXX,  Ruth  iv.  11;  Ps. 
xxvii.  5;  Ixxxviii.  2;   Jer.  xxxi.  4. 

12.  Know  (el&dvai).  See  on  ch.  iv.  4.  Recognise  them 
for  what  they  are,  and  as  entitled  to  respect  because  of  their 
office.  Comp.  hriyivwrKcre  acknowledge^  1  Cor.  xvi.  18  ;  and 
iyvwrffrj^  takeit  knowledge^  LXX,  Ps.  cxliii.  8.  Ignatius, 
Smyrn.  ix.,  has  hrUrKoirov  elSdpai  to  know  the  bishop j  to  appre- 
ciate and  honor  him. 

Are  over  (irpourraiUifov^).  Lit.  who  are  placed  before  you. 
See  on  Rom.  xii.  8.  Used  of  superintendents  of  households, 
1  Tim.  iii  4,  6, 12 :  of  the  ruling  of  elders  of  the  church, 
1  Tim.  V.  17.     It  does  not  indicate  a  particular  ecclesiastical 


48  WOBD  STUDIBS  IN  THB  KBW  TB8TAMENT.        [Ch.  V. 

ofSce,  but  is  used  functionally.  The  ecclesiastical  nomenclar 
ture  of  the  Pauline  Epistles  is  unsettled,  corresponding  with 
the  fact  that  the  primitive  church  was  not  a  homogeneous 
body  throughout  Christendom.  The  primitive  Pauline  church 
consisted  of  a  number  of  separate  fraternities  which  were 
self-governing.  The  recognition  of  those  who  ministered  to 
the  congregations  depended  on  the  free  choice  of  their  mem- 
bers. See  for  instance  1  Cor.  xvi.  15,  16.  The  congrega- 
tion exercised  discipline  and  gave  judgment :  1  Cor.  v.  8-5 ; 
2  Cor.  ii.  6,  7 ;  vu.  11, 12;  Gal.  vi.  1. 

Admonish  (yovOerovpra*;^.  Only  in  Acts  and  Paul.  See 
on  Acts  XX.  31,  and  comp.  ver.  14 ;   Rom.  xv.  14 ;   1  Oor. 

iv.  14 ;  Col.  i.  28. 

13.  Esteem  (^yeZaOcu).  Primarily  to  Uad^  which  is  the 
only  sense  in  the  Gospels  and  Acts,  except  Acts  xxvi.  2,  in  a 
speech  of  Paul.  To  lead  the  mind  through  a  reasoning  pro- 
cess to  a  conclusion,  and  so  to  thinks  to  estimate.  Only  in  this 
sense  by  Paul,  Peter,  and  James.  See  2  Cor.  ix.  5 ;  Philip, 
ii.  3 ;  Jas.  i.  2 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  9.  In  both  senses  in  Hebrews. 
See  X.  29 ;  xiii.  7. 

Very  highly  in  love.  Const,  very  higUy  with  esteem.  In 
love  qualifies  both  words.* 

For  their  work's  sake  (hih  ri  !pyov  avr&v).  Their  esteem 
for  their  superintendents  is  not  to  rest  only  on  personal 
attachment  or  respect  for  their  position,  but  on  intelligent 
and  sympathetic  appreciation  of  their  work.  It  is  a  good 
and  much-needed  lesson  for  the  modern  congregation  no  less 
than  for  the  Thessalonian  church. 

14.  Them  that  are  unruly  (joif^  ardscrov^^.  N.  T.^.  The 
A.V.  is  more  vigorous  and  less  stilted  than  Rev.  disorderly. 
From  a  not  and  rdaaeiv  draw  up  or  arrange.     Those  who  are 

*  Others  join  in  lave  with  e^eem  as  forming  one  conception ;  bat  the 
phrase  1iy€t&$ai  iw  dydvjf  is  not  warranted  by  usage. 


Ch.V.]      THB  FIB8T  EPI8TLB  TO  THE  THE8SALONIAN8.         49 

out  of  line.  Comp.  the  adverb  Strdtcrci^  disorderly^  2  Th. 
iii.  6, 11.  Probably  referring  to  the  idlers  and  busybodies 
described  there. 

Feeble-minded  (pXiyo's^^ov^^.  N.  T.^.  Better  faint- 
hearted. 'OX^o9  little  and  y^vxif  soul.  Those  of  little  heart. 
^Class.  In  LXX  see  Prov.  xiv.  29 ;  Isa.  xxv.  5 ;  Uv.  6 ; 
Ivii.  16.  'OXiyo^tvxia  faint-heartedness,  ^N.  T.  LXX,  Ex. 
vi.  9 ;  Ps.  liv.  8.     Comp.  Ps.  of  Sol.,  xvi.  11. 

Support  (airr^ecrde).  Comp.  Matt.  vi.  24;  Tit.  i.  9. 
'Ain-i  against  and  ix^aOai  to  hold  one^s  self.  The  primary 
sense  is,  keeping  one's  self  directly  opposite  to  another  so  as 
to  sustain  him. 

15.  That  which  is  good  (jh  ayaObv).  Not  to  be  limited 
to  profitable^  beneficent  (as  Lightfoot,  Liinemann),  although 
ayaOik  commonly  includes  a  corresponding  beneficent  relation 
of  its  subject  to  another  subject,  which  is  emphasised  here  by 
to  all  men.  See  on  Rom.  v.  7.  It  may  also  include  what  is 
absolutely,  morally  good,  as  Rom.  ii.  10.  So  Heb.  xiii.  21 ; 
1  Pet.  iii.  11 ;  Rom.  vii.  18. 

17.  Without  ceasing  (^iBuxXelwrm^  Comp.  Rom.  i.  9 ; 
xii.  12 ;  Eph.  vi.  18 ;  Col.  iv.  2. 

18.  Will  (OiXriiJM).  In  the  sense  of  requirement.  Comp. 
ch.  iv.  3. 

19.  Quench  not  the  Spirit.  Since  he  is  the  inspirer  of 
prayer,  and  the  bestower  of  all  gifts  of  grace  on  the  Church. 
Comp.  Eph.  iv.  80.  The  operation  of  the  Spirit  is  set  forth 
under  the  image  of  fire  in  Matt.  iii.  11 ;  L.  xii.  49 ;  Acts  ii. 
8,  4.  The  reference  here  is  to  the  work  of  the  Spirit  gener- 
ally, and  not  specially  to  his  inspiration  of  prayer  or  prophecy. 

20.  Prophesy ings  (TrpoifnfTeCa^}.  The  emphasis  on  proph- 
esyings  corresponds  with  that  in  1  Cor.  xiv.  1-6,  22  £F. 
Prophecy  in  the  apostolic  church  was  directly  inspired  in- 

▼OL.  IT.— 4 


60  ^ORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  V. 

dtruction,  exhortation,  or  warning.  The  prophet  received 
the  truth  into  his  own  spirit  which  was  withdrawn  from 
earthly  things  and  concentrated  upon  the  spiritual  world. 
His  higher,  spiritual  part  (irvevfid)^  and  his  moral  intelli- 
gence (w)59),  and  his  speech  (Xrfyo?)  worked  in  harmony. 
His  spirit  received  a  spiritual  truth  in  symbol :  his  under- 
standing interpreted  it  in  its  application  to  actual  events, 
and  his  speech  uttered  the  interpretation.  He  was  not 
ecstatically  rapt  out  of  the  sphere  of  human  intelligence, 
although  his  understanding  was  intensified  and  clarified  by 
the  phenomenal  action  of  the  Spirit  upon  it.  This  double 
action  imparted  a  peculiarly  elevated  character  to  his  speech. 
The  prophetic  influence  was  thus  distinguished  from  the 
mystical  ecstasy,  the  ecstasy  of  Paul  when  rapt  into  the 
third  heaven,  which  affected  the  subject  alone  and  was 
incommunicable  (2  Cor.  xii.  1-4).  The  gift  of  tongues  car- 
ried the  subject  out  of  the  prophetic  condition  in  which 
spirit,  imderstanding,  and  speech  operated  in  concert,  and 
into  a  condition  in  which  the  understanding  was  overpowered 
by  the  communication  to  the  spirit,  so  that  the  spirit  could 
not  find  its  natural  expression  in  rational  speech,  or  speech 
begotten  of  the  understanding,  and  found  supernatural 
expression  in  a  tongue  created  by  the  Spirit.  Paul  attached 
great  value  to  prophecy.  He  places  prophets  next  after 
apostles  in  the  list  of  those  whom  God  has  set  in  the  Church 
(1  Cor.  xii.  28).  He  associates  apostles  and  prophets  as  the 
foundation  of  the  Church  (Eph.  ii.  20).  He  assigns  to 
prophecy  the  precedence  among  spiritual  gifts  (1  Cor.  xiv. 
1-5),  and  urges  his  readers  to  desire  the  gift  (1  Cor.  xiv. 
1,  89).     Hence  his  exhortation  here. 

21.  Prove  all  things  (irdvra  Sotufjui^ere).  A  general 
exhortation,  not  confined  to  prophesyings ;  but  Paul  else- 
where insists  that  a  test  be  applied  to  phenomena  which 
claim  to  be  supernatural.  See  on  discerning  of  spirits^  1  Cor. 
xii.  10 ;  xiv.  29,  and  comp.  2  Th.  ii.  2,  and  1  J.  iv.  1-8. 
For  SoKifjLd^ere  prove^  see  on  1  Pet.  i.  7.  In  LXX,  Prov. 
xxvii.  21 ;  Ps.  xi.  6,  Soic(/uov  is  a  crucible  or  furnace. 


Oh.  v.]      THE  FIRST  EPIBTLB  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.         51 

Hold  fast  that  which  is  good  (rh  tcaXov  icar^ere).  These 
words  are  associated  in  early  Christian  writers  with  an  apoc- 
ryphal saying  ascribed  to  Jesus,  and  very  frequently  quoted, 
ytveaOe  Si  B6ki/ioi  rpaire^Tai  ihow  y<mr%elve%  approved  money- 
changers.  By  some  ancient  writers  the  two  are  cited  together 
as  Paul's ;  by  others  they  are  distinguished,  as  by  Origen, 
who  cites  the  saying  as  an  injunction  \ivro\iiv)  of  Jesus,  and 
adds,  ^^  and  also  (observing)  the  teaching  of  Paul,  who  says, 
*  prove  all  things,  hold  fast  the  good,  abstain  from  every  form 
of  evil.' "  The  saying  about  the  money-changers  is  probably 
a  genuine  logion  of  the  Lord.  Some  have  thought  that  the 
words  added  by  Clement  of  Alexandria,  '^rejecting  some 
things  but  holding  fast  the  good,"  formed  part  of  the  Lord's 
sapng,  and  that,  accordingly,  Paul's  words  here  depend  on 
an  original  utterance  of  Jesus.  If  this  could  be  proved,  €Z5o9 
fornix  ver.  22,  might  be  explained  as  a  figure  of  exchangers 
distinguishing  between  genuine  and  false  coins.* 

22.  Appearance  (efSot;?).  As  commonly  explained,  abstain 
from  everything  that  even  look%  like  evil.  But  the  word  sig- 
nifies form  or  hind.  Comp.  L.  iii.  22 ;  J.  v.  87,  and  see 
nearly  the  same  phrase  in  Joseph.  Ant.  x.  3, 1.  It  never  has 
the  sense  of  %emblan4:e.  Moreover,  it  is  impossible  to  abstain 
from  everything  that  looks  like  evil. 

Of  evil  (irovffpov).  To  be  taken  as  a  noun;  not  as  an 
adjective  agreeing  with  e?Sou9  form  (from  every  evil  form). 
The  meaning  of  irovtjptk  in  N.  T.  cannot  be  limited  to  active 
evil,  mischi^^  though  it  often  has  that  sense.  The  same  is 
true  in  LXX,  where  it  sometimes  means  grudging  or  nig- 
gardly.     See  Sir.  xiv.  4,  6 ;  xxxiv.  28. 

28.  The  very  Qod  of  peace  (airm  6  dc^  rrfi  eip^vri^}. 
Better,  the  God  of  peace  himself.     Grod's  work  is  contrasted 

•  See  J.  H.  Bopee,  Die  SprUche  Jesu,  p.  Ulf.;  B.  F.  Westcott,  /iKra. 
dnetion  to  the  /SM^  of  the  OotpeUj  5th  ed.,  p.  464 ;  J.  B.  Lightfoot,  on 
1  Th.  T.  21,  in  Noiee  on  FpiitUi  of  St.  Paul.  Alto  the  xemarkB  of  Bon*- 
Biann  on  this  peaiage. 


62  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Gk.  T. 

with  homan  efforts  to  carry  out  the  preceding  injunctions. 
The  phrase  Gad  of  peace  only  in  Paul  and  Hebrews.  See 
Rom.  XV.  88;  xvi.  20;  PhiUp.  iv.  9  ;  Heb.  xiii.  20.  The 
meaning  is,  God  who  is  the  source  and  giver  of  peace. 
Peace,  in  the  Pauline  sense,  is  not  mere  calm  or  tranquillity. 
It  is  always  conceived  as  based  upon  reconciliation  with  God. 
God  is  the  God  of  peace  only  to  those  who  have  ceased  to  be 
at  war  with  him,  and  are  at  one  with  him.  God*s  peace  is 
not  sentimental  but  moral.  Hence  the  God  of  peace  is  the 
sanctifier.  ^^  Peace  "  is  habitually  used,  both  in  the  Old  and 
New  Testaments,  in  connection  with  the  messianic  salvation. 
The  Messiah  himself  will  be  Peace  (Mic.  v.  5).  Peace  is 
associated  with  righteousness  as  a  messianic  blessing  (Ps. 
Ixxii.  7 ;  Ixxxv.  10).  Peace,  founded  in  reconciliation  with 
God,  is  the  theme  of  the  gospel  (Acts  x.  36).  The  gospel 
is  the  gospel  of  peace  (Eph.  ii.  17 ;  vi.  16 ;  Rom.  x.  15). 
Christ  is  the  giver  of  peace  (J.  xiv.  27 ;  xvi.  88). 

Sanctify  (07400-01).  See  on  J.  x.  86  ;  xvii.  17.  The  pri- 
mary idea  of  the  word  is  separation.  Hence  Syio^y  the  stand- 
ard word  for  holy  in  LXX  is,  primarily,  set  apart.  *Ayui^€tv 
is  1.  to  separate  from  things  prof ane  and  to  consecrate  to  Q-od; 
2.  to  cleanse  ot  purify  as  one  set  apart  to  holy  uses. 

Wholly  (JikoreXttsi).  N.  T.^.  So  that  nothing  shall  escai)e 
the  sanctifying  power.  "'OXo?  completCy  and  t^Xo9  end  or 
eonswmmation. 

Spirit^  soul^  body  (irvAfJLa,  V^**^^)  a&fui).  It  is  useless  to 
attempt  to  draw  from  these  words  a  technical,  psychological 
statement  of  a  threefold  division  of  the  human  personality. 
If  Paul  recognised  any  such  technical  division,  it  was  more 
probably  twofold ;  the  body  or  material  part,  and  the  imma- 
terial part  with  its  higher  and  lower  sides — wvevfjLa  and 
^t^.  See  on  Rom.  vi.  6 ;  vii.  5,  28 ;  viii.  4 ;  xi.  3  and 
footnote. 

Be  preserved  entire  (^oXikkfjpov — rriprfOetfi).  This  is  the 
rendering  of  Rev.  and  is  correct.    A.  V .  joins  oKitcXtipop  with 


i*H.  v.]      THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THE88ALONIANS.  53 

wveufAo^  and  renders  your  whole  spirit.  'GkiKkripov  is  predic 
ative,  not  attributive.  It  does  not  mean  tvholey  but  is  derived 
from  SKo^  whole  and  KXrjpo^  allotment^  and  signifies  having  the 
entire  allotment;  complete  in  aU  parts.  It  occurs  only  here 
and  Jas.  i.  4,  where  it  is  associated  with  r^Xeioi.  perfect.  It 
appears  in  LXX,  as  Lev.  xxiii.  15 ;  Deut.  xvi.  9  ;  xxvii.  6. 
Joseph.  Ant.  iii.  12,  2,  uses  it  of  an  unblemished  victim  for 
sacrifice.  As  distinguished  from  oKoreXei^  wholly^  ver.  23,  it 
is  qualitativcy  while  oKoreXek  is  quantitative.  The  kindred 
oXjoK\rfp(a  perfect  soimdness^  only  in  Acts  iii.  16.  For  pre- 
served see  on  1  Pet.  i.  4. 

24.  Faithful  (wurm).  Comp.  2  Tim.  ii.  13,  and  see  on 
1  J.  i.  9 ;  Apoc.  i.  5 ;  iii.  14. 

That  calleth  (o  KaX&v).  =  tJie  caller.  The  emphasis  is 
on  the  person  rather  than  on  the  act.  Comp.  Rom.  ix.  11 ; 
Gal.  i.  6, 15 ;  v.  8;  1  Th.  ii.  12 ;  1  Pet.  v.  10 ;  Jas.  i.  5. 

26.  tQw.  See  on  2  Cor.  xiii.  12.  Comp.  Rom.  xvi.  16 ; 
ICor.  xvi.  20;  1  Pet.  v.  14. 

27.  I  charge  (jhopicOim).  N.  T.®.  Rev.  stronger  and 
more  literal,  J  o^ur^.  ^lass.  This  strong  appeal  may  per- 
haps be  explained  by  a  suspicion  on  Paul's  part  that  a  wrong 
use  might  be  made  of  his  name  and  authority  (see  2  Th. 
ii.  2),  so  that  it  was  important  that  his  views  should  be 
made  known  to  all.  Lightfoot  refers  to  2  Th.  iii.  17,  as 
showing  a  similar  feeling  in  his  anxiety  to  authenticate  his 
letter. 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE 
THESSALONIANS. 


CHAPTER  L 
On  yy.  1,  2,  see  on  1  Th.  i.  1. 

3.  We  are  bound  —  as  it  is  meet.  The  accumulation  of 
cognate  expressions  indicates  the  apostle's  earnestness. 

Groweth  exceedingly  (inrepav^dvei).  N.  T.^.  See  on 
1  Th.  iii.  10. 

4.  Glory  (iv§cavxaad<u).  N.  T.®.  The  simple  verb  icav- 
XaaOai.  to  boasty  and  the  kindred  nouns  §cavxni^  ground  of 
boasting^  and  tcavxtfo'i^  act  qf  boasting^  are  favorites  with 
Paul. 

5.  A  manifest  token  (^IvSe^yfji^i).  N.  T.^.  Comp.  IvSa^t^^ 
Philip,  i.  28.  The  token  is  the  patience  and  faith  with  which 
they  endure  persecution  and  tribulation.  It  is  a  token  of 
the  righteous  judgment  of  God,  in  that  it  points  to  the 
future  glory  which  God  will  confer  at  the  final  judgment, 
and  the  righteous  award  which  will  be  dispensed  to  the 
persecutors.     Similarly  Philip,  i.  28. 

That  ye  may  be  counted  worthy.  The  structure  of  the 
sentence  is  loose.  These  words  should  be  directly  connected 
with  righteoui  Judgment^  and  denote  the  purport  of  that  judg- 
ment—  their  assignment  to  an  inheritance  in  the  kingdom 
of  God. 

64 


Ch.  I.]      THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO   THE  THESSALONIAN&       65 

Of  the  kingdom  of  God  (rrj^  fia<nXe(a9  rov  6€ov).  The 
plinise  is  not  frequent  in  Paul.  ^aaCkeCa  deov  four  times  ; 
fiaaiXeCa  rov  ')(purrov  xal  Beov  kingdom  of  Christ  and  of  God^ 
once.  Here  in  the  eschatological  sense  —  the  future,  consum- 
mated kingdom,  the  goal  of  their  striving  and  the  recom- 
pense of  their  suffering.     See  on  L.  vi.  20. 

6.  Seeing  it  is  (elwep^.  More  literally,  if  so  be  that. 
Confirming,  in  a  hypothetical  form,  the  assertion  of  God'a 
judgment  upon  persecutors,  ver.  5.  It  implies  no  doubt, 
but  rhetorically  puts  a  recognised  fact  as  a  supposition.  So 
Rom.  iii.  30 ;  viii.  9, 17 ;  1  Cor.  viii.  5. 

7.  Rest  (Jiv€€riv).  See  on  liberty.  Acts  xxiv.  28.  With 
this  exception  only  in  Paul. 

With  us.  According  to  Paul's  habit  of  identifying  his 
experience  with  that  of  his  Christian  readers.  See  1  Cor.  iv. 
8 ;  Rom.  viii.  28 ;  Philip,  i.  29,  80 ;  ii.  18 ;  iii.  20, 21 ;  2  Cor. 
i.7. 

When  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  be  revealed  (eV  r^  airotcaXih^i 
Tov  Kvplov  'Ii/o-oi)).  Lit.  in  the  revelation  of  the  Lord  Je9U9. 
For  am-OKokuy^L^  revelation,  see  on  Apoc.  i.  1. 

With  his  mighty  angels  (/act'  ayydXtov  SwdfAeta^  avrov). 
Lit.  with  the  angels  of  his  power. 

8.  In  flaming  fire  (^  irvpl  ^Xo7c(?).  Lit.  in  a  fire  of 
flame.     Comp.  1  Cor.  i.  18 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  7. 

Taking  vengeance  (Si&faro?  UhUtiai^v).  Lit.  giving  or 
rendering.  Vengeance  is  an  unfortunate  rendering,  as  imply- 
ing, in  popular  usage,  personal  vindictiveness.  See  on  2  Cor. 
vii.  11.     It  is  the  full  awarding  of  justice  to  all  parties. 

On  them  that  know  not  God  —  obey  not  the  gospel  (roli 
fifl  elhiai  6^v  —  TOi¥  M^  {nraKovovaiv  r^  evayyeXj^),  To  know 
God  is  to  know  him  as  the  one,  true  God  as  distinguished 


56  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ok.  I. 

from  false  gods ;  to  know  his  will,  his  holiness,  his  hatred  of 
sin,  and  his  saving  intent  toward  mankind.  Two  words  are 
used  of  such  knowledge,  elSA^u  and  yivia/eeiv.  Both  are 
applied  to  the  heathen  and  to  Christians,  and  both  are  used 
of  the  Jews'  knowledge  of  God.  *Ei8Ahu^  of  heathen,  Gral. 
iv.  8 ;  1  Th.  iv.  5 ;  2  Th.  i.  8.  Vivwriceiv^  of  heathen,  Rom.  i. 
21 ;  1  Cor.  i.  21.  'EiS^cu,  of  Christ  and  Christians,  J.  vii. 
29 ;  viii.  19, 55 ;  xiv.  7.  Vivwr§c€iv^  of  Christ  and  Christians, 
Gal.  iv.  9;  IJ.  ii.  13, 14;  iv.  6,7,  8;  J.  x.  15;  xvii.  8.  In 
John,  yivwrfC€i.v  of  Jews  who  do  not  know  the  Father,  J.  xvi. 
8  ;  viii.  55 :  eiBAfoi,  J.  vii.  28  ;  viii.  19 ;  xv.  21.  The  two 
are  combined,  J.  i.  26  ;  vii.  27 ;  viii.  55 ;  2  Cor.  v.  16.  A  dis- 
tinction is  asserted  between  yivwrfcei^v  as  knowledge  grounded 
in  personal  experience,  apprehension  of  external  impressions 
—  and  elSdvcu  purely  mental  perception  in  contrast  with  con- 
jecture or  knowledge  derived  from  others.  There  are  doubt- 
less passages  which  bear  out  this  distinction  (see  on  J.  ii.  24), 
but  it  is  impossible  to  carry  it  rigidly  through  the  N.  T.  In 
the  two  classes,  —  those  who  know  not  God  and  those  who 
obey  not  the  gospel,  —  it  is  not  probable  that  Paul  has  in 
mind  a  distinction  between  Jews  and  Gentiles.  The  Jews 
were  not  ignorant  of  God,  yet  they  are  described  by  John  as 
not  knowing  him.  The  Gentiles  are  described  by  Paul  as 
knowing  God,  but  as  refusing  to  glorify  him  as  God  (Rom. 
i.  21).  Paul  rather  describes  here  the  subjects  of  God's 
judgment  as  one  class,  but  under  different  aspects. 

9.  Shall  be  punished  {hUrivrUrovtnv).  The  verb  (N.  T.^) 
means  to  pay  or  render.     Lit.  shall  pay  penalty. 

Everlasting  destruction  (JS\€0pov  alAviov).  The  phrase 
nowhere  else  in  N.  T.  In  LXX,  4  Mace.  x.  15.  Rev.  prop- 
erly, eternal  destruction.  It  is  to  be  carefully  noted  that 
eternal  and  everlasting  are  not  synonymous.  See  additional 
note  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. 

From  the  presence  (hirh  wpoaArrov^.  Or  faee.  *kirhfram 
has  simply  the  sense  of  separation.     Not  from  the  time  of  the 


Qb.  I.]      THE  SECOND   EPISTLE  TO  THE  THE8SALONIAKS.      57 

Lord'9  appearing^  nor  hy  reason  of  the  glory  of  his  presence. 
UpSa-omrov  is  variously  translated  in  A.  V.  Mostly  face :  also 
presence^  Acts  iii.  13,  19 ;  v.  41 :  person^  Matt.  xxii.  16 ; 
L.  XX.  21 ;  Gal.  ii.  6 :  appearance^  2  Cor.  v.  12 ;  x.  1 :  fash- 
ionj  Jas.  i.  11.  The  formula  awo  wpoawirov  or  rod  irpoawirov 
occurs  Acts  iii.  19 ;  v.  41 ;  vii.  46 ;  Apoc.  vi.  16  ;  xii.  14 ; 
XX.  11.  In  LXX,  Gren.  iii.  8 ;  iv.  14, 16 ;  Ex.  xiv.  25,  and 
frequently. 

Glory  of  his  power  (&(^  t^  layvo^  aurov).  For  glory 
see  on  1  Th.  ii.  12.  'Icr^ts  power^  not  often  in  Paul.  It  is 
indwelling  power  put  forth  or  embodied,  either  aggressively 
or  as  an  obstacle  to  resistance  :  physical  power  organised  or 
working  under  individual  direction.  An  army  and  a  fortress 
are  both  Urxyp^»  The  power  inhering  in  the  magistrate, 
which  is  put  forth  in  laws  or  judicial  decisions,  is  mt;^)  and 
makes  the  edicts  Urxyph  valid  and  hard  to  resist.  LwaiMi  is 
the  indwelling  power  which  comes  to  manifestation  in  Urxjif^. 
The  precise  phrase  used  here  does  not  appear  elsewhere  in 
N.  T.  In  LXX,  Isa.  ii.  10,  19,  21.  The  power  (8iW/a9) 
and  glory  of  God  are  associated  in  Matt.  xxiv.  30 ;  Mk.  xiii. 
26  ;  L.  xxi.  27 ;  Apoc.  iv.  11 ;  xix.  1.  Comp.  tepdro^  rrj^ 
S6^  auTov  strength  of  his  ghry^  Col.  i.  11. 

10.  To  be  glorified  (ivSo^aa0rjpai).  Only  here  and  ver. 
12  in  N.  T.  Repeatedly  in  LXX.  See  Ex.  xiv.  4, 17;  Isa. 
xlv.  26.     <>Class. 

11.  Wherefore  (ek  S).  Better,  to  which  end.  Comp.  Col. 
L  29.  The  end  is,  ^  that  ye  may  be  counted  worthy  of  the 
kingdom  of  (jod,"  ver.  5.  The  same  thought  is  continued 
in  ver.  11. 

Count — worthy  (^Mkrg).  Comp.  1  Tim.  v.  17;  Heb. 
iii.  3 ;  x.  29. 

Your  calling  (t^  kki^eos^^.  Including  both  the  act  and 
the  end  of  the  Christian  calling.  Comp.  Philip,  iii.  14;  1 
Th.  ii.  12;  Eph.  iv.  1. 


68  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTABIBNT.         [Ch.  I. 

All  the  good  pleasure  of  his  goodness  (jrSurav  eifBomiav 
ayadaavpry:}.  Wrong.  Paul  does  not  mean  all  the  ffoodness 
which  God  is  pleased  to  bestow^  but  the  delight  of  the  Thessa- 
lonians  in  goodness.  He  prays  that  God  may  perfect  their 
pleasure  in  goodness.  So  Weizsacker,  die  Freude  an  allem 
Outen,  The  Rev.  desire  for  evSo/elav  is  infelicitous,  and  lacks 
support.  ^AyaOcoavvTf  goodness  (P^.  see  on  Rom.  iii.  12)  is 
never  predicated  of  God  in  N.  T.  In  LXX,  see  Neh.  ix.  25, 
35.  *Ev8oKCa  good  pleasure^  delight^  is  a  purely  Biblical  word. 
As  related  to  one's  self,  it  means  contentment^  satirfactian: 
see  Sir.  xxix.  23  ;  Ps.  of  Sol.  iii.  4  ;  xvi.  12.  As  related  to 
others,  good  wiUy  benevolence.  L.  x.  21;  Eph.  i.  5,  9 ;  Philip, 
i.  15;  ii.  13;  Ps.  of  Sol.  viii.  89. 

12.  The  name  (to  Bvo^ul).  In  no  case  where  it  is  joined 
with  Jesus,  or  Christ,  or  Lord  Jesus,  does  it  mean  the  title  or 
dignity.*  Paul  follows  O.  T.  usage,  according  to  which  the 
name  of  the  Lord  is  often  used  for  all  that  the  name  covers  ; 
so  that  the  name  of  the  Lord  =  the  Lord  himself. 


Additional  Note  on  S\£0pov  alAviov  eternal  destruction, 

2  Th.  I.  9. 

'Autfv,  transliterated  aeony  is  a  period  of  time  of  longer  or  shorter  dura- 
tion, haying  a  beginning  and  an  end,  and  complete  in  itself.  Aristotle 
(ircpt  ovpavwi  i.  9, 15)  says :  "  The  period  which  includes  the  whole  time 
of  each  one's  life  is  called  the  aeon  of  each  one."  Hence  it  often  means 
the  life  of  a  man,  as  in  Homer,  where  one's  life  (ahav)  is  said  to  leave  him 
or  to  consume  away  (77.  v.  685;  Od,  ▼.  160).  It  is  not,  however,  limited 
to  human  life;  it  signifies  any  period  in  the  course  of  events,  as  the 
period  or  age  before  Christ;  the  period  of  the  millennium;  the  mytho- 
logical period  before  the  beginnings  of  history.  The  word  has  not  **  a 
stationary  and  mechanical  value "  (De  Quincey).  It  does  not  mean  a 
period  of  a  fixed  length  for  all  cases.  There  are  as  many  aeons  as  entities, 
the  respective  durations  of  which  are  fixed  by  the  normal  conditions  of 
the  several  entities.  There  is  one  aeon  of  a  human  life,  another  of  the 
life  of  a  nation,  another  of  a  crow's  life,  another  of  an  oak's  life.  The 
length  of  the  aeon  depends  on  the  subject  to  which  it  is  attached. 

•  As  Llghtfoot  on  Philip,  ii.  0. 


Gh.  I.]      THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THES8ALOKIANS.      69 

It  is  sometimes  translated  w&rld;  world  representing  a  period  or  a 
series  of  periods  of  time.  See  Matt.  xii.  82 ;  xiii.  40,  49 ;  L.  i.  70 ;  1  Cor. 
L  20;  ii.  6;  Eph.  L  21.  Similarly  oL  aJwn^  the  worlds^  the  uniyerse,  the 
aggregate  of  the  ages  or  periods,  and  their  contents  which  are  included 
in  the  duration  of  the  world.    1  Cor.  iL  7 ;  x.  11 ;  Heb.  i.  2 ;  iz.  26 ;  xi.  3. 

The  word  always  carries  the  notion  of  time^  and  not  of  eternity.  It 
always  means  a  period  of  time.  Otherwise  it  would  be  impossible  to 
account  for  the  plural,  or  for  such  qualifying  expressions  as  this  age,  or 
the  age  to  come.  It  does  not  mean  something  endless  or  everlasting.  To 
deduce  that  meaning  from  its  relation  to  det  is  absurd ;  for,  apart  from 
the  fact  that  the  meaning  of  a  word  is  not  definitely  fixed  by  its  deriya- 
iion,  dci  does  not  signify  endless  duration.  When  the  writer  of  the  Pastoral 
Epistles  quotes  the  saying  that  the  Cretans  are  always  (dci)  liars  (Tit.  L 
12),  he  surely  does  not  mean  that  the  Cretans  will  go  on  lying  to  all 
eternity.  See  also  Acts  yii.  51 ;  2  Cor.  iy.  11 ;  yi  10 ;  Heb.  iii.  10 ;  1.  Pet 
iiL  15.  'Ac4  means  habitually  or  continually  within  the  limit  of  the  subject's 
life.  In  our  colloquial  dialect  everlastingly  is  used  in  the  same  way.  *'  The 
boy  is  eyerlastingly  tormenting  me  to  buy  him  a  drum." 

In  the  New  Testament  the  history  of  the  world  is  conceiyed  as  devel- 
oped through  a  succession  of  aeons.  A  series  of  such  aeons  precedes  the 
introduction  of  a  new  series  inaug^ated  by  the  Christian  dispensation, 
and  the  end  of  the  world  and  the  second  coming  of  Christ  are  to  mark  the 
beginning  of  another  series.  See  Eph.  iii.  11.  Paul  contemplates  aeons 
before  and  after  the  Christian  era.  Eph.  i.  21 ;  ii.  7 ;  iii.  9,  21 ;  1  Cor. 
X.  11 ;  comp.  Heb.  ix.  26.  He  includes  the  series  of  aeons  in  one  great 
aeon,  6  aim^  rwv  aiwnov  the  aeon  of  the  aeons  (Eph.  iii.  21) ;  and  the  author 
of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  describes  the  throne  of  God  as  enduring 
unto  the  aeon  of  the  aeons  (Heb.  L  8).  The  plural  is  also  used,  aeons  of 
the  aeonSf  signifying  all  the  successive  periods  which  make  up  the  sum 
total  of  the  ages  collectively.  Rom.  xvi.  27 ;  Gal.  i.  5 ;  Philip,  iv.  20,  etc. 
This  plural  phrase  is  applied  by  Paul  to  God  only. 

The  adjective  alo>vio$  in  like  manner  carries  the  idea  of  time.  Neither 
the  noun  nor  the  adjective,  in  themselves,  carry  the  sense  of  endless  or 
everlasting.  They  may  acquire  that  sense  by  their  connotation,  as,  on  the 
other  hand,  dtSiof ,  wMch  means  everlasting^  has  its  meaning  limited  to  a 
given  point  of  time  in  Jude  6.  ^Aiwvuk  means  enduring  through  or  pertain- 
ing to  a  period  of  time.  Both  the  noun  and  the  adjective  are  applied  to 
limited  periods.  Thus  the  phrase  c2s  tw  aiSmi,  habitually  rendered  for- 
ever,  is  often  used  of  duration  which  is  limited  in  the  very  nature  of  the 
case.  See,  for  a  few  out  of  many  instances,  LXX,  Ex.  xxi.  6 ;  xxix.  9 ; 
xxxii.  13;  Josh.  xiv.  9;  1  Sam.  viii.  13;  Lev.  xxv.  46;  Deut.  xv.  17; 
1  Chron.  xxviii.  4.  See  also  Matt.  xxi.  19 ;  J.  xiiL  8 ;  1  Cor.  viii.  13.  The 
same  is  true  of  oUvuk.  Out  of  150  instances  in  LXX,  four-fifths  imply 
limited  duration.  For  a  few  instances  see  Gen.  xlviiL  4;  Num.  x.  8; 
XV.  15 ;  Prov.  xxii.  28 ;  Jonah  ii.  6 ;  Hab.  iiL  6 ;  Isa.  Ixi.  17. 

Words  which  are  habitually  applied  to  things  temporal  or  material  can* 


60  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT*         [Ch.  L 

not  carry  in  themselves  the  sense  of  endlessness.  Even  when  applied  to 
God,  we  are  not  forced  to  render  alilmoi  everlasting.  Of  course  tiie  life  of 
God  is  endless ;  but  the  question  is  whether,  in  describing  God  as  alAmaSf 
it  was  intended  to  describe  the  duration  of  his  being,  or  whether  some 
different  and  larger  idea  was  not  contemplated.  That  God  lives  longer 
than  men,  and  lives  on  everlastingly,  and  has  lived  everlastingly,  are,  no 
doubt,  great  and  significant  facts ;  yet  they  are  not  the  dominant  or  the 
most  impressive  facts  in  God's  relations  to  time.  God's  eternity  does  not 
stand  merely  or  chiefly  for  a  scale  of  length.  It  is  not  primarily  a  mathe- 
matical but  a  moral  fact.  The  relations  of  God  to  time  include  and  imply 
far  more  than  the  bare  fact  of  endless  continuance.  They  carry  with  them 
the  fact  that  God  transcends  time ;  works  on  different  principles  and  on  a 
vaster  scale  than  the  wisdom  of  time  provides ;  oversteps  the  conditions 
and  the  motives  of  time ;  marshals  the  successive  aeons  from  a  point  out- 
side of  time,  on  lines  which  run  out  into  his  own  measureless  cycles,  and 
for  sublime  moral  ends  which  the  creature  of  threescore  and  ten  years 
cannot  grasp  and  does  not  even  suspect. 

There  in  a  word  for  everlasting  if  that  idea  is  demanded.  That  df&o? 
occurs  rarely  in  the  New  Testament  and  in  LXX  does  not  prove  that  its 
place  was  taken  by  (ucmog.  It  rather  goes  to  show  that  less  importance 
was  attached  to  the  bare  idea  of  everlastingness  than  later  theological 
thought  has  inven  it.  Paul  uses  the  word  once,  in  Rom.  i.  20,  where  he 
speaks  of  "  the  everlasting  power  and  divinity  of  God."  In  Rom.  xvi.  26 
he  speaks  of  the  eternal  God  (roG  altimav  Oewi) ;  but  that  he  does  not  mean 
the  everlasting  God  is  perfectly  clear  from  the  context.  He  has  said  that 
*'  the  mystery  "  has  been  kept  in  silence  in  times  eternal  (j(pAvfW  aWftbcc), 
by  which  he  does  not  mean  everlasting  times,  but  the  successive  aeons 
which  elapsed  before  Christ  was  proclaimed.  God  therefore  is  described 
as  the  God  of  the  aeons,  the  God  who  pervaded  and  controlled  those  periods 
before  the  incarnation.  To  the  same  effect  is  the  title  6  jStunXcvs  rwr 
aitaywv  the  King  of  the  aeons,  applied  to  God  in  1  Tim.  L  17 ;  Apoc.  xv.  8 ; 
comp.  Tob.  xiii.  6,  10.  The  phrase  irpo  xp^on^  oloii^W  be/ore  eternal  times 
(2  Tim.  i.  9 ;  Tit.  i.  2),  cannot  mean  before  everlasting  times.  To  say  that 
God  bestowed  grace  on  men,  or  promised  them  eternal  life  before  endless 
times,  would  be  absurd.  The  meaning  is  of  old,  as  L.  L  70.  The  grace 
and  the  promise  were  given  in  time,  but  far  back  in  the  ages,  before  the 
times  of  reckoning  the  aeons. 

Zwf  altavuK  eternal  life,  which  occurs  42  times  in  N.  T.,  but  not  in 
LXX,  is  not  endless  life,  but  life  pertaining  to  a  certain  age  or  aeon,  or 
continuing  during  that  aeon.  I  repeat,  life  may  be  endless.  The  life  in 
union  with  Christ  is  endless,  but  the  fact  is  not  expressed  by  alwvtoi*  Ko- 
Aa<rts  alcmos,  rendered  everlasting  punishment  (Matt.  xxv.  46),  is  the  pun- 
ishment peculiar  to  an  aeon  other  than  that  in  which  Christ  is  speaking. 
In  some  cases  lunf  ahayuK  does  not  refer  specifically  to  the  life  beyond  time, 
but  rather  to  the  aeon  or  dispensation  of  Messiah  which  succeeds  the  legal 
dispensation.    See  Matt  xix.  16 ;  J.  v.  39.    John  says  that  Iwf  alwvuK  iii 


Ch.  I.]      THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THE88ALONIAN8.      61 

the  prtseni  possession  of  those  who  belieye  on  the  Son  of  God,  J.  iii.  36 ; 
V.  24 ;  yi.  47,  54.  The  Father's  coramandment  is  {on)  aliavuK,  J.  xii.  50 ; 
to  know  the  only  trae  God  and  Jesus  Christ  is  (wf  olwviof ,  J.  xrii.  8. 

Bishop  Westcott  very  justly  says,  commenting  upon  the  terms  used 
by  John  to  describe  life  under  different  aspects :  '*  In  considering  these 
phrases  it  is  necessary  to  premise  that  in  spiritual  things  we  must  guard 
against  all  conclusions  which  rest  upon  the  notions  of  succession  and 
duration.  *  Eternal  life '  is  that  which  St.  Paul  speaks  of  as  ^  &irrt»9  Cunf  the 
life  which  is  life  indeed f  and  ^  ^unf  tou  OuXj  the  life  of  God,  It  is  not  an  end- 
less duration  of  being  in  time,  but  being  of  which  time  is  not  a  measure. 
We  have  indeed  no  powers  to  grasp  the  idea  except  through  forms  and 
images  of  sense.  These  must  be  used,  but  we  must  not  transfer  them  as 
realities  to  another  order."  * 

Thus,  while  olcmog  carries  the  idea  of  time,  though  not  of  endlessness^ 
there  belongs  to  it  also,  more  or  less,  a  sense  of  quality.  Its  character  is 
ethical  rather  than  mathematical.  The  deepest  significance  of  the  life 
beyond  time  lies,  not  in  endlessness,  but  in  the  moral  quality  of  the  aeon 
into  which  the  life  passes.  It  is  comparatively  unimportant  whether  or 
not  the  rich  fool,  when  his  soul  was  required  of  him  (L.  xiL  20),  entered 
upon  a  state  that  was  endless.  The  principal,  the  tremendous  fact,  as 
Christ  unmistakably  puts  it,  was  that,  in  the  new  aeon,  the  motives,  the 
aims,  the  conditions,  the  successes  and  awards  of  time  counted  for  nothing. 
In  time,  his  bams  and  their  contents  were  everything;  the  soul  was 
nothing.  In  the  new  life  the  soul  was  first  and  everything,  and  the  barns 
and  storehouses  nothing.  The  bliss  of  the  sanctified  does  not  consist  pri- 
marily in  its  endlessness,  but  in  the  nobler  moral  conditions  of  the  new 
aeon, — the  years  of  the  holy  and  eternal  God.  Duration  is  a  secondary 
idea.  When  it  enters  it  enters  as  an  accompaniment  and  outgrowth  of 
moral  conditions. 

In  the  present  passage  it  is  urged  that  oXctfpor  destruction  points  to 
an  unchangeable,  irremediable,  and  endless  condition.  If  this  be  true,  if 
HktBpoi  is  extinction,  then  the  passage  teaches  the  annihilation  of  the 
wicked,  in  which  case  the  adjective  aUnnos  is  superfluous,  since  extinction 
is  final,  and  excludes  the  idea  of  duration.  But  ^Actfpos  does  not  always 
mean  destruction  or  extinction.  Take  the  kindred  verb  dwoXXvfu  to  destroy, 
put  an  end  to,  or  in  the  middle  voice,  to  be  lost,  to  perish.  Peter  says,  '*  the 
world  being  deluged  with  water,  perished "  (din&Xcro^  2  Pet.  iii.  6) ;  but 
the  world  did  not  become  extinct,  it  was  renewed.  In  Heb.  i.  11,  12, 
quoted  from  Ps.  cii.,  we  read  concerning  the  heavens  and  the  earth  as 
compared  with  the  eternity  of  God,  *<they  shall  perish**  (dmKoiuimu). 
But  the  perishing  is  only  preparatory  to  change  and  renewal  ^  They 
shall  be  changed  "  (dXXayiitnyrai).  Comp.  Isa.  li.  6, 16 ;  Ixv.  17 ;  IxvL  22 ; 
2  Pet.  iii.  13 ;  Apoc.  xxi.  1.  Similarly,  <<  the  Son  of  man  came  to  save  that 
which  was  lost  **  (danXMkoi),  L.  xix.  10.    Jesus  charged  his  apostles  to  go 

*  The  Epistles  of  St.  John,  p.  206. 


62  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Cb.  U 

to  the  last  (diro\«tt\ara)  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel,  Matt.  x.  6,  oompu 
XV.  24.  '<  He  that  shall  lose  (dwokwji)  his  life  for  my  sake  shall  find  it,** 
Matt.  zri.  25.    Comp.  L.  xv.  6,  9,  32. 

In  this  passage  the  word  destruction  is  qualified.  It  is  **  destruction 
from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  and  from  the  glory  of  his  power/'  at  his 
second  coming,  in  the  new  aeon.  In  other  words,  it  is  the  severance,  at  a 
given  point  of  time,  of  those  who  obey  not  the  gosj^l  from  the  presence 
and  the  glory  of  Christ.  *Aictfito$  may  therefore  describe  this  severance  as 
continuing  during  the  millennial  aeon  between  Christ's  coming  and  the 
final  judgment ;  as  being  for  the  wicked  prolonged  throughout  that  aeon 
and  characteristic  of  it, — or  it  may  describe  the  severance  as  characteris- 
ing or  enduring  through  a  period  or  aeon  succeeding  the  final  judgment, 
the  extent  of  which  period  is  not  defined.  In  neither  case  is  alwvun  to 
be  interpreted  as  everlasting  or  endless. 


CHAPTER  n. 

1.  By  the  coming  (v7r^/>).  More  correctly  ^otc^rAtii^.  Comp. 
Rom.  ix.  27;  2  Cor.  i.  8.  ^Tirip  never  in  N.  T.  in  a  formula 
of  swearing. 

Gathering  together  (^t(n;i/a7aKy^).  Only  here  and  Heb. 
X.  25.  The  verb  iTnavvdjeip  is  used,  as  the  noun  here,  of  the 
Lord's  gathering  together  his  elect  at  his  coming.  See  Matt, 
xxiv.  31  i  Mk.  xiii.  27;  comp.  2  Mace.  ii.  7. 

2.  Shaken  (o-aXet/^^i/oi).  From  adXo^  the  tosnng  or  noell 
of  the  sea.  See  L.  xxi.  25.  Comp.  Matt.  xi.  7;  xxiv.  29; 
Acts  iv.  31;  Heb.  xii.  26. 

In  mind  (aTro  rov  w>i9).  More  correctly, /row  tfour  mind. 
Not)9  signifies  the  judgment^  sober  sense.  Comp.  1  Cor.  xiv. 
15,  and  see  on  Rom.  yii.  23.  They  are  to  ^^  keep  their  heads  '* 
under  the  temptation  to  fanatical  extravagances  concerning 
the  Lord's  appearing. 

Be  troubled  (0po€iadaC).  From  6po6^  clamor^  twmuU.  The 
meaning  is  be  unsettled  or  throtcn  into  confusion. 


Ch.  n.]      THB  SECOND  SPISTLB  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.     63 

By  spirit  (&^  wvevfiaTa^').  By  prophetic  utterances  of 
individuals  in  Christian  assemblies,  claiming  the  authority 
of  divine  revelations. 

By  word  (Bii,  Xi^ov).  Oral  expressions  falsely  imputed 
to  Paul. 

By  letter  as  from  us  (ZC  hrurroXfif:  »9  &*  fifiAv).  Const. 
a$fr(Mn  tu  with  ward  and  letter.  The  reference  is  to  a  letter 
or  letters  forged  in  Paul's  name ;  not  to  the  first  Thessalon- 
ian  Epistle,  as  misunderstood  by  the  readers. 

As  that  (w  Sri).  Indicating  the  contents  of  such  com- 
munications. 

Is  at  hand  (Mmi§c€ii).  Better  than  Rev.  %%  now  present. 
Lightfoot,  happily,  is  imminent. 

8.  Deceive  (^fawarif^).  Better  beguile;  since  the  word 
means  not  only  making  a  false  impression^  but  aetually  leading 
astray. 

Except  there  come  a  falling  away.  BetoTeexeeptinaert 
in  translation  the  dag  shall  not  came.  Such  ellipses  are  com- 
mon in  Paul. 

Falling  away  (jkwoirraaU).  Only  here  and  Acts  xxi.  21. 
Comp.  LXX,  Joe^.  xxii.  22;  2  Chron.  xxix.  19. 

The  man  of  sin — the  son  of  perdition  (6  avOporrro^  t^  &po- 
IA(a^,  6  vm  rfj^  inrmXela^').  See  on  children  of  lights  1  Th.  v.  5. 
The  phrase  man  of  sin  (lawlessness)  does  not  occur  elsewhere, 
either  in  N.  T.  or  LXX.  San  of  perdition  is  found  J.  xvii. 
12,  ®LXX :  rAcpa  iTiwXilai  children  of  perdition  (A.  V.  trans- 
gression')^  Isa.  Ivii.  4.  The  man  of  sin  has  been  thought  to 
refer  to  Caligula,  Titus,  Simon  Magus,  Nero,  the  Pope  of 
Rome,  Luther,  Mahomet,  etc. 


64  WORD  trruDiiM  ik  the  new  tbbtambnt.      [Cb.  n. 

4.  That  is  called  God  (\ey6/iepov  Oebv).  Above  the  true 
God  and  the  false  gods.  The  oppoeer  claims  divine  honors 
for  himself. 

That  is  worshipped  (a-^fiaafia).  An  object  of  adoration^ 
including  things  as  well  as  persons.  Only  here  and  Acts 
xvii.  28  on  which  see  note  under  devotiom. 

Temple  of  God.  According  to  some,  a  figure  of  the  Chris- 
tian Church.     Others,  the  temple  of  Jerusalem. 

Shewing  (^awoSei/evvvrd).  Publicly  asserting  divine  dig- 
nity.    Rev.  setting  himself  forth  as  God. 

6.  What  withholdeth  (to  Marexov).  Better  restraineth. 
The  verb  means  to  hold  fastj  as  L.  viii.  15:  to  hold  baek^  as 
L.  iv.  42.  See  on  Rom.  i.  18.  He  refers  to  some  power 
which  hinders  the  revelation  of  the  man  of  sin  or  Antichrist. 

In  his  time  (Jv  r^  avrov  Kcup^.    Better,  in  his  own  season 

Not  before  his  appointed  season. 

7.  Mystery  of  iniquity  Qfivariipiov  t^  iipo/iia^^.  Better, 
of  lawlessness.  The  phrase  is  unique  in  N.  T.  and  ^LXX. 
Mystery  is  found  in  various  combinations,  as  mystery  of  the 
kingdom  of  heaven^  Matt.  xiii.  11:  of  Q-od^  1  Cor.  ii.  1:  of  hi9 
will^  Eph.  i.  9:  of  Christy  Eph.  iii.  4:  of  the  gospel^  Eph.  vi. 
19:  of  faith,  1  Tim.  iii.  9:  of  godliness^  1  Tim.  iii.  16:  of  the 
seven  stars^  Apoc.  \.  20:  of  the  woman^  Apoc.  xvii.  7.  A 
mystery  does  not  lie  in  the  obscurity  of  a  thing,  but  in  its 
secrecy.  It  is  not  in  the  thing,  but  envelops  it.  Applied 
to  a  truth,  it  signifies  a  truth  once  hidden  but  now  revealed 
or  to  be  revealed;  a  truth  which  without  special  ^velation 
would  be  unknown.  It  is  almost  universally  found  in  con- 
nection with  words  signifying  publication  or  revelation.  See 
on  Matt.  xiii.  11.  The  mystery  of  lawlessness  is  the  mass 
of  lawlessness  yet  hidden,  but  which  is  to  reveal  itself  in  the 
person  and  power  of  Antichrist.     The  position  of  the  word 


Cr.  n.]     THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.     65 

is  emphatic,  emphasising  the  concealed  character  of  the  evil 
power. 

Only  (^fuipov).  The  sentence  is  elliptical:  ^^only  we  must 
wait/'  or  ^^  only  it  must  work  in  secret,  until  he  that  letteth,** 
etc.  For  a  similar  instance  see  Gal.  ii.  10.  The  collocation 
of  A.  V.  is  wrong. 

Letteth  (^xar^mv).  The  same  word  as  rettraineth,  ver.  6. 
Let  is  old  English  for  hipder^  prevent.     Often  in  Chaucer. 

"  May  I  bim  lette  of  that  ?  "  (preyent  him  from  it). 

Troil.  and  Cress.  iL  78S. 

**  And  bothe  in  love  y-like  sore  they  brente  (burned) 
That  noon  of  alle  hir  (their)  frendes  might  hit  lette.** 

Legend  of  Good  TTomen,  781. 
So  Shakespeare : 

•*  What  lets  but  one  may  enter?  '* 

Two  OenL  of  Verona,  iU.  1. 

«•  rU  make  a  ghost  of  him  that  lets  me.*' 

Ham.  I  4. 

••  The  flesh  leslsteth  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  In  onr  hearts,  and  lets 
It*'— Latimer,  Serm. 

8.  Consume  (iiveXei).  Better,  elajf^  as  Matt.  ii.  16;  L. 
xxii.  2;  Acts  v.  88. 

Spirit  (irveuiMTi).  Better,  breath.  HvwiMy  almost  always 
translated  spirit^  is  from  wuetv  to  breathe  or  blow.  Frequent 
in  class,  in  this  sense.  Comp.  J.  iii.  8;  Heb.  i.  7.  LXX, 
Ps.  cxlvii.  7;  Ep.  of  Jer.  61.  Philo  says:  "  The  spirit  of 
God  signifies,  in  one  sense,  the  air,  the  third  element;  and  it 
is  used  in  this  sense  in  the  beginning  of  Genesis  ...  for 
air,  being  light,  is  borne  up,  aiid  uses  water  as  its  basis.  In 
the  other  sense  it  is  the  pure  wisdom  in  which  every  wise 
man  participates  "  (^De  CHgantibue^  6).     See  on  Rom.  viii.  4. 

Shall  destroy  (iraTopyif^ci).  See  on  ambereth^  L.  xiii.  7; 
and  make  without  effect^  Rom.  iiL  & 

TOL.  IT.  —  6 


66  WORD  STUDIBS  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Cb.  IL 

With  the  brightness  (ry  iin^veia).  See  on  1  Tim.  \l 
14.  Rev.  correctly,  mantfestation.  See  LXX,  Esth.  v.  1; 
Amos  v.  22;  2  Mace.  ii.  21;  8  Mace.  ii.  9.  In  class,  (but 
late)  of  deities  appearing  to  a  worshipper  (Plut.  Themutoeles^ 
80):  of  the  sudden  appearance  of  an  enemy  (Polyb.  i.  54, 
2):  of  a  manifestation  of  Providence  (Diod.  Sic.  i.  15):  of 
the  heathen  gods  assuming  shape  and  appearing  in  order  to 
work  mischief  (Just.  Mart.  ApoL  i.  5).  In  N.  T.  of  the 
parousia.  See  1  Tim.  vi.  14;  2  Tim.  i.  10;  iv.  1,  8;  Tit. 
ii.  13.  In  2  Tim.  i.  10,  of  Christ's  historical  manifestation. 
So  iwuf>aivo>^  Tit.  ii.  11;  iii.  4.     Only  here  in  Paul. 

Coming  (irapovaCa^^.  Ov  presence^  which  is  the  original 
meaning.  In  N.  T.  with  a  few  exceptions,  of  the  second 
coming  of  Christ.  The  combination  manifeBtatian  of  hUpreW' 
ence  (only  here)  appears  to  emphasise  the  resistless  power  of 
the  Son  of  man,  not  (as  Lightf oot)  his  splendor  and  glory. 
The  mere  appearing  of  his  presence  suffices  to  destroy  his 
adversary. 

9.  After  the  working  of  Satan.  The  sense  is  that  the 
coming  of  Antichrist  proclaims  itself  to  be  according  to  the 
working  of  Satan  by  means  of  power,  signs,  etc.  'Ev^K/eia 
P^.  power  in  exercise^  used  only  of  superhuman  power.  See 
Col.  i.  29;  ii.  12. 

Signs  and  lying  wonders  (jrqiielois;  Ka\  r^paaiv  ^^^euSov^y, 
Lit.  Hgna  and  wonders  of  a  lie.  Cf  a  lie  characterises  the 
three  words,  power^  signs^  wonders.  All  bear  the  stamp  of 
fraud.  For  signs  and  wonders  see  on  Matt.  xxiv.  24,  and 
mighty  works^  Matt.  xi.  20. 

10.  Deceivableness  of  unrighteousness  (airdrg  ahucCai^y. 
Better  deceit  of  unrighteousness;  which  is  characteristic  of 
unrighteousness  and  is  employed  by  it. 

11.  Strong  delusion  (^li^pyeiav  irXdvrfi).  Rev.,  literally 
and  correctly,  a  working  of  error.     See  on  working  ver.  9. 


Ch.  n.]     THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THES8AL0NIANS.     67 

The  phrase  is  unique  in  N.  T.  It  means  an  active  power  of 
mieUading,  For  ifKivfi  error  which  shows  iteeJf  in  €Lctionj  see 
on  1  Th.  ii.  3. 


A  lie  (r^  y^^ASei).  Properly,  the  lie.  The  article  g^ves 
the  generic  sense,  falsehood  in  all  its  forms.  Comp.  J.  viii. 
44 ;  Rom.  i.  25 ;  Eph.  iv.  25.  Comp.  the  contrast  of  truth 
and  unrighteofisnese  in  ver.  12.  All  wrongdoing  has  an  ele- 
ment of  falsity. 

12.  Might  be  damned  QcpiO&aiv).  More  correctly, 
judged.     See  on  damnation^  1  Tim.  v.  12.* 


*  I  attempt  no  interpretation  of  this  passage  as  a  whole,  which  I  do  not 
understand.  The  yarieties  of  exposition  are  bewildering.  Convenient  sum- 
maries may  be  found  in  Lttnemann's  Meyer,  Dr.  Gloag's  IrUroducHon  to  the 
Pauline  Epistles,  and  Bomemann^s  Commentary,  Generally,  it  may  be  said 
that  Paul  seems  to  predict  a  great  moral  and  religious  defection  which  is  to 
precede  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  and  which  is  to  reach  its  consummation  in 
the  appearance  of  an  evil  power  described  as  the  Man  of  Sin,  the  personal 
incorporation  and  concentration  of  wickedness.  His  coming  is  denoted  by 
the  same  word  as  the  coming  of  Christ  (japovala,  yer.  0).  He  is  represented 
as  sitting  in  the  temple  of  God,  exhibiting  himself  as  God,  and  performing 
miracles  of  falsehood  according  to  the  working  of  Satan.  A  restraining 
power  is  upon  him,  preventing  his  revelation  before  the  proper  time.  The 
two  knots  of  the  passage  are  the  identification  of  the  man  of  sin,  and  of  him 
that  restraineth.  The  man  of  sin  has  been  identified  as  Nero,  the  Pope  of 
Rome,  Luther,  Mahomet,  Caligula,  Simon  Magus,  Titus.  By  others,  as  rep- 
resenting not  an  individual,  but  the  succession  of  popes,  the  Jewish  nation, 
and  especially  the  Sanhedrim.  The  restraining  power  is  explained  as  the 
Roman  Empire  ;  the  German  Empire ;  the  Roman  Emperor  Vitellius ;  the 
Apostles ;  the  chiefs  of  the  Jewish  nation  against  Simon  the  son  of  Giora ; 
the  Emperors  Claudius  and  Vespasian ;  the  pious  Jews  living  at  the  time 
of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem ;  James  the  Just.  Opinions  differ  as  to 
whether  the  man  of  sin  is  an  individual  or  an  organisation.  Romanists  dis- 
cover him  in  some  representative  enemy  of  Romanism ;  Protestants  in  the  Ro- 
man church  and  hierarchy.  Before  any  approach  to  a  sound  exegesis  of  the 
passage  can  be  made,  it  will  be  necessary  to  define  and  settle  the  principles  of 
apocal3rptic  interpretation,  a  matter  which  is  still  very  much  in  the  dark. 
About  the  only  valuable  thing  that  can  be  fairly  extracted  from  the  passage 
is  Paul's  firm  assurance  that  God^s  hand  is  ever  on  the  work  of  evil,  and  that 
in  whatever  form  or  with  whatever  power  it  may  reveal  Itself,  it  will  inev- 
itably be  subdued  and  crushed  by  the  power  of  Chxist 


68  WOBD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NSW  TB8TAMBMT.      [Cb.  III. 

18.  Hath  chosen  (tTXaro).  The  only  case  in  N.  T.  in 
which  this  word  is  used  of  God's  election.  LXX,  Deut. 
xxyi.  18,  of  God's  choosing  Israel  to  be  his  peculiar  people. 
Comp.  Philip,  i.  22 ;  Heb.  xi.  26. 

From  the  beginning  (&ir  ^px^h)*  ^o^  elsewhere  in  PauL 
His  usual  expressions  are  wpi  r&v  aUsvmv  htfore  the  ages 
(1  Cor.  ii.  7) :  irpi  KarafioXrp  tcScfAov  before  the  foundation 
of  the  world  (Eph.  i.  4)  :  itirb  r&v  alihvmvfrom  the  age$  (Eph. 
iii.  9).  Btfore  eternal  times  (irp6  ;^iwy  aimvlmv)  is  found 
2  Tim.  i.  9 ;  Tit.  i.  2. 

14.  Our  gospel.    See  on  1  Th.  i.  5. 

15.  Traditions  (irapa&6a€i^y  See  on  1  Cor.  xi.  2.  Not 
emphasising  a  distinction  between  written  and  oral  tradition. 
Tradition,  in  the  scriptural  sense,  may  be  either  written  or 
oral.  It  implies  on  the  part  of  a  teacher  that  he  is  not 
expressing  his  own  ideas,  but  is  delivering  or  handing  aver 
(irapahC&fOfu)  a  message  received  from  some  one  else.  See 
1  Cor.  xi.  28.  The  prominent  idea  of  irapdSoai^  is  therefore 
that  of  an  authority  external  to  the  teacher.  Comp.  by  ward 
nor  by  letter^  ver.  2. 

16.  Through  grace  (^  ;^apiTi).  Better,  in  grace,  as  the 
element  of  God's  gift.  Const,  with  Jiath  given,  not  with  hath 
loved  and  hath  given. 

CHAPTER  in. 

1.    Finally  (to  XotTrov).     See  on  1  Th.  iv.  1. 

May  have  free  course  (rp^).  More  literally,  simply, 
and  better,  may  run.  Have  swift  progress  through  the  world. 
An  O.  T.  idea.  See  Ps.  cxlvii.  15,  and  comp.  Isa.  Iv.  11  and 
Acts  xii.  24. 

Be  glorified  (^So^d^tjrai).  Acknowledged  in  its  true  power 
and  glory.  Comp.  J.  xii.  28.  The  phrase  the  word  of  the 
Lord  —  be  glorified^  only  here. 


Ch.  m.]     THS  SBCOND  BPISTLB  TO  THE  THB8SAL0NIANS.     69 

2.  Unreasonable  (JMnrmv).  See  on  L.  xxiii.  41,  and 
comp.  Acts  XXV.  5;  xxviii.  6.  In  LXX  in  a  moral  sense, 
imqmUmt^  Tob.  iv.  8 ;  xi.  11 ;  xxxiv.  12.  The  word  origin- 
ally means  cmt  qf  place* 

All  men  have  not  faith.    See  on  Acts  vi.  7 ;  GaL  L  28. 

8.  From  evil  (&iri  rov  Trovffpov).  Possibly,  from  the  evil 
one.  Ti  irovtfp6v  etfil  is  found  Rom.  xii.  9 ;  Matt.  v.  89  ;  but 
general  N.  T.  usage  favors  the  masculine,  personal  sense. 
See  Matt.  xiu.  19,  88 ;  Eph.  vi.  16 ;  1  J.  u.  18, 14 ;  iu.  12 ; 
V.  18.  In  LXX,  ri  irovrfp6v  evil  is  very  common :  o  irovrfpo^  a 
few  times,  but  always  of  men.  See  Deut.  xxiv.  7  ;  Esth. 
vii.  6 ;  Job  xxi.  80.  In  Tob.  iii.  8, 17,  ri  irovrfpSv  BiUfuiviov 
the  wicked  demon.  The  masculine  is  favored  by  the  Jewish 
formularies,  of  which  traces  appear  in  the  Lord's  prayer ;  by 
the  unanimous  tradition  of  Greek  interpreters ;  by  the  inter- 
pretations of  Tertullian  and  Cyprian,  and  by  tiie  evidence  of 
the  Syriac  and  Sahidio  Versions.* 

5.  Hearts  (Kapilasi).    See  on  Rom.  i.  21 ;  x.  10 ;  Eph.  i.  18. 

Patient  waiting  for  Christ  (inro/jLovifv  rov  xP^arcSi). 
Rather  patience  of  Ohriet.  The  prayer  is  that  their  hearts 
may  be  directed  to  love  God  and  to  exhibit  the  patience  of 
Christ.f 

*  For  a  fall  disctuuion,  see  Lightfoot,  On  a  Fresh  Betfition  of  the  New 
Teitament.    3d  ed.    Appendix  IL 

t  So  Lttnenuum,  Lightfoot,  Weizsicker,  Ellicott,  Bomemann.  Sohmiedel 
maintainB  the  A.  V.  There  iB  in  N.  T.  no  instance  of  ^omoH^  in  the  sense  of 
waUing  for,  nor  is  the  verb  ^o/Uptiw  used  in  that  sense.  Waiting  for  or 
awoMng  is  expressed  by  dwticdixw^ai  (mostly  Paul),  dpafjJwtiwionce  in  Paul), 
4K84xw9ai  (twice  in  Paol),  wtpi/Up€i9  (not  in  Paul),  wpoadix*^^^  (J^ot  in  that 
sense  in  Paul),  and  wpo^doKtiw  (not  in  Paul).  In  Rom.  yiii.  26  Paul  has  8c' 
ihroMoi^t  dw-ttcdtx^figSa,  In  LXX  both  the  noun  and  the  verb  are  found  in  the 
sense  of  awaiting  or  waiting  for.  See  Ezra  x.  2 ;  Ps.  xxxviii.  7 ;  Judg. 
Ui.  26 ;  2  K.  tL  88;  Tob.  t.  7,  etc.  FtHent  waiting  for  Chriet  accords  with 
the  general  drift  of  the  Epistle.  On  ||m  other  hand  see  1  Th.  L  8,  and  1  Hl 
L  10,  where  for  waiting  for  the  Son  he  uses  dpoftdptiv. 


70  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ck.  IBL 

6.  Withdraw  yourselves  from  QrriXKiffdai  v/uv9  hiril). 
^rdWeadcu^  P^.  In  the  active  voice,  to  place^  arrange^  equip : 
in  the  middle  voice,  to  provide  for^  take  care.  See  2  Cor^ 
viii.  20.     Here  with  airofrom^  to  place  one^%  Belf  away  from. 

Disorderly  (ardicTm).  This  adverb,  the  verb  itratcr^ 
and  the  adjective  aroKTo^  are  found  only  in  Paul,  and  only 
in  the  Thessalonian  Epistles.     See  on  1  Th.  v.  14. 

7.  Follow  (jufjLeurOai).  Better,  imitate.  Comp.  1  Cor. 
iv.  16;  xi.  1 ;  Philip,  iii.  17 ;  1  Th.  i.  6. 

8.  Any  man's  bread  (^afnov  wapd  rtiw).    Lit.  bread  from 

any  one^  or  at  any  man'e  hand. 

For  nought  (Stopeiiv).  The  word  is  a  noun,  meaning  a 
gift.  See  J.  iv.  10;  Acts  ii.  38;  Rom.  v.  15.  The  accusa- 
tive often  adverbially  as  here ;  cu  a  g\ft^  gratie.  Comp. 
Matt.  X.  8 ;   Rom.  iii.  24 ;   Apoc.  xxi.  6. 

Labour  and  travail.    See  on  1  Th.  i.  8. 

Be  chargeable  (iwifiaprjaai).  P^.  Better,  burden.  By 
depending  upon  them  for  pecuniary  support.  Comp.  1  Cor. 
ix.  3-18,  and  see  on  1  Th.  ii.  6. 

9.  Power  {i^ovalav).  Better,  right.  See  on  Mk.  ii.  10; 
J.  i.  12. 

10.  if  any  would  not  work^  etc.    A  Jewish  proverb. 

11.  Working  not  at  all  —  busybodies  (/ii/Sey  ipya^ofiA^ 
0V9  —  9r€/9t€/>7a^o/i^u9).  One  of  Paul's  frequent  word- 
plays. See  on  reprobate  mind^  Rom.  i.  28.  Not  busy,  but 
busybodies.  Tlepiepyd^eaOat  (N.  T.^.)  is  to  busUe  (Aaut  a 
thing :  here,  to  be  officious  in  others^  affairs.  See  on  rh  irepC-- 
efyya  curious  arts^  Acts  xix.  19,  and  1  Tim.  v.  18. 

12.  With  quietness  —  work.  See  on  study  to  be  quiet, 
1  Th.  iv.  11. 


Ch.  m.]     THB  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THBSSALOKIANS.     71 

13.  Be  not  weary  (/i^  ivtctuci/farfTe).  With  one  exceptdon, 
L.  xviii.  1,  only  in  Paul.     To  faint  or  lo$e  heart. 

Well  doing  (^KaXoiroiovvTt^^.  N.  T.^.  According  to  the 
Greek  idiom,  doing  wett^  be  not  weary.  Not  limited  to  works 
of  charity,  but  including  Christian  conduct  generally,  as,  for 
instance,  steadily  attending  to  their  own  business,  ver.  12. 

14.  By  this  epistle.  Connect  with  our  word.  The  mes- 
sage we  send  in  this  letter.  Not,  as  some,  with  the  following 
words,  note  that  man  in  your  epistle. 

Note  (ariiJuetovaOe).  N.  T.^.  Lit.  eet  a  mark  on.  The 
nature  of  the  mark  is  indicated  in  the  next  clause. 

Have  no  company  with  (/a^  awavafiiyvuad(u).  P^.  See 
on  1  Cor.  V.  9. 

Be  ashamed  (ivrpairH).  See  on  Matt.  xxi.  87,  and  1  Cor. 
iv.  14. 

15.  Admonish  (vovOereire).  See  on  Acts  xx.  81,  and 
Eph.  vi.  4. 

16.  The  Lord  of  peace  (6  tcvpio^  r^  e^i^).  The  only 
instance  of  the  formula. 

By  all  means  (jh  iravrl  rpihrfi)^  or  in  every  way.  The 
alternative  reading  'nhr^  place  is  rejected  by  the  principal 
texts. 

17.  The  salutation  of  Paul  with  mine  own  hand 
(iunraafwi  t§  ifi^  x^ipl  Ilai/Xov).  Rev.  properly,  "the  salu- 
tation of  me  Paul."  The  genitive  of  me  is  contained,  accord- 
ing to  a  familiar  Greek  idiom,  in  the  possessive  pronoun  my. 
Paul  had  apparently  been  emplojdng  an  amanuensis. 

In  every  epistle.    Comp.  1  Cor.  xvi.  21 ;  Col.  iv.  18. 


THE  BPISTLB  TO  THE  GALATIANS. 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIANS. 


INTRODUCTION. 


By  the  churches  of  Gralatia  which  Paul  addresses  (ch.  i.  2) 
are  most  probably  meant  the  churches  in  the  Roman  province 
of  Galatia ;  those  namely  in  Iconium,  Pisidian  Antioch,  Lys- 
tra,  and  Derbe ;  and  not  the  Christians  living  in  the  Galatian 
district  lying  to  the  north  and  east  of  Lycaonia  and  Phrygia, 
which  formed  only  a  part  of  the  Roman  province,  and  the 
chief  cities  of  which  were  Ancyra,  Tavium,  and  Pessinus. 
The  Roman  province  was  formed  by  Augustus,  25  B.C.,  and 
included  Lycaonia,  Isauria,  southeastern  Phrygia,  and  a  por- 
tion of  Pisidia.  The  churches  in  this  province  were  founded 
by  Paul  in  his  first  missionary  tour,  the  account  of  which  is 
given  Acts  xiii.,  xiv.* 

The  South  Gralatian  hypothesis  supplies  a  defect  in  the 
history  of  the  Pauline  churches,  which,  on  the  other,  it  is 

*  The  view  here  glTen  is  known  aa  the  South  Galatian  hypothesis.  The 
other  view,  which  limits  the  application  of  the  name  Galatia  to  the  Galatian 
district,  the  country  of  the  Asiatic  Gauls,  is  known  as  the  North  Galatian 
hypothesis,  and  is  held  by  the  majority  of  critics.  The  South  Galatian  hy- 
pothesis was  propoimded  as  early  as  1826  by  Mynster  {IntroducHon  to  the 
GaUUian  Epittle);  was  maintained  by  the  French  archaeologist  Perrot  (Z>e 
CMatia  Pravineia  Bamanaj  Paris,  1867),  who  was  followed  by  Renan 
(Pa«Zt»,  1869);  and  has  been  defended  by  Hausrath,  Weizslicker,  Zahn, 
Pfleiderer,  Ramsay  (The  Church  in  the  Soman  Empire),  and  McGiflert 
(Apostolic  Age).  See  also  an  article  by  Emilie  Grace  Brigsps,  ''  The  Date  of 
the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians,*'  in  the  Kew  World,  March,  1900,  and  J.  Vernon 
Bartlett,  The  Apostolic  Age.  Among  the  prominent  advocates  of  the  North 
Galatian  hypothesis  are  Bishop  Lightf oot  (  Cofitm^nlary  on  Galatians),  Lip- 
sius  (Hand-Commentar);  Weiss  and  Jttlicher  (Introductions  to  the  li.  T.); 
Holsten  (Svangelium  des  Paulus),  Schnier  (Theologische  LiUeraturMsUung, 
1892, 1898,  and  JahrbUcher  JUr  protestantische  Theologie,  1892),  and  Sie£Fert 
(Der  Britf  an  die  Galater,  Meyer,  8  Aufl.). 

76 


76  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  QALATIAN  EPISTLB. 

difficult  to  account  for.  On  the  North  Galatian  hypothesis, 
although  the  Gralatian  churches  were  the  scene  of  a  violent 
conflict  between  Paul  and  the  Judaising  Christians,  and  the 
recipients  of  one  of  Paul's  most  important  letters,  and  are 
therefore  entitled  to  an  important  place  in  the  history  of  the 
apostolic  churches,  —  no  mention  of  their  origin  or  founda- 
tion occurs  in  the  Book  of  Acts,  while  the  founding  of  the 
churches  of  Pisidia  and  Lycaonia,  which  are  nowhere  named 
by  Paul,  is  expressly  narrated.  On  the  other  hypothesis,  we 
have  in  Acts  xiii.,  xiv.,  a  detailed  account  of  the  foundation 
of  the  Galatian  churches. 

From  the  notices  in  the  Acts  and  in  the  Epistle,  it  appears 
that  Paul's  preaching  in  Gtilatia  met  with  a  favorable  recep- 
tion. See  Acts  xiii.  42,  48,  49 ;  xiv.  1 ;  Gal.  iv.  18.  We 
do  not  know  how  long  it  was  before  the  churches  were 
invaded  by  Jewish  emissaries,  nor  whence  these  came.  They 
probably  came  from  the  Judaistic  circles  of  the  mother- 
church  at  Jerusalem,  although  it  is  held  by  some  that 
they  belonged  to  the  Jewish  Christian  constituency  of  the 
churches  in  Galatia.  They  declared  that  Paul  was  not  an 
apostle,  but  at  most  only  a  disciple  of  the  apostles.  He  had 
had  no  personal  knowledge  of  Christ :  the  contents  of  his 
gospel  were  derived  from  men,  and  therefore  he  was  entitled 
to  no  authority.  All  questions  should  be  referred  to  the 
mother-church  in  Jerusalem,  especially  to  the  great  apostles 
of  the  circumcision,  the  pillars  of  the  church,  James,  Peter, 
and  John.  Moreover,  Paul's  teaching  that  righteousness 
was  based  only  upon  faith  in  Christ  and  not  upon  circum- 
cision and  legal  observance,  contradicted  the  historical  reve- 
lation of  God,  since  God  promised  salvation  to  Abraham  and 
to  his  seed  on  the  ground  of  circumcision ;  and,  in  order  to 
carry  the  promise  into  effect,  made  the  covenant  of  the  law 
forever  with  the  people  of  Israel,  who  were  to  receive  the 
divine  blessing  on  condition  of  observing  the  divine  com- 
mands. His  teaching,  moreover,  encouraged  moral  license, 
and  therefore  contravened  all  moral  principle  (v.  18).  They 
further  accused  him  of  being  a  man-pleaser,  seeking  a  fol- 
lowing and  adapting  his  preaching  to  the  tast^  of  his  hear- 


INTBODUCTION  TO  THE  GALATIAN  EPISTLE.  77 

ers ;  preaching  circumcision  to  those  who  were  inclined  to 
accept  it,  and  uncircumcision  to  such  as  wished  to  refuse  it 
(V.  11). 

These  intruders  were  not  proselytes,  but  born  Jews,  Jewish 
Christians,  with  a  Pharisaic  tendency  like  that  of  those  who, 
in  Antioch  and  Jerusalem,  sought  to  impose  circumcision 
and  legal  observance  upon  Gentile  Christians  (Acts  xv.  1,  5 ; 
Gal.  ii.  4).  They  demanded  that  the  Gentile  Christians 
should  be  incorporated  by  circumcision  with  the  community 
of  Israel,  and  should  observe  the  leading  requirements  of  the 
Mosaic  law  (v.  2, 11 ;  vi.  12).  They  laid  great  stress  on  the 
observance  of  sacred  seasons  (iv.  10).  "They  prescribed  a 
cultus  with  holy  days  and  festivals,  which  contained  a  more 
seductive  charm  than  the  exposition  of  the  word;  for  it 
offered  compensation  for  the  heathenism  they  had  aban- 
doned, and  the  old  disposition  once  revived  might  easily 
have  found  in  it  a  congenial  home."*  They  did  not  em- 
phasise the  solemn  duties  which  followed  circumcision,  and 
which  Paul  himself  forcibly  stated  (v.  3 ;  comp.  iii.  10);  but 
they  recommended  circumcision  as  an  easy  way  of  attaining 
salvation  through  mere  formal  incorporation  with  the  true 
people  of  God,  and  also  as  a  protection  against  persecution 
(vi.  12 ;  comp.  v.  11). 

These  efforts  bore  fruit  among  the  Galatians.  Having 
thrown  off  the  corruptions  of  their  heathen  faith  and  wor- 
ship, they  again  came  into  bondage  to  "  the  weak  and  beg- 
garly elements"  which  they  had  outgrown  (iv.  9).  The 
slightest  tendency  to  such  a  lapse  was  met  and  fostered  by 
the  daily  appeal  of  the  pagan  cult  amid  which  they  lived, 
an  elaborate  and  impressive  system,  fortified  with  a  code  of 
rules  and  administered  by  a  powerful  hierarchy,  the  whole 
presenting  a  striking  external  resemblance  to  the  Jewish 
ceremonial  system.  As  Professor  Ramsay  observes:  "It  is 
not  until  this  is  properly  apprehended  that  Gal.  iv.  3-11 
becomes  clear  and  natural.  Paul  in  that  passage  implies 
ihat  the  Judaising  movement  of  the  Christian  Galatians  is  a 

«  Weizsficker. 


78  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  GALATIAN  BPI8TLR. 

recurrence  to  their  old  heathen  type."  Paul  describes  them 
as  arrested  in  a  course  of  obedience  to  the  truth  which  they 
had  been  running  well  (y.  7)  :  as  soon  removed  into  a  differ- 
ent gospel  (i.  6) :  as  bewitched  by  an  evil  eye  (iii.  1)  :  as 
pervaded  with  an  evil  leaven  (v.  9).  They  were  beginning, 
in  part  at  least,  to  observe  the  Jewish  ceremonial  law :  they 
were  depending  upon  the  law  for  justification:  they  were 
declining  from  a  spiritual  to  a  fleshly  economy :  they  were 
beginning  to  regard  as  an  enemy  the  friend  and  teacher 
whom,  not  so  long  ago,  they  had  received  as  an  angel  of 
God,  and  for  whom  they  would  have  plucked  out  their  own 
eyes  (iv.  14, 16). 

To  what  extent  the  Galatian  Christians  had  been  prevailed 
on  to  accept  circumcision,  we  do  not  know.  The  writing  of 
this  letter,  however,  implies  that  Paul  did  not  regard  this  evil 
as  past  arresting. 

The  letter  itself  is  marked  by  unity  of  purpose,  cohesion 
of  thought,  and  force  and  picturesqueness  of  diction.  Like 
2d  Corinthians  and  Philippians  it  is  intensely  personal. 
Like  the  former  of  those  Epistles  it  reveals  the  apostle*s  keen 
sensitiveness  to  the  attitude  of  his  readers  toirard  himself. 
It  is  indignant  and  severe,  with  dashes  of  bitterness,  yet  it 
contains  touches  of  affectionate  reminiscence.  It  is  pervaded 
and  controlled  by  the  one  purpose  of  meeting  and  correcting 
the  Gtdatian  apostasy  in  its  twofold  form  of  repudiating  his 
apostolic  right  and  the  doctrine  of  salvation  by  faith.  The 
letter  falls  into  three  parts  :  chs.  i.,  ii.,  maintaining  the  inde- 
pendence and  authority  of  his  apostleship,  and  the  divine 
origin  of  his  gospel.  Chs.  iii.,  iv.,  defending  the  intrinsic 
truth  of  his  gospel.  Chs.  v.,  vi.,  exhibiting  the  moral  conse- 
quences which  legitimately  and  logically  result  from  his 
gospel. 

The  relationship  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Roman  letter  is 
marked,  yet  it  has  its  special  characteristics  as  distinct  from 
Romans.  It  bears  the  character  of  a  letter  more  distinctly 
than  Romans,  which  is  a  treatise.  It  Iajb  a  more  distinct  em- 
phasis upon  tiie  person  and  apostolic  authority  of  Paul,  and 
its  dominant  conception  is  the  freedom  of  the  Christisii,  m 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  QALATIAN  EPISTLE.  79 

in  Romans  the  dominant  conception  is  justification  by  faith. 
Romans  is  more  positively  doctrinal ;  Galatians  more  apolo- 
getic and  polemic  as  against  Judaism.  Romans  treats  cir- 
cumcision as  a  question  of  practice ;  Galatians  as  a  question 
of  law.  As  in  Romans,  faith  is  emphasised  over  against  the 
works  of  the  law  as  the  ground  of  justification  before  God ; 
but  equally  with  Romans  the  divinity  and  sanctity  of  the 
law  are  recognised.  The  law  is  holy,  and  just  and  good.  It 
is  the  expression  of  God's  sovereign  and  righteous  will.  It 
reflects  his  character,  and  if  one  could  keep  it  he  would  live 
by  it  (iii.  12) ;  all  this,  while  it  remains  true  that  ^'  by  the 
works  of  the  law  shall  no  flesh  be  justified"  (ii.  16). 

Accordingly  the  ethics  of  the  Epistle  are  stem  and  uncom- 
promising. The  picture  of  the  works  of  the  flesh  is  perhaps 
not  as  powerful  and  lurid  as  that  in  the  first  chapter  of 
Romans.  It  is  drawn  in  fewer  lines,  and  is  offset  and  en- 
forced by  a  picture  of  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  Yet  the  one 
is  no  less  distinct  and  unmistakable  than  the  other.  In 
Romans  the  sins  of  the  Gentile  world  are  massed  in  a  fearful 
catalogue ;  in  Gtdatians  single  passages  here  and  there  afford 
glimpses  of  deeply-rooted  evil  tendencies  in  the  life  of  the 
newly-converted  Gentile,  which  show  how  hard  it  had  been 
for  him  to  divest  himself  of  his  pagan  license,  and  which 
contain  within  themselves  possibilities  of  future  degeneracy. 
We  see  a  conceit  of  higher  knowledge  and  larger  liberty 
which  might  readily  seize  upon  ^^  occasions  to  the  flesh,'*  and 
run  into  what  some  one  has  aptly  styled  "the  bigotry  of 
illumination,"  and  the  selfishness  of  fancied  deeper  insight 
(v.  15;  vi.  2-5).  The  same  conceit  appears  in  the  weakness 
and  inconstancy  which  readily  succumb  to  the  flattering 
overtures  of  pretentious  Jewish  emissaries  (iv.  12  ff. ;  v.  26). 
Yet  with  rigid  severity  against  such  tendencies  there  is 
blended  a  tender  compassion  for  the  erring,  a  reasonable  and 
kindly  appreciation  of  the  weakness  of  the  new  convert. 

Professor  Sabatier  (TApStre  Pavl)  says  of  the  Epistle: 
*^  The  style  does  not  sustain  the  thought ;  it  is  the  thought 
which  sustains  the  style,  giving  to  it  its  force,  its  life,  its 
beauty.      Thought  presses  on,  overcharged,  breathless  and 


80  INTRODUCTION  TO  THB  QALATIAK  EPISTLE. 

hurried,  dragging  the  words  after  it.  .  .  .  Unfinished  phrases, 
daring  omissions,  parentheses  which  leave  us  out  of  sight 
and  out  of  breath,  rabbinical  subtleties,  audacious  paradoxes, 
vehement  apostrophes, — pour  in  like  surging  billows.  Mere 
words  in  their  ordinary  meaning  are  insufficient  to  sustain 
this  overwhelming  plenitude  of  thought  and  feeling.  Every 
phrase  is  obliged,  so  to  speak,  to  bear  a  double  and  triple 
burden." 
The  authenticity  of  the  letter  is  generally  conceded.* 

*  Oal&tians  with  Romans  and  the  two  Corinthian  letters,  were  received  as 
genuine  and  authentic  by  the  Ttlbingen  critics.  Some  sixteen  yeais  ago  they 
were  attacked  by  a  small  coterie  of  critics,  chiefly  in  Holland.  Allard  Pier- 
son  and  S.  A.  Naber  ascribed  the  Paulme  Epistles  to  one  Paulns  Episcopua,  a 
Christian  ecclesiastic,  who  appropriated  large  portions  of  certain  reformed 
Jewish  writings,  and  christianised  them  by  means  of  changes  and  interpoli^ 
tions.  A.  D.  Loman  asserted  that  Christianity  was  a  messianic  movement 
among  the  Jews ;  that  Jesus  had  no  exiBtence,  but  was  a  purely  mythical 
embodiment  of  a  series  of  ideas  and  principles  developed  in  the  second  cen- 
tury. The  four  chief  Epistles  of  Paul  which  contradict  this  hypothesis  are 
spurious  and  legendary.  Out  of  the  anti-Judaic  and  uniyersalistic  Gnosis  of 
the  early  part  of  the  second  century,  was  developed  a  Paul-legend  in  the 
mterest  of  a  universalistic  Christianity.  Romans,  Galatians,  and  Corinthians 
were  all  written  in  Paul's  name  to  recommend  this  Christianity.  These 
views  obtained  no  currency,  and  were  repudiated  by  even  the  radical  critica 
of  Germany.  Rudolph  Steck  of  Bern  (18S8)  held  that  none  of  the  four 
letters  were  the  work  of  Paul,  but  were  the  product  of  a  Pauline  party  of  the 
second  century.  He  revived  the  hypothesis  of  the  dependence  of  the  Pauline 
writin^B  on  Seneca. 


COMMENTARIES  ON  OALATIANS. 


ENGLISH. 

J.  B.  Lightfoot,  lOih  ed.,  1890:  B.  Jowett,  EpisOes  of  St.  AmJ 
to  ike  ThesaaJkmianBj  OakaianSy  and  BofMina,  3d  ed.,  1894.  The 
essays  are  interesting  and  suggestive.  C.  J.  EUicott,  Critical  and 
OrammaHcal  Commentary  on  St.  FauPa  Epistle  to  the  Oalatians. 
J.  Eadie,  Commentary  on  the  Oreek  Text  of  the  EpMe  of  Paul  to 
ike  OakUianSf  1869.  Of  a  more  popular  character,  J.  A.  Beet, 
Commentary  on  Oalatianaj  3d  ed.  Philip  Schaff  in  Schafps  Popur 
lar  Commentary, 

OERICAN. 

F.  Sieffert,  Der  Brief  an  die  Oatater^  Mey.,  8  Anfl.,  1894.  B. 
A  LipsiuSi  **  Der  Brief  an  die  Galater,"  in  the  HandrOommentar^ 
by  Holtzmann,  Lipsius,  Schmiedely  and  Von  Soden. 

For  discussions  of  tJie  Geographical  question,  see  W.  M.  Bam- 
say,  The  Church  in  the  Soman  Empire  before  A.D.  170:  Lightfoot 
in  Commentary:  Sieffert  and  Lipsius  in  Commentaries;  E. 
SchUrer,  <<  Was  ist  unter  VaXar(a  in  der  tlherschrift  des  Galater- 
briefs  zu  verstehen?"  JahrbOcher  fflr  proteetantiache  Theolo^j 
1892,  460  £E. :  C.  Weizsftcker,  Dae  apostoliache  ZeitaUer  der  ehriet- 
lichen  Kirche.  Translation  from  2d  ed.  by  J.  Millar,  1894 :  W. 
M.  Bamsay's  articles  on  <<  Galatia"  and  <<  Gkdatiay  Begions  of,"  in 
Hastings'  Dictionary  of  the  BibUy  YoL  11.,  1899 :  A  C.  McGiffert, 
The  Jpoitolic  Age,  1897. 


TOL.   IT.<»6  81 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIANS. 


CHAPTER  I. 


1--6.  The  usual  fonn  of  salutation  is  expanded  by  additions 
which  answer  to  the  occasion  of  the  letter,  and  foreshadow  its 
principal  thoughts. 

1.  An  apostle.  This  title  is  prefixed  to  Romans,  Ist  and 
2d  Corinthians,  Ephesians,  Colossians.  Here  with  special 
emphasis,  because  Paul's  apostleship  had  been  challenged. 

Of  men  —  by  man  (Att*  avOpdmiov — &*  avOpomov).  Better, 
from  men  —  throtigh  man  or  a  man.  In  contradiction  of  the 
assertion  that  he  was  not  directly  commissioned  by  Jesus 
Christ,  like  the  twelve,  but  only  by  human  authority.  JProm 
men^  as  authorising  the  office;  through  man^  as  issuing  the 
call  to  the  person.  He  thus  distinguishes  himself  from  false 
apostles  who  did  not  derive  their  commissions  from  God,  and 
ranks  himself  with  the  twelve.  Man  does  not  point  to  any 
individual,  but  is  in  antithesis  to  Je9U9  Christy  or  may  be 
taken  as  =  any  man. 

By  Jesus  Christ.    See  Acts  ix.  4-6 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  1. 

And  God  the  Father.  The  genitive,  governed  by  the  pre- 
ceding Biit  by  or  through.  The  idea  is  the  same  as  an  apoMe 
by  the  mil  of  God:  1  Cor.  i.  1;  2  Cor.  i.  1;  Eph.  i.  1.  Ai^ 
is  used  of  secondary  agency,  as  Matt.  i.  22 ;  xi.  2 ;  L.  i.  70 ; 
Acts  i.  16 ;  Heb.  i.  2.  But  we  find  St^  OeKi^fiaTo^  0€ov  by  the 
mil  of  Q-od^  Rom.  xv.  32 ;  1  Cor.  i.  1 ;  2  Cor.  i.  1,  etc.,  and 
&a  Beov  by  God,  Gal.  iv.  7.  Also  Bi*  oi  (Gk)d),  1  Cor.  i.  9 ; 
Heb.  ii.  10. 

82 


Ch.  I.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIAN8.  83 

Who  raised  him  from  the  dead  (rov  iyeipavro^  ainov  U 
v€tcp&v}.  It  was  the  riien  Christ  who  made  Paul  an  apostle. 
For  resurrection  the  N.  T.  uses  iyetpeiv  to  raise  up  ;  i^eyeipeiv 
to  raise  out  of;  Syepci^  raising  or  rising  ;  avurrdvai  to  raise  up  ; 
hvcurraai^  and  i^avdoTcun^  raising  up  and  raising  up  out  of. 
With  v€tcpo<:  dead  are  the  following  combinations:  iyeCpeiv  airh 
r&v  v€Kp&p  (never  airo  v&cp&p)  to  raise  from  the  dead;  iy.  i/c 
v&c.  or  T&p  v€K.  to  raise  out  of  the  dead ;  avaarricai,  to  raise^ 
apoarijpai  to  be  raised  or  to  rise  ix.  vac.  (never  airb} ;  avd* 
oTcun^  v€K.  or  t&p  p€k,  resurrection  of  the  dead;  apcUrr.  ix, 
vac. ;  i^apdoToai^  ix.  pac.  rising  or  resurrection  out  of  the  dead 
OT  from  among.  It  is  impossible  to  draw  nice  distinctions 
between  these  phrases.* 

2.  Brethren  — with  me.  The  circle  of  Paul's  colleagues 
or  more  intimate  friends.  Comp.  Philip,  iv.  21,  22,  where 
t?ie  brethren  with  me  are  distinguished  from  all  the  saints  — 
the  church  members  generally. 

Unto  the  churches  of  Qalatia.  See  Introduction.  This 
is  a  circular  letter  to  several  congregations.  Note  the  omis- 
sion of  the  commendatory  words  added  to  the  addresses  in 
the  two  Thessalonian  and  first  Corinthian  letters. 

8.  Qrace  to  you,  etc.  See  on  1  Th.  i.  1.  He  will  not 
withhold  the  wish  for  the  divine  grace  and  peace  even  from 
those  whom  he  is  about  to  upbraid. 

4.  Qave  himself  for  our  sins.  Comp.  Matt.  xx.  28 ;  Eph. 
V.  25  ;  1  Tim.  ii.  6  ;  Tit.  ii.  14.  Purposely  added  with  refer- 
ence to  the  Galatians'  falling  back  on  the  works  of  the  law  as 
the  ground  of  acceptance  with  God.  For  or  with  reference  to 
sins  ('T€f>l)  expresses  the  general  relation  of  Christ's  mission 
to  sin.  The  special  relation,  to  atone  for^  to  destroy^  to  save 
and  sanctify  its  victims^  is  expressed  by  \nrip  on  behalf  of  The 
general  preposition,  however,  may  include  the  special. 

•  Ai,  for  example,  Lightfoot  on  PhUip.  iiL  11. 


84  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  I. 

Out  of  this  present  evil  world  (Jbc  rov  ai&vo^  rov  iv&rT&ro^ 
m-ovrfpov).  Lit.  <nU  of  the  worlds  the  present  (ifforld  which  is) 
evil.  For  aU»v  age  or  period,  see  on  J.  i.  9,  and  additional  note 
on  2  Th.  i.  9.  Here  it  has  an  ethical  sense,  the  course  and  car- 
rent  of  this  world's  affairs  as  corrupted  by  sin.  C!omp.  2  Cor. 
iy.  4.  *'EpeaT&To^  preient,  as  contrasted  with  the  world  to  come. 
Elsewhere  we  have  o  vvp  aldv  the  now  world  (1  Tim.  vi.  17); 
o  aiiiiv  rov  tcoafuw  rovrov  the  period  of  thie  world  (Eph.  ii.  2) ; 

0  tua>v  ofiT09  this  world  or  cige  (Rom.  xii.  2).  *EiwtAtio9,  not 
impending^  as  some  expositors, — the  period  of  wickedness  and 
suffering  preceding  the  parousia  (2  Th.  ii.  8),  which  would 
imply  a  limitation  of  Christ's  atoning  work  to  that  period. 
Comp.  2  Th.  ii.  2 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  1 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  26.  The  sense 
of  present  as  related  to  future  is  clear  in  Rom.  viii.  88 ; 

1  Cor.  iii.  22;  Heb.  ix.  9.  For  the  evil  character  of  the 
present  world  as  conceived  by  Paul,  see  Rom.  xii.  2 ;  1  Cor. 
ii.  6 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  4 ;  Eph.  ii.  2. 

5.  To  whom  be  glory,  etc.  For  similar  doxologies  see 
Rom.  ix.  6;  xi.  86;  xvi.  27;  Eph.  iii.  21;  1  Tim.  i.  17. 

Forever  and  ever  (ek  roif^  al&va^  r&v  aUnwv),  Lit.  ufUo 
the  ages  of  the  ages.  See  additional  note  on  2  Th.  i.  9,  and 
comp.  Rom.  xvi.  27;  Philip,  iv.  20;  1  Tim.  i.  17;  2  Tim. 
iy.  18.  Often  in  the  Apocalypse.  In  LXX  habitually  in 
the  singular :  see  Ps.  Ixxxviii.  29 ;  ex.  8,  80.  In  the  dox- 
ology  the  whole  period  of  duration  is  conceived  as  a  succession 
of  cycles. 

6.  I  marvel  (Oaviid^tioi).  Often  by  Greek  orators  of  sur- 
prise at  something  reprehensible.  So  in  N.  T.,  Mk.  vi.  6 ; 
J.  vii.  21 ;  L.  xi.  88 ;  J.  iv.  27. 

So  soon  (ovro^  Tax^)«  Better,  so  quickly.  Paul  does 
not  mean  so  soon  after  a  particular  event,  as  their  conversion, 
or  his  last  visit,  or  the  entry  of  the  false  teachers,  — but  refers 
to  the  rapidity  of  their  apostasy ;  rax<if>K  being  used  absolutely 
as  always. 


Gh.  I.]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OALATIAKS.  85 

Removed  {fierariOeaOe).  A.  Y.  misses  the  sense  of  the 
middle  voice,  removing  or  trantferring  yourselves^  and  also  the 
force  of  the  continuous  present,  are  removing  or  going  over^ 
indicating  an  apostasy  not  consummated  but  in  progress. 
The  verb  is  used  in  Class,  of  altering  a  treaty,  changing  an 
opinion,  desertion  from  an  army.  For  other  applications  see 
Acts  vii.  16 ;  Heb.  vii.  12 ;  xi.  5.  Comp.  LXX,  Deut. 
xxvii.  17;  Prov.  xxiii.  10;  Isa.  xxix.  17.  Lightfoot  ren- 
ders are  turning  renegades. 

Him  that  called  (tov  icaUaavro^').  God.  Not  neuter 
and  referring  te  the  gospel.  Calling,  in  the  writings  of 
the  apostles,  is  habitually  represented  as  God's  work.  See 
Rom.  vui.  80;  ix.  11;  1  Cor.  i.  9;  Gal.  i.  15;  1  Th.  ii.  12; 
1  Pet.  i.  15;  ii.  9;  2  Pet.  i.  8. 

I  nto  the  grace  (iv  x^'^i) .    ItUo  is  wrong.    It  should  be  by. 

Another  gospel  (h-epov).  Rather  a  different,  another  sort 
of  gospel.  See  on  Matt.  vi.  24;  L.  xvi.  7;  xviii.  10.  In 
illustration  of  the  difference  between  £XXo9  another  and  h-^po^ 
different^  see  1  Cor.  xii.  8-10;  xv.  40;  2  Cor.  xi.  4;  Rom. 
yiii.  23. 

7.  Another  (2XXo).  A  different  gospel  is  not  another 
gospel.     There  is  but  one  gospel. 

But  (jd  /A^).  Rev.  only.  As  if  he  had  said,  ^Uhere  is  no 
other  gospel,  but  there  are  some  who  trouble  you  with  a 
different  kind  of  teaching  which  they  offer  as  a  gospel.** 

Some  that  trouble  {pi  rapdaaovre;).  The  article  with  the 
participle  marks  these  persons  as  characteristically  trouble- 
some—  the  troublers.  Comp.  L.  xviii.  9,  of  those  who  were 
characteristically  self-righteous.  For  trouble  in  the  sense  of 
disturbing  faith  and  unsettling  principle,  see  Gal.  v.  10 ;  Acts 
XV.  24.     Not  necessarily,  as  Lightfoot,  raising  seditions. 

8.  We.    See  on  1  Th.  i,  2. 


86  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  L 

Angel  from  heaven  (0776X09  i^  ovpavov).  The  phrase  only 
here.  "Angels  in  heaven  or  the  heavens,"  Matt.  xxii.  80; 
Mk.  xii.  25;  xiii.  32.  ^^  Angels  of  the  heavens,'*  Matt, 
xxiv.  36. 

Other  than  that  (irap^  8).  Roman  Catholic  interpreters 
insist  that  irap  should  be  rendered  contrary  to^  though  the 
Vulg.  gives  praeterquam  besides.  Some  Protestant  inter- 
preters insist  on  besides  as  being  against  supplementing  the 
gospel  with  traditions.  The  explanation  is  found  in  the  pre- 
vious words,  a  different  gospel.  Any  gospel  which  is  different 
from  the  one  gospel,  is  both  beside  and  contrary  to. 

Accursed  (hvdOefui).  See  on  Rom.  ix.  3,  and  offerings^  L. 
xxi.  5.  Comp.  Kardpa  curse^  and  iiriKardparo^  cursed^  GaL 
iii.  13.  In  LXX  always  curse^  except  Lev.  xxvii.  28,  and  the 
apocryphal  books,  where  it  is  always  g\ft  or  offering.  By 
Paul  always  curse :  see  Rom.  ix.  3 ;  1  Cor.  xii.  3 ;  xvi.  22. 
The  sense  of  excommunication^  introduced  by  patristic  writers, 
does  not  appear  in  N.  T. 

9.  As  we  said  before  (a>9  Trpoeipi^Kafiep).  Comp.  2  Cor. 
xiii.  2 ;  Philip,  iii.  18.  Not  to  be  referred  to  the  preceding 
verse,  since  the  compound  verb  would  be  too  strong,  and  now 
in  the  following  clause  points  to  an  earlier  time^  a  previous 
visit.     Comp.  Gal.  v.  21;  2  Cor.  viii.  3;  xiii.  2;  1  Th.  iv.  6. 

10.  For  do  I  now  persuade  (a/wi  yhp  —  ire^Bai).  For 
introduces  a  justification  of  the  severe  language  just  used. 
The  emphasis  is  on  now^  which  answers  to  now  in  ver.  9.  I 
have  been  charged  with  conciliating  men.  Does  this  anath- 
ema of  mine  look  like  it  ?  Is  it  a  time  for  conciliatory  words 
notv^  when  Judaising  emissaries  are  troubling  you  (ver.  7) 
and  persuading  you  to  forsake  the  true  gospel  ?  Persuade 
signifies  conciliate^  seek  to  mn  over. 

Or  Qod.  Persuade  or  conciliate  God  is  an  awkward  phrase ; 
but  the  expression  is  condensed,  and  persuade  is  carried  for- 


Ch.  I.]  TELE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OALATIANS.  87 

ward  from  the  previous  clause.  This  is  not  uncommon  in 
Paul's  style  :  See  Philem.  5 ;  Eph.  i.  15  ;  Philip,  ii.  6,  where 
fiop<f>ff  formj  applied  to  God,  is  probably  the  result  of  ^Mp^v 
BovKovform  of  a  servant  (ver.  7)  on  which  the  main  stress  of 
the  thought  lies. 

11.  I  certify  (yvtopi^w').  Or,  I  make  known.  Certify^ 
even  in  older  English,  is  to  assure  or  attest^  which  is  too 
strong  for  yv<op{^€ip  to  make  knotvn  or  declare.  This,  which  in 
the  N.  T.  is  the  universal  meaning  of  yi/wp/fcti/,  and  the  pre- 
vailing sense  in  LXX,  is  extremely  rare  in  Class.,  where  the 
usual  sense  is  to  become  acquainted  with.  For  the  formula  see 
on  1  Th.  iv.  13. 

After  man  (jcarh  avOponrov).  According  to  any  human 
standard.  The  phrase  only  in  Paul.  See  Rom.  iii.  5 ;  1  Cor. 
iii.  3 ;  ix.  8  ;  xv.  32.  KariL  avdpwrov^  according  to  men^ 
1  Pet.  iv.  6. 

12.  Oi  fmn  (irap^avOpamov^.  Better, /roTTi  man.  Uaph 
from  emphasises  the  idea  of  transmission,  and  marks  the  con- 
nection between  giver  and  receiver.  Comp.  1  Th.  ii.  13 ; 
iv.  1 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  14  ;  Acts  x.  22.  In  the  Gospels  and  Acts 
wapaXafifidveip  usually  means  to  take^  in  the  sense  of  causing 
to  accompany,  as  Matt.  iv.  6 ;  xvii.  1 ;  Mk.  iv.  36,  etc. 
Scarcely  ever  in  the  sense  of  receive:  see  Mk.  vii.  4.  In 
Paul  ofUy  in  the  sense  of  receive^  and  only  with  waph^  with 
the  single  exception  of  1  Cor.  xi.  23  (i-jro).  The  simple 
Xaiifidina  usually  with  iraph^  but  with  otto,  1  J.  ii.  27  ;  iii.  22. 

By  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  (hC  airoKoKv^^m 
*lrjaov  Xpurrov).  Not,  by  Jesus  Christ  being  revealed  to 
me,  but,  I  received  the  gospel  by  Jesus  Christ's  revealing  it  to 
me.  The  subject  of  the  revelation  is  the  gospel,  not  Christ. 
Christ  was  the  revealer.  Rev.  (it  came  to  me)  through  reve- 
lation of  Jesus  Christ, 

13.  Conversation  (avaarpo^v).     Better,  manner  of  life 
See  on  1  Pet.  i.  15. 


88  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  L 

In  the  Jews'  religion  (^iv  r^*IovSaUr/i^^.  Only  here  and 
ver.  14.  Lit.  in  Judaism.  It  signifies  his  nationiLl  religious 
condition.  In  LXX,  2  Mace.  ii.  21 ;  yiii.  2 ;  xiy.  88 ; 
4  Mace.  iv.  26. 

Beyond  measure  (/ica^  iirepfioX^p).  P^.  Lit.  aeeording 
to  excess.  The  noun  primarily  means  a  casting  beyond^  thence 
superiority^  exeeUeney.  See  2  Cor.  iv.  7, 17.  It  is  translit- 
erated in  hyperbole.  For  similar  phrases  comp.  1  Cor.  ii.  1 ; 
Acts  xix.  20 ;  iii.  17 ;  xxv.  28. 

Wasted  (ivSpOovv).  Better,  laid  waste.  In  Class,  applied 
not  only  to  things  —  cities,  walls,  fields,  etc.  —  but  also  to 
persons.     So  Acts  ix.  21. 

14.  Profited  (TrpoAcowrov).  Better,  advanced.  See  on  is 
far  spent^  Rom.  xiii.  12.  Paul  means  that  he  outstripped  his 
Jewish  contemporaries  in  distinctively  Jewish  culture,  zeal, 
and  activity.     Comp.  Philip,  iii.  4-6. 

Equals  (awriXucuiyra^).  N.  T.^.  The  A.  V.  is  indefinite. 
The  meaning  is  equals  in  age.     So  Rev.,  of  mine  own  age. 

Nation  (y4vei).  Race.  Not  sect  of  the  Pharisees.  Comp. 
Philip,  iii.  5 ;  2  Cor.  xi.  26 ;  Rom.  ix.  3. 

Zealous  (Ji^Xon^).  Lit.  a  zealot.  The  extreme  party  of 
the  Pharisees  called  themselves  "zealots  of  the  law" ;  "zeal- 
ots of  6od."  See  on  Simon  the  Canaanite^  Mk.  iii.  18.  Paul 
describes  himself  under  this  name  in  his  speech  on  the  stairs. 
Acts  xxii.  8.     Comp.  Philip,  iii.  5,  6. 

Traditions  (irapah6a&isv).  The  Pharisaic  traditions  which 
had  been  engrafted  on  the  law.  See  Matt.  xv.  2,  6 ;  Mk, 
vii.  8, 18,  and  on  2  Th.  u.  15. 

16.  It  pleased  (€vS6icriaep).  See  on  €uio/cla  good  pleamir^^ 
1  Th.  i.  11. 


Ch.  I.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OALATIANS.  89 

Separated  (a^pUrtK^.  Set  apart:  designated.  See  on 
Rom.  i.  1,  and  declared^  Rom.  i.  4.  The  A.  V.  wrongly  lends 
itself  to  the  sense  of  the  physical  separation  of  the  child  from 
the  mother. 

From  my  mother's  womb  (jU  koCKUl^  firirpo^  fiov).  Before 
I  was  bom.  Others,  from  the  time  of  my  birth.  A  few  pas- 
sages in  LXX  go  to  sustain  the  former  view :  Judg.  xvi.  17 ; 
Isa.  xliv.  2,  24 ;  xlix.  1,  5.  That  view  is  also  favored  by 
those  instances  in  which  a  child's  destiny  is  clearly  fixed  by 
God  before  birth,  as  Samson,  Judg.  xvi.  17;  comp.  xiii. 
5,  7  ;  John  the  Baptist,  L.  i.  15.  See  also  Matt.  xix.  12. 
The  usage  of  iK  as  marking  a  temporal  starting  point  is 
familiar.     See  J.  vi.  66  ;  ix.  1 ;  Acts  ix.  33 ;  xxiv.  10. 

Called  (/icaX^a^).  See  on  Rom.  iv.  17.  Referring  to 
Paul's  call  into  the  kingdom  and  service  of  Christ.  It  need 
not  be  limited  to  his  experience  at  Damascus,  but  may  include 
the  entire  chain  of  divine  influences  which  led  to  his  convers- 
ion and  apostleship.  He  calls  himself  tcXtirh^  itirArroXo^  an 
apo$tle  by  caU^  Rom.  i.  1 ;  1  Cor.  i.  1. 

16.  To  reveal  his  Son  In  me  (^airotcaXvy^  riv  vlhv  avrov 
iv  ifioi).  In  N.  T.  airoKaXvTrreiv  to  reveal  is  habitually  used 
with  the  simple  dative  of  the  subject  of  the  revelation,  as  L. 
X.  21.  Once  with  €U  unto^  Rom.  viii.  18  :  with  iv  in  of  the 
sphere  in  which  the  revelation  takes  place,  only  here,  unless 
Rom.  i.  17  be  so  explained ;  but  there  iv  is  probably  instru- 
mental. Render  iv  here  by  the  simple  in:  in  my  spirit, 
according  to  the  familiar  N.  T.  idea  of  God  revealing  him- 
self, living  and  working  in  man's  inner  personality.  See,  for 
instance,  Rom.  i.  19;  v.  5 ;  viii.  10,  11 ;  1  Cor.  iii.  16 ;  xiv. 
25 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  6 ;  1  J.  ii.  5,  14,  etc.  Lightfoot  explains,  to 
reveal  hU  Son  hy  or  through  me  to  others.  But  apart  from 
the  doubtful  use  of  iv^  this  introduces  prematurely  the  thought 
of  Paul's  influence  in  his  subsequent  ministry.  He  is  speak- 
ing of  the  initial  stages  of  his  experience. 


do  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Cb.  I. 

Immediately  (eiff^^.  Connect  only  with  leanferred  not, 
etc.  Not  with  the  whole  sentence  down  to  Arabia.  Paul  is 
emphasising  the  fact  that  he  did  not  receive  his  commission 
from  men.  As  soon  as  God  revealed  his  Son  in  me,  I  threw 
aside  all  human  counsel. 

Conferred  Qrrpoaav^OefJLtfp).  P^.  and  only  in  Galatians. 
Rare  in  Class.  The  verb  avanOivai  means  to  lay  upon  ;  hence 
intrust  to.  Middle  voice,  to  intrust  one's  self  to;  to  impart  or 
communicate  to  another.  The  compounded  preposition  7rpd9 
implies  more  than  direction;  rather  communication  or  relation 
with^  according  to  a  frequent  use  of  irpio^.  The  whole  com- 
pound then,  is  to  put  one's  self  into  communication  with.  Wet- 
stein  gives  an  example  from  Diodorus,  De  Alexandre^  xvii. 
116,  where  the  word  is  used  of  consulting  soothsayers. 

Flesh  and  blood.  Always  in  N.  T.  with  a  suggestion  of 
human  weakness  or  ignorance.  See  Matt.  xvi.  17  ;  1  Cor. 
XV.  50 ;  Eph.  vi.  12. 

17.  Went  I  up  (avrjXdov).  Comp.  ver.  18.  Only  in  this 
chapter,  and  J.  vi.  3.  More  commonly  avafiaCveiv^  often  of 
the  journey  to  Jerusalem,  probably  in  the  conventional  sense 
in  which  Englishmen  speak  of  going  up  to  London,  no  matter 
from  what  point.  See  Matt.  xx.  17;  Mk.  x.  82;  J.  ii.  13; 
Acts  xi.  2.  In  Acts  xviii.  22  the  verb  is  used  absolutely  of 
going  to  Jerusalem.  The  reading  airrjjkOov  I  went  away  has 
strong  support,  and  is  adopted  by  Weiss.  In  that  case  the 
meaning  would  be  went  away  to  Jerusalem  from  where  I  then 
was. 

Apostles  before  me.  In  point  of  seniority.  Comp.  Rom. 
xvi.  7. 

Arabia.  It  is  entirely  impossible  to  decide  what  Paul 
means  by  this  term,  since  the  word  was  so  loosely  used  and 
so  variously  applied.  Many  think  the  Sinaitic  peninsula  is 
meant  (Stanley,  Farrar,  Matheson,  Lightfoot).     Others,  the 


Ch.  I.]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIANS.  91 

district  of  Auranitis  near  Damascus  (Lipsius,  Conybeare  and 
Howson,  Lewin,  McGiffert).  Others  again  the  district  of 
Arabia  Petraea. 

18.  To  see  (UrropfjaaC).  N.  T.^.  1.  To  inquire  into: 
2.  to  find  out  hy  inquiring:  8.  to  gain  knowledge  by  visiting ; 
to  become  personally  acquainted  vfith.  In  LXX,  only  1  E^. 
i.  83, 42,  to  relate^  to  record.  Often  in  Class.  The  word  here 
indicates  that  Paul  went,  not  to  obtain  instruction,  but  to 
form  acquaintance  with  Peter. 

Cephas.    See  on  Matt.  xvi.  18;  J.  i.  42;  1  Cor.  i.  12. 

19.  Save  James  (el  fi^).  With  the  usual  exceptive  sense. 
I  saw  none  save  James.  Not,  I  saw  none  other  of  the  apos- 
tles, but  I  saw  James.  James  is  counted  as  an  apostle, 
though  not  reckoned  among  the  twelve.  For  Paulas  use  of 
**  apostle,'*  see  on  1  Th.  i.  1,  and  comp.  1  Cor.  xv.  4-7. 

The  Lord's  brother.  Added  in  order  to  distinguish  him 
from  James  the  son  of  Zebedee  (Matt.  iv.  21 ;  x.  2 ;  Mk.  x. 
85),  who  was  still  living,  and  from  James  the  son  of  Alphaeus 
(Matt.  X.  3).*  The  Lord's  brother  means  that  James  was  a 
son  of  Joseph  and  Mary.  This  view  is  known  as  the  Helvid- 
ian  theory^  from  Helvidius,  a  layman  of  Rome,  who  wrote, 
about  880,  a  book  against  mariolatry  and  ascetic  celibacy. 
The  explanations  which  differ  from  that  of  Helvidius  have 
grown,  largely,  out  of  the  desire  to  maintain  the  perpetual 
virginity  of  Mary.  Jerome  has  given  his  name  to  a  theory 
known  as  the  Hieronymian,  put  forth  in  reply  to  Helvidius, 
about  888,  according  to  which  the  brethren  of  the  Lord  were 
the  sons  of  his  mother's  sister,  Mary  the  wife  of  Alphaeus  or 
Clopas,  and  therefore  Jesus'  cousins.  A  third  view  bears  the 
name  of  Epiphanius,  Bishop  of  Salamis  in  Cyprus  (o&.  404), 


•  See  IntTodwstUm  to  the  Caiholic  EpiaOeM^  VoL  L,  p.  6161,  andJ.  B. 
Mayor,  The  JEpiiOe  of  8t,  James,  XXXVL-XLI. 


92  WORD  STUDIES  IN  TH£  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Gk.  I. 

and  ia  that  the  Lord's , brothers  were  sons  of  Joseph  by  a 
former  wife.* 

20.  I  lie  not.    Comp.  Rom.  ix.  1 ;  2  Cor.  xi.  81 ;  1  Tim. 

u.  7. 

21.  Regions  (^tcXtfiara).  P^.  Comp.  Rom.  xv.  28 ;  2  Cot. 
xi.  10.  KXl/Ao^  originally  an  inelinatian  or  %lope  of  ground: 
the  supposed  slope  of  the  earth  from  the  equator  to  the  pole. 
The  ancient  geographers  ran  imaginary  parallel  lines  from 
the  equator  toward  the  pole,  and  the  spaces  or  zones  or 
regions  between  these  lines,  viewed  in  their  slope  or  inclina- 
tion toward  the  pole,  were  xXifiara,  The  word  came  to  sig^ 
nify  the  temperature  of  these  zones,  hence  our  climate.  In 
Chaucer's  treatise  on  the  Astrolabe,  chapter  xxxix.  is  headed 
^^  Descripcion  of  the  Meridional  Lyne,  of  Longitudes  and 
Latitudes  of  Citees  and  Townes  from  on  to  a-nother  of  Cly- 
matz.*'  He  says:  **The  longitude  of  a  clymat  is  a  lyne 
imagined  fro  est  to  west,  y-lyke  distant  by-twene  them  sdle. 
The  latitude  of  a  clymat  is  a  lyne  imagined  fro  north  to  south 
the  space  of  the  erthe,  fro  the  byginning  of  the  firste  clymat 
unto  the  verrey  ende  of  the  same  clymat,  even  directe  agayns 
the  pole  artik.''  In  poetical  language,  ^^ climes''  is  used  for 
regions  of  the  earth,  as  Milton : 

**  Whateyer  clime  the  sun's  bright  ciide  warms.** 

Syria  and  Cilicia.  Syria,  in  the  narrower  sense,  of  the 
district  of  which  Antioch  was  the  capital :  not  the  whole 
Roman  province  of  Syria,  including  Gkdilee  and  Judaea. 
Matt.  iv.  24  ;  L.  ii.  2  ;  Acts  xx.  3.  This  district  was  the 
scene  of  Paul's  first  apostolic  work  among  the  Gentiles. 
Cilicia  was  the  southeasterly  province  of  Asia  Minor,  directly 
adjoining  Syria,  from  which  it  was  separated  by  Mt.  Pierius 
and  the  range  of  Amanus.     It  was  bordered  by  the  Mediter- 

*  The  reader  who  is  curious  about  the  matter  may  consult  J.  B.  Mayor, 
The  EpUiU  of  St,  James^  ch.  L  He  holds  the  Helvidlan  theory.  Also  J.  B. 
Lightfoot,  St.  PauVa  BpiiUe  to  the  OiUatians,  essay  on  ''The  Brethren  of 
the  Lord.*'    He  holds  the  Epiphanian  theory. 


Ch   U.]  the  epistle  to  the  GALATIAN8.  98 

ranean  ou  the  south.      It  was  Paulas  native  province,  and  its 
capital  was  Tarsus,  Paul's  birthplace. 

22.  Was  unknown  (rifiv^  aypoov/ieiw^.  Better,  was  still 
unknown^  the  imperfect  denoting  that  he  remained  unknown 
during  his  stay  in  Syria  and  Cilicia. 

Of  Judaea.  The  province,  as  distinguished  from  Jerusa- 
lem, where  he  must  have  been  known  as  the  persecutor  of 
the  church.     See  Acts  ix.  1, 2. 

Which  were  in  Christ.    See  on  1  Th.  ii.  14. 

23.  They  had  heard  (Jucovovre;  9iaav).  Correlative  with 
I  was  unknown^  ver.  22.  Note  the  periphrasis  of  the  parti- 
ciple with  the  substantive  verb,  expressing  duration.  They 
were  hearing  all  the  time  that  I  was  thus  unknown  to  them 
in  person. 

The  faith.  See  on  Acts  vi.  7,  and  comp.  2  Th.  iii.  2.  The 
subjective  conception  of  faith  as  trustful  and  assured  accept- 
ance of  Jesus  Christ  as  Saviour,  tends  to  become  objective, 
so  that  the  subjective  principle  is  sometimes  regarded  objec- 
tively.    This  is  very  striking  in  the  Pastoral  Epistles. 

24.  In  me.  The  sense  is  different  from  that  in  ver.  16, 
see  note.  Here  the  meaning  is  that  they  glorified  God  as 
the  author  and  source  of  what  they  saw  in  me. 


CHAPTER  n. 

1.  Fourteen  years  after  (5i^  SacaTeaa-dpav  ir&v).  Rev. 
after  the  space  of  fourteen  years.  Comp.  &*  ir&p  wXeuipw 
after  severed  yearsy  Acts  xxiv.  17 ;  hC  iiiup&v  cfter  (some} 
days^  Mk.  ii.  1.  Ai^  means  q/^r,  that  is,  a  given  number  of 
years  being  interposed  between  two  points  of  time.  Not, 
in  the  course  ^(Rev.  marg.). 


94  WOBD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ck.  IL 

2.  By  revelation  {xariL  &votcd\vy^ip).  It  was  specially 
and  divinely  revealed  to  me  that  I  should  go.  In  what  way, 
he  does  not  state. 

Communicated  (&v€0^fifip).  Only  here  and  Acts  xxv.  14. 
'Avflt  up,  TiOdpai  to  set.  To  set  up  a  thing  for  the  considera- 
tion of  others :  to  lay  it  before  them. 

Unto  tliem  (^airroh^.  The  Christians  of  Jerusalem  gen- 
erally. 

Privately  (^xar  ISCav).  The  general  communication  to  the 
Jerusalem  Christians  was  accompanied  by  a  private  consult* 
ation  with  the  leaders.  Not  that  a  different  subject  was 
discussed  in  private,  but  that  the  discussion  was  deeper  and 
more  detailed  than  would  have  befitted  the  whole  body  of 
Christians. 

To  them  which  were  of  reputation  (rok  SoKownv).    Lit. 

to  those  who  seem;  are  reputed.  Men  of  recognised  position, 
James,  Cephas,  John.  Not  his  adversaries  who  were  adher- 
ents of  these  three.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  he  would 
submit  his  gospel  to  such.  The  expression  is  therefore  not 
used  ironically.  Paul  recognises  the  honorable  position  of 
the  three  and  their  rightful  claim  to  respect.  The  repetition 
of  the  phrase  (vv.  6,  9)  may  point  to  a  favorite  expression 
of  his  opponents  in  commen^ng  these  leaders  to  Paul  as 
models  for  his  preaching  ;  hardly  (as  Lightfoot)  to  the  con- 
trast between  the  estimation  in  which  they  were  held  and 
the  actual  services  which  they  rendered  to  him.  He  chooses 
this  expression  because  the  matter  at  stake  was  his  recogni- 
tion by  the  earlier  apostles,  and  any  ironical  designation 
would  be  out  of  place.* 

Lest  by  any  means  I  should  run  or  had  run  in  vain. 

Better,  should  be  running.     Comp.  Philip,  ii.  16.     This  is 

*  For  the  expression  cl  SoxoGrrn  in  Class.,  see  Thucyd.  L  76;  Eorip.  Bee* 
296;  7Vo<id.609. 


Ch.  n.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIAKS.  95 

sometimes  explained  as  implying  a  misgiving  on  Paul's  part 
as  to  the  soundness  of  his  own  teaching,  which  he  desired  to 
have  set  at  rest  by  the  decision  of  the  principal  apostles. 
On  this  explanation  /it;  7ri»9  will  be  rendered  lest  in  some 
way  or  other.  But  such  a  misgiving  is  contrary  to  Paul's 
habitual  attitude  of  settled  conviction  respecting  that  gospel 
which  he  had  received  by  revelation,  and  in  the  preaching 
of  which  he  had  been  confirmed  by  experience.  In  consult- 
ing the  Christians  at  Jerusalem  Paul  had  principally  in 
view  the  formal  indorsement  of  his  work  by  the  church  and 
its  leaders.  Their  formal  declaration  that  he  had  not  been 
running  in  vain  would  materially  aid  him  in  his  mission. 
My;  7ra>9  is  therefore  to  be  taken  as  marking  an  indirect 
question,  whether  —  not  possibly  ;  and  the  sense  of  the  whole 
passage  is  as  follows  :  ^^  I  laid  before  them  that  gospel  which 
I  preach  to  the  Gentiles,  that  they  might  examine  and  settle 
for  themselves  the  question  whether  I  am  not  possibly  run- 
ning or  had  run  in  vain."  The  investigation  was  to  be  for 
their  satisfaction,  not  for  Paul's.*  Run  (rpix^iv)  is  a  favorite 
metaphor  with  Paul.  See  Rom.  ix.  16 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  24,  26 ; 
Gal.  V.  7 ;  Philip,  ii.  16 ;  iii.  13,  14. 

3.  Neither  (ovS^).  More  correctly,  not  even.  So  far  were 
they  from  pronouncing  my  labour  in  vain,  that  not  even  Titus 
was  compelled  to  be  circumcised,  although  he  was  a  Greek. 
Though  approving  Paul's  preaching,  the  apostles  might,  for 
the  sake  of  conciliation,  have  insisted  on  the  circumcision  of 
his  Gentile  companion. 

Being  a  Qreek  (^EWriv  &v).  Or,  although  he  was  a  Cheek. 
Const,  closely  with  aiiv  ifiol  with  me.    It  was  a  bold  proceed- 

*  ThiB  explanation  is  adopted  by  Sieffert,  Meyer,  and  Weizsftcker.  The 
expositors  generally  admit  that  no  doubt  on  PauPs  part  is  implied  (so  Winer, 
Alford,  Lipsius,  Ellicott,  Lightfoot),  but  mostly  insist  on  the  first  sense  of 
Mi^  won.  The  difficulty  of  reconciling  these  two  positions,  which  is  clearly 
recognised  by  Ellicott^  is  evaded  by  referring  r^w  and  HSpaitov  to  the  opin- 
ions of  others.  So  Ellicott:  *'If  others  deemed  Paul's  past  and  present 
course  fruitless,  it  really  must,  in  that  respect,  have  amounted  to  a  loss  of 
past  and  present  labour.** 


96  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Cs.  H 

ing  for  Paul  to  take  an  uncircumcised  Gentile  with  him  to 
the  conference  at  Jerusalem. 

Was  compelled  to  be  circumcised  (fjvajtcdfrOtf  ir^r/Mf- 
Orjvcu).  That  is,  no  constraint  was  applied  by  the  Jemsalem 
church  and  its  authorities  for  the  circumcision  of  Titos. 
The  statement  is  not  that  such  an  attempt  was  pressed  but 
successfully  resisted,  but  that  circumcision  was  not  insisted 
on  by  the  church.  The  pressure  in  that  direction  came  from 
*'  the  false  brethren  "  described  in  the  next  verse. 

4.  The  false  brethren  (rois  'i^^euiaZik^wk).  Only  here 
and  2  Cor.  xi.  26.  Christians  in  name  only;  Judaisers; 
anti-Paulinists.  The  article  marks  them  as  a  well-known 
class. 

Unawares  brought  In  Qn-apeurdtcrov^^.  N.  T.^.  Lit.  brought 
in  by  the  side^  and  so  imidiauslif^  ilU^ally.  Vulg.  iubintro- 
ductoi.  ^LXX.  Strabo  (xvii.  1)  uses  it  as  an  epithet  of 
Ptolemy,  "the  sneak."  Comp.  irapeurd^ovav  %hM  privUy 
bring  in^  2  Pet.  ii.  1 ;  and  irapeia-eBvrfaau  crept  in  privily^  Jude 
4.  Brought  tn,  not  from  Jerusalem  into  the  church  at 
Antioch,  nor  into  the  Pauline  churches  generally,  but  into 
the  Christian  brotherhood  to  which  they  did  not  rightfully 
belong. 

Who  (orTti^).  The  double  relative  introduces  the  explan- 
ation of  the  two  preceding  epithets :  false  brethren,  privily 
brought  in,  iince  they  came  in  privily  to  spy  out  our  liberty. 

Came  In  privily  (irapeiaijXdov).  Lit.  came  in  bende.  Only 
liere  and  Rom.  v.  20,  where  it  implies  nothing  evil  or  secret, 
but  merely  something  subsidiary.  The  aorist  has  a  pluper- 
fect sense,  indicating  the  earlier  intrusion  of  these  persons 
into  the  Christian  community. 

To  spy  out  (^fcaraaKoir^ai).  N.  T.^.  In  LXX,  of  spying 
out  a  territory,  2  Sam.  x.  3 ;  1  Chron.  xix.  8. 


Ch.  n.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIANS.  97 

Liberty  (ikmOepCav).  Freedom  from  Moeaism  through 
justification  by  faith. 

Bring  us  into  bondage  (KaraSouKAaovaip).  Only  here 
and  2  Cor.  xi.  20.  Bring  us  into  subjection  to  Jewish  ordin- 
ances.    The  compound  verb  indicates  aiu'eet  subjection. 

5.  We  gave  place  by  subjection  (^d^a/iev  rg  inroray^^. 
We^  Paul  and  Barnabas.  Gave  place  or  yielded,  N.  T.^.  By 
tfie  subjection  which  was  denuinded  of  us.  The  noun  only 
in  Paul  and  the  Pastorals,  and  always  in  the  sense  of  «e{f- 
Bubjection.     Comp.  2  Cor.  ix.  18 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  11 ;  iii.  4. 

6.  Render  the  passage  as  follows  :  ^  But  to  be  something 
from  (at  the  hands  of)  those  who  were  of  repute,  whatever 
they  were,  matters  nothing  to  me  (God  accepteth  not  man*8 
person),  for  those  who  were  of  repute  imparted  nothing  to 
me. 

To  be  something  (eZm/  ri).  Comp.  ch.  vi.  8 ;  Acts  v. 
86 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  11.  To  be  in  good  standing  as  an  evangelist 
or  apostle,  approved  and  commissioned  by  high  authorities. 

From  those  who  were  of  repute  {&ir6  r&v  Soicowrmv). 

From^  at  the  hands  of ;  as  receiving  my  indorsement  or  com- 
mission from  them.    Comp.  ch.  i.  1.    Of  repute^  see  on  ver.  2. 

Whatsoever  they  were  (motot  work  ^av).  Uor^  in  N.  T. 
is  invariably  temporal,  and  points  here  to  the  preeminence 
which  these  apostles  had  formerly^  up  to  the  time  of  Paul's 
visit,  enjoyed,  because  of  their  personal  connection  with 
Jesus.* 

Maketh  no  matter  to  me  (ou5^  /mm  &a^^).  Paul  does 
not  say,  as  A.  V.  and  Rev.,  that  the  standing  and  repute  of 

•  Othen,  M  M07«r,  EDIoott,  Sleflert,  taka  wvri  m  itreiigUMning  the  indef- 
inite MDM  of  6roSM  like  the  Latin  eunque,    «« WhateTer  in  the  vfortd  th^f 
were.**    Thia  aenae  of  wvri  ooeon  in  Claaik  but  not  in  N.  T. 
TOL.  nr. — 7 


98  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  IL 

the  apostles  were  matters  of  indifference  to  him,  but  that  he 
was  indifferent  about  receiving  his  commission  from  them  as 
recognised  dignitaries  of  the  church.  The  construction  is : 
**  To  be  something  (^ehai  ri)  at  the  hands  of  (&7ro)  those  who 
were  of  repute  matters  nothing  to  me." 

Qod  accepteth  no  man's  person.  Or  more  strictly, 
aeeepteth  not  the  person  of  man.  Parenthetical.  AafA/3dp€iP 
wp6a'orn'OP  to  receive  or  accept  the  face  is  a  Hebraism.  See  on 
Jas.  ii.  1.  In  O.  T.  both  in  a  good  and  a  bad  sense ;  to  be 
gracioue^  and  to  show  favour  from  personal  or  partisan  motives. 
In  N.  T.  only  here  and  L.  xx.  21,  both  in  a  bad  sense.  Sim- 
ilar Hebraistic  expressions  are  fiXjTreiP  ek  wpoa-cmrov  to  look  at 
the  faee^  Matt.  xxii.  16 :  davfjui^eip  irpoa-orrra  to  admire  the 
countenances^  Jude  16  :  navxaadcu  iv  irpoadnr^  to  glory  in  the 
face,  2  Cor.  v.  12. 

For — to  me.  Explaining  the  previous  statement.  To  be 
of  consequence  because  commissioned  by  those  in  repute  mat- 
ters nothing  to  me  (God  accepteth  not  man's  person),  for 
although  they  might  have  asserted  their  high  repute  and 
authority  to  others,  to  me  they  did  not,  as  was  shown  by 
their  imposing  on  me  no  new  requirements. 

In  conference  added  nothing  (ox^v  irpwravSano^.  In 
conference  is  an  attempt  to  conform  the  sense  to  ch.  i.  16. 
The  verb  without  the  accusative,  as  there,  means  to  confer 
with.  Here,  with  the  accusative,  the  meaning  is  laid  upon 
or  imposed  on.  Rend,  therefore,  imposed  nothing  on  me. 
They  imposed  on  me  no  new  Qirph^  additional)  requirements ; 
no  conditions  or  limitations  of  my  missionary  work.* 

7.   The  gospel  of  the  uncircumcision  (t&  evayy^Xiop  Tfj9 

iucpo^varla^).     The  phrase  only  here  in  N.  T.     The  gospel 

*  It  is  objected  that  this  meaning  is  precluded  by  the  middle  Toice,  which 
requires  us  to  render  undertook.  But  the  word  in  the  middle  Toice  is  used 
in  an  active  sense  (see  Xen.  Cyr,  viii.  5,  4).  It  may  mean  to  toy  upon 
another  for  one*8  own  use  or  advantage  (Xeu.  Anab.  ii.  2, 4).  So  here.  Thej 
imposed  no  obligations  in  their  own  interest  as  Jewish  Christians. 


Cu.  U.]  THB  BPISTLB  TO   THE  GALATIAN8.  99 

which  was  to  be  preached  to  the  uncircumcised  —  the  Gen- 
tiles. Lightfoot  aptly  says:  ^^It  denotes  a  distinction  of 
sphere,  and  not  a  difference  of  type." 

8.  He  that  wrought  effectually  (6  ivepy^^ira^).  See  on 
1  Th.  ii.  13.  Rev.  omits  effectually^  but  it  is  fairly  implied 
in  the  verb.*  Comp.  1  Cor.  xii.  6;  Philip,  ii.  18;  Col.  i. 
29.     The  reference  is  to  God,  not  to  Christ. 

In  Peter  (Il^py).  Better, /or  Peter.  In  Peter  would  be 
iv  Ylerpfp, 

Unto  the  apostleship  (cfc).  Not  merely  with  reference  to 
the  apostleship,  but  with  the  design  of  making  him  an  apostle. 
Comp.  2  Cor.  ii.  12 ;  Col.  i.  29.  Observe  how  Paul  puts 
himself  on  an  equality  with  Peter. 

Unto  the  Qentiles  ^w  rh  l^vri).  To  make  me  an  apostle 
to  the  Gentiles. 

9.  Who  seemed  to  be  pillars  (ol  iotcowre:  arvkoi  thai). 
Better,  who  are  in  repute  as  pillars.  The  metaphor  of  pillars, 
applied  to  the  great  representatives  and  supporters  of  an 
institution,  is  old,  and  common  in  all  languages.! 

The  grace  (rtfp  x^P^^^*  Including  all  the  manifestations 
of  divine  grace  in  Paul  —  his  mission,  special  endowment, 
success  in  preaching  the  gospel  —  all  showing  that  he  was 

*  So  WeizBftcker,  wirksam  war :  and  Lipdus,  sich  wtrksam  erurie$en  hat. 

t  See  Pindar,  01.  ii.  146,  of  Hector;  Eorip.  J^.  T.  60,  66,  of  the  sons  of 
a  house.  Hor.  Carm.  L  36, 18,  starUem  eolumnam,  of  the  public  security 
and  stability.    Chaucer,  of  the  Frere,  Prol.  to  Canterbury  Tales^  214, 

*'  Un-to  his  ordre  he  was  a  noble  post** 

Milton,  Par.  X.  iL  802,  of  Beeliebab: 

*'  in  his  rising  seemed 
A  pillar  of  state.** 

Bee  also  Clement,  ad  Corinth,  V.,  and  in  N.  T.  1  Thn.  iiL  16 ;  Apoc  til  Ii. 


100  WORD  STUDIBS  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Gb.  IL 

worthy  of  their  fellowship.     He  is  careful  to  speak  of  it  as 
•  g\ft  of  God,  ioBelaap. 

They  gave  the  right  hands  of  fellowship  (Se^iin  &»Ka9 
KOiiHovla^).  The  phi-ase  only  here  in  N.  T.  A  token  of  alli- 
ance in  the  apostolic  office  of  preaching  and  teaching.  The 
giving  of  the  right  hand  in  pledge  was  not  a  distinctiyelj 
Jewish  custom.  It  appears  as  early  as  Homer.  Deissmann 
cites  an  inscription  from  Pergamum,  98  B.C.,  in  which  the 
Pergamenes  offer  to  adjust  the  strife  between  Sardes  and 
Ephesus,  and  send  a  mediator  hovpcu  r^  x^V^  ^  avXXua-iv 
to  give  hands  for  a  treaty.  See  Se^i^p  or  Se^ii^  SlSSpoi^ 
1  Mace.  vi.  58 ;  xi.  50,  62 ;  xiii.  50 ;  2  Mace.  xi.  26 ;  xii.  11 ; 
xiii.  22 ;  and  &f .  XafijSdveiv  to  receive  right  hand  or  handSj 
1  Mace.  xi.  66 ;  xiii.  50 ;  2  Mace.  xii.  12 ;  xiv.  19.*  The 
custom  prevailed  among  the  Persians,  from  whom  it  may 
have  passed  to  the  Jews.  See  Joseph.  Antiq.  xviii.  9,  8. 
Images  of  right  hands  clasped  were  sometimes  exchanged  in 
token  of  friendship  (see  Xen.  Anal.  ii.  4,  1).  Tacitus 
(^Rist.  i.  54)  says :  "  The  state  of  the  Lingones  had  sent, 
according  to  an  ancient  institution,  right  hands,  as  gifts  to 
the  legions,  a  signal  token  of  good  will."  On  Roman  coins 
often  appear  two  hands  joined,  with  various  inscriptions,  as 
Hxereituum  Fides;  Concordia  ;  Consensus.  To  give  the  hand 
in  confirmation  of  a  promise  occurs  £z.  x.  19.  In  Isa.  Ixii. 
8,  God  swears  by  his  right  hand. 

10.    Only.     With  only  this  stipulation. 

We  should  remember  (fivrffiovewofiev).  The  only  instance 
in  N.  T.  of  this  verb  in  the  sense  of  beneficent  care.  No 
instance  in  LXX.  In  Ps.  ix.  12,  there  is  the  thought  but 
not  the  word. 

*  Lightfoot  says  that,  in  patriarchal  times,  the  outward  gesture  which 
confirmed  an  oath  was  different,  and  refers  to  Gen.  xxiv.  2.  But  this  usage 
is  referred  to  in  only  one  other  place,  Gen.  xlvii.  29,  and  nothing  is  certainly 
known  as  to  the  significance  of  the  act.  See  the  interesting  note  on  Gen. 
xxiv.  2,  in  Lange's  Commentary. 


Ch.  n.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIAN8.  101 

The  poor  (r&p  irmx&v)*  The  poor  Christians  of  Pales- 
tine. Comp.  Acts  xxiv.  17 ;  Rom.  xv.  26,  27 ;  1  Cor.  xvi. 
8 ;  2  Cor.  ix.  1.  For  the  word,  see  on  Matt.  v.  8.  In  LXX 
ordinarily  of  those  who  are  oppressed,  in  contrast  with  rich 
and  powerful  oppressors ;  or  of  those  who  are  quiet  in  con- 
trast with  the  lawless. 

The  same  which  (8 — ainhrmho).  Lit.  which,  ihUvery 
thing.  The  expression  is  peculiarly  emphatic,  and  brings 
out  the  contrast  between  Judaising  hostility  and  Paul's 
spirit  of  loving  zeal.      Rev.  which  very  thing. 

11.  To  the  face  (icarh  wp6aoyrrov).  As  Acts  iii.  18.  The 
meaning  is  expressed  in  the  familiar  phrase  faced  him  doum. 
It  is,  however,  rarely  as  strong  as  this  in  N.  T.  Rather 
lefare  the  face,  or  in  the  face  of,  meaning  simply  in  the  sight 
or  presence  of  (L.  ii.  81),  or  (according  to  appearance  (2  Cor. 
i.  7).  The  explanation  that  Paul  withstood  Peter  only  in 
appearance  or  semblance  (so  Jerome,  Chrysostom,  Theodoret, 
and  other  Fathers)  is  one  of  the  curiosities  of  exegesis,  and 
was  probably  adopted  out  of  misplaced  consideration  for  the 
prestige  of  Peter. 

He  was  to  be  blamed  (^KareyveiHrfUpo^  ^p).  A.  V.  is 
wrong.  Rev.  correctly,  A«  stood  condemned.  Not  by  the 
body  of  Christians  at  Antioch  ;  rather  his  act  was  its  own 
condemnation. 

12.  Did  eat  with  (awi^Oiev).  A.  V.  misses  the  force  of 
the  imperfect,  marking  Peter's  custom.  Not  only  at  church 
feasts,  but  at  ordinary  meals,  in  defiance  of  the  Pharisaic 
prohibition.  Peter  had  been  shown  by  special  revelation 
that  this  prohibition  was  not  binding  (Acts  x.  28  ;  xi.  8,  9), 
and  had  defended  that  position  in  the  apostolic  conference 
(Acts  XV.  7ff.). 

Withdrew  and  separated  himself  (vTr^crreXXev/ical^k^cipiirey 
iavT6v).    Or,  began  to  withdraw,  etc.   'TiroardWeiP  only  here 


102  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NBW  TESTAMENT.       [Cte.  II 

in  Paul.  It  means,  originally,  to  draw  in  or  etnUrc^.  Thus 
of  furling  sails,  closing  the  fingers.  Middle  voice,  to  draw 
or  shrink  lack  from  through  fear.  Hence,  to  di$senU>le  or  pre^ 
varicate.  There  seems  to  be  no  special  reason  for  making  it 
either  a  military  metaphor,  as  Ligbtfoot,  or  a  nautical  meta- 
phor, as  Farrar.     See  on  Acts  xx.  20. 

13.  Dissembled  with  him  (awuiracptttfaap).  N.  T.^. 
Peter's  course  influenced  the  other  Jewidi  Christians  at 
Antioch,  who  had  previously  followed  his  example  in  eating 
with  Gentiles. 

Was  carried  away  (crwa^iTx^^)*  L^^*  ^^  carried  away 
mth  them  (avv).  In  Paul  only  here  and  Rom.  xii.  16,  on 
which  see  note.     In  LXX  once,  Ex.  xiv.  6. 

With  their  dissimulation  (ain&v  ry  irrroKpUr^i).  Not  to 
or  over  to  their  dissimulation.  Paul  uses  a  strong  word, 
which  is  employed  only  in  1  Tim.  iv.  2.  The  kindred  verb 
{nroKpiveaOcu  to  play  a  part^  and  the  noun  {nro/cpir^  hypocrite^ 
do  not  occur  in  his  letters.  Their  act  was  hypocrisy^  because 
it  was  a  concealment  of  their  own  more  liberal  conviction, 
and  an  open  profession  of  still  adhering  to  the  narrow  Phari- 
saic view.  It  was  ^^  a  practical  denial  of  their  better  spiritual 
insight"  (Wieseler).* 

14.  See  additional  note  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. 
Walked  not  uprightly  (^opOowoBowriv).  Lit.  are  not  walking. 
N.  T.^.     ^LXX.     ^Class.     Lit.  to  be  straight-footed. 

Being  a  Jew  (v7ra/^a>y).  The  verb  means  orig^inally  to 
begin;  thence  to  come  forth,  be  at  hand^  be  in  existence.  It  is 
sometimes  claimed  that  inrdpx€iv  as  distinguished  from  tlviu 
implies  an  antecedent  condition  —  being  originally.  That  is 
true  in  some  cases,  f      But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  sometimes 

«  See  a  striking  passage  in  Arrian's  Epictetui,  it  0. 
t  See  Thuc.  iv.  18 ;  vL  86  ;  Hdt  iL  15.    Comp.  the  meaning  to  he  takmi^ 
for  granted,  Plato,  J^p.  198  D ;  Tim.  80  C. 


Ch.  II.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIAN8.  103 

denotes  a  present  as  related  to  a  future  condition.*  The 
most  that  can  be  said  is  that  it  is  very  often  used  with  a 
relative  meaning,  but  that  it  often  is  found  simply  in  the 
sense  of  to  be. 

Livest  after  the  manner  of  Gentiles  {iOviKw  t^). 
'E^wicw,  N.  T.^.  The  force  of  the  present  livest  must  not 
be  pressed.  The  reference  is  not  strictly  temporal,  either  as 
referring  to  Peter's  former  intercourse  with  the  Gentile 
Christians,  or  as  indicating  that  he  was  now  associating  with 
them  at  table.  It  is  rather  the  statement  of  a  general  prin* 
ciple.  If  you,  at  whatever  time,  act  on  the  principle  of  living 
according  to  Gentile  usage.  At  the  time  of  Paul's  address 
to  Peter,  Peter  was  living  after  the  maimer  of  Jews  ('lovSa- 

Compellest  (ava^icd^eii).  Indirect  compulsion  exerted  by 
Peter's  example.  Not  that  he  directly  imposed  Jewish  sepa- 
ratism on  the  Gentile  converts. 

To  live  as  do  the  Jews  (^lovhat^eiv).  N.  T.^  Once  in 
LXX,  Esth.  viii.  17.  Also  in  Joseph.  B.  J.  ii.  18,  2,  and 
Plut.  Cie.  7.  It  is  used  by  Ignatius,  Magn.  x.  Xpicmapi^eip 
to  practise  Christianity  occurs  in  Origen. 

15.  We^  etc.  Continuation  of  Paul's  address;  not  the 
beginning  of  an  address  to  the  Galatians.  Under  we  Paul 
includes  himself,  Peter,  and  the  Jewish  Christians  of  Antioch, 
in  contrast  with  the  Gentile  Christians.  The  Galatians  were 
mostly  Gentiles. 

Who  are  Jews^  etc.  The  who  is  wrong.  Render  we  are 
Jews.  The  expression  is  concessive.  We  are,  I  grants  Jews. 
There  is  an  implied  emphasis  on  the  special  prerogatives  and 
privileges  of  the  Jews  as  such.     See  Rom.  iii.  If.;  ix.  1  ff. 

•  Hdt  vii.  144 ;  Thoc.  ii.  64.    Comp.  Aeech.  Agam.  961,  to  he  in  store. 


104  WORD  STITDIBS  IN  THE  NEW  TBBTAMBNT.      [G&  IL 

Sinners  of  the  Gentiles  (i^  iOvAv  afuifnmXoC).  Lit.  sin- 
ners taken  from  the  Gentiles,  or  9prungfrom.  Sinners^  in  the 
conventional  Jewish  sense ;  bom  heathen,  and  as  such  sin- 
ners; not  implying  that  Jews  are  not  sinners.  The  Jew 
regarded  the  Grentile  as  impure,  and  styled  him  a  dog  (Matt. 
XV.  27).  See  Rom.  ii.  12 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  1 ;  ix.  21 ;  Eph.  ii. 
12 ;  L.  xviii.  82 ;  xxiv.  7.  Possibly  Paul  here  cites  the  very 
words  by  which  Peter  sought  to  justify  his  separation  from 
the  Gentile  Christians,  and  takes  up  these  words  in  order  to 
draw  from  them  an  opposite  conclusion.  This  is  quite 
according  to  Paul's  habit. 

16.  Justified  (hKcuoinaC).  See  on  Rom.  iii.  20, 26.  The 
meaning  to  declare  or  pronounce  righteous  cannot  be  consist- 
ently carried  through  Paul's  writings  in  the  interest  of  a 
theological  fiction  of  imputed  righteousness.  See,  for  exam- 
ple, Rom.  iv.  25  ;  1  Cor.  vi.  11 ;  and  all  passages  where  the 
word  is  used  to  describe  justification  by  works  of  the  law,  as 
here,  ch.  iii.  11 ;  v.  4.  If  one  is  justified  by  the  works  f** 
the  law,  his  righteousness  is  a  recU  righteousness,  foundea 
upon  his  conformity  to  the  law.  Why  is  the  righteousness 
of  faith  any  less  a  real  righteousness  ? 

By  tlie  works  of  tlie  law  (i(  lpy<op  v6fjLov).  Lit.  out  of 
the  works,  etc.  Comp.  Rom.  iii.  20.  Works  are  character- 
istic of  a  legal  dispensation.  Paul  often  puts  ^^ works"  alone 
as  representing  legal  righteousness.  See  Rom.  iv.  2,  6 ;  ix. 
11,  32 ;  xi.  6  ;  Eph.  ii.  9. 

But  by  faitli  (ihv  iiif).  As  the  Greek  stands,  it  would 
read,  "  Is  not  justified  by  the  works  of  the  law  save  through 
faith.^*  So,  unfortunately.  Rev.  This  would  mean,  as  the 
Romish  interpreters,  not  through  works  of  the  law  except  they 
be  done  through  faith  in  Christy  and  would  ascribe  justification 
to  works  which  grow  out  of  faith.  Paul  means  that  justifi- 
cation is  by  faith  alone.  The  use  of  Hlp  /a^  is  to  be  thus 
explained  :  A  man  is  not  justified  by  the  works  of  the  law  : 
(he  is  not  justified)  except  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.    *B^  ftii 


CSb.  n.]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIAK8.  105 

retains  its  exceptive  force,  but  the  exception  refers  only  to 
the  verb.  Comp.  c»  /a^  in  Matt.  xii.  4 ;  L.  iv.  26,  27 ;  Gal. 
i.  19 ;  Apoc.  xxi.  27. 

By  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  (&^  wlarem  Xpurrov  *Iffaov). 
Properly,  Christ  Jesus.  Faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  according  to 
a  common  usage.  See  J.  v.  42  ;  1  J.  ii.  5, 15 ;  Acts  ix.  81 ; 
Mk.  xi.  22;  Rom.  iii.  22 ;  Gal.  iii.  22.  Paul  uses  different 
prepositions  in  describing  the  relations  of  faith  and  works  to 
righteousness ;  probably  not  always  with  a  distinct  intention 
of  giving  different  shades  of  thought.  Here,  through  (StA) 
faith  and  out  of  (^f )  works.  Here  and  Rom.  iii.  30,  out  of 
(he)  faith.  Philip,  iii.  9,  righteousness  through  (&^)  faith, 
and  from  (iic)  God,  resting  upon  (Arl)  faith.  Ai^  marks  faith 
as  the  medium  of  justification;  ifc  as  the  source;  M  as  the 
foundation.    *E(  is  habitually  used  with  works. 

Flesh  (a-dp^).  See  on  Rom.  vii.  5.  For  no  flesh  see  on 
Rom.  iii.  20. 

17.  Are  found  (evpStf/iev).  More  correctly,  were  found : 
were  discovered  and  shown  to  be.  See  Rom.  vii.  10;  1  Cor. 
XV.  15 ;  2  Cor.  v.  3 ;  Philip,  ii.  8  ;  iii.  9. 

Sinners  (a/iafyrooikoC).  Like  the  Gentiles,  ver.  15.  Paul 
assumes  that  this  was  actually  the  case :  that,  seeking  to  be 
justified  in  Christ,  they  were  found  to  be  sinners.  To  seek 
to  be  justified  by  Christ  is  an  admission  that  there  is  no  jus- 
tification by  works ;  that  the  seeker  is  unjustified,  and  there- 
fore a  sinner.  The  effort  to  attain  justification  by  faith  in 
Christ  develops  the  consciousness  of  sin.  It  compels  the 
seeker,  whether  Jew  or  Gentile,  to  put  himself  upon  the 
conmion  plane  of  sinners.  The  Jew  who  calls  the  Gentile  a 
sinner,  in  seeking  to  be  justified  by  faith,  finds  himself  a  sin- 
ner also.  The  law  has  failed  him  as  a  justifying  agency. 
But  Paul  is  careful  to  repudiate  the  false  inference  from  this 
fact,  stated  in  what  immediately  follows,  namely,  that  Christ 
is  a  minister  of  sin. 


lOii  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Gh.  JL 

Minister  of  sin.     A  promoter  of  sin  by  causing  us  to 

abandon  the  law. 


Qod  forbid  (/a^  ^ivono).  See  on  Rom.  iii.  4.  Not  a 
reply  merely  to  the  question  "  is  Christ  a  minister  of  sin  ?  " 
but  to  the  whole  supposition  from  ^^if  while  we  seek."  The 
question  is  not  whether  Christ  is  in  general  a  minister  of  sin, 
but  whether  he  is  such  in  the  case  supposed.  Paul  does  not 
assume  that  this  false  inference  has  been  drawn  by  Peter  or 
the  other  Jewish  Christians. 

20.  I  build  again  the  things  which  I  destroyed  (h  mari- 
\vaa  ravra  irdXiv  oUoBofiA).  Peter,  by  his  Christian  profes- 
sion, had  asserted  that  justification  was  by  faith  alone  ;  and 
by  his  eating  with  Gentiles  had  declared  that  the  Mosaic  law 
was  no  longer  binding  upon  him.  He  had  thus,  figuratively, 
destroyed  or  pvlled  down  the  Jewish  law  as  a  standard  of 
Christian  faith  and  conduct.  By  his  subsequent  refusal  to 
eat  with  Gentiles  he  had  retracted  this  declaration,  had 
asserted  that  the  Jewish  law  was  still  binding  upon  Christians, 
and  had  thus  built  again  what  he  had  pulled  down.  Build- 
ing and  pulling  do^vn  are  favorite  figures  with  Paul.  See 
Rom.  xiv.  20;  xv.  20;  1  Cor.  viii.  1,  10;  x.  28;  xiv.  4,  17; 
Eph.  ii.  20  f .  For  KaraXveiv  destroj/y  see  on  Rom.  xiv.  20  ; 
2  Cor.  v.  1. 

I  make  myself  (Jijmvtov  avpurrdpm).  Better,  prove  myseff. 
The  verb  originally  means  to  put  together :  thence  to  put  one 
person  in  contact  with  another  by  way  of  introducing  him 
and  bespeaking  for  him  confidence  and  approval.  To  com" 
mend^  as  Rom.  xvi.  1 ;  comp.  Rom.  v.  8 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  1 ;  iv. 
2 ;  V.  12.  As  proof,  or  exhibition  of  the  true  state  of  a  case 
is  furnished  by  putting  things  together,  the  word  comes  to 
mean  demonstrate^  exhibit  thefacty  as  here,  Rom.  iii.  5 ;  2  Cor. 
vi.  11. 

A  transgressor  (irapajSdrrjp).  See  on  Jas.  ii.  11,  and  on 
Tapd^aav;  transgression^  Rom.   ii.  23.      In  reasserting  the 


Ch.  II.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIANS.  107 

validity  of  the  law  for  justification,  which  he  had  denied  by 
seeking  justification  by  faith  in  Christ,  he  proves  himself  a 
transgressor  in  that  denial,  that  pulling  down. 

19.  For  (7A/>).  Justifying  the  previous  thought  that  the 
reerection  of  the  law  as  a  standard  of  Christian  life  and  a 
means  of  justification  is  a  condemnation  of  the  faith  which 
relies  on  Christ  alone  for  righteousness. 

1^  through  the  law^  am  dead  to  the  law  (iy&  Bih  v6fjLov 
v6iixp  airSavov).  For  am  dead^  render  died.  Faith  in  Christ 
created  a  complete  and  irreparable  break  with  the  law  which 
is  described  as  death  to  the  law.  Comp.  Rom.  vii.  4, 6.  The 
law  itself  was  the  instrument  of  this  break,  see  next  ver. 
'£70)  is  emphatic.  Paul  appeals  to  his  personal  experience, 
his  decided  break  with  the  law  in  contrast  with  Peter's  vacil- 
lation. 

Might  live  unto  Qod  (0€^  t^»)*  With  death  to  the  law 
a  new  principle  of  life  entered.  For  the  phrase,  see  Rom. 
vi.  10,  11. 

20.  I  am  crucified  with  Christ  (Xpurr^  crweirravpa^fAcu). 
This  compound  verb  is  used  by  Paul  only  here  and  Rom.  vi. 
6.  In  the  gospels.  Matt,  xxvii.  44 ;  Mk.  xv.  82 ;  J.  xix.  82. 
The  statement  explains  how  a  believer  dies  to  the  law  by 
means  of  the  law  itself.  In  the  crucifixion  of  Christ  as  one 
accursed,  the  demand  of  the  law  was  met  (see  Gal.  iii.  18). 
Ethically,  a  believer  is  crucified  with  Christ  (Rom.  vi.  8-11 ; 
Philip,  iii.  10 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  81 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  10),  and  thus  the 
demand  of  the  law  is  fulfilled  in  him  likewise.  Paul  means 
that,  ^*'  owing  to  his  connection  with  the  crucified,  he  was, 
like  him,  legally  impure,  and  was  thus  an  outcast  from  the 
Jewish  church."  *  He  became  dead  to  the  law  by  the  law's 
own  act.  Of  course  a  Jew  would  have  answered  that  Christ 
was  Jtutlff  crucified.     He  would  have  said :   "  If  you  broke 

*  Professor  C.  C,  Everett,  The  Oosp^l  of  Paul,  p.  147.  The  reader  will 
do  well  to  study  hia  interesting  and  suggesUve  discussion. 


108  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THB  NEW  TE8TA1CBNT.        [Gn-  H- 

with  the  law  because  of  your  fellowship  with  Christy  it  proved 
that  both  he  and  you  were  tnmsgressors."  But  Paul  is 
addressing  Peter,  who,  in  common  with  himself,  believed  on 
Christ  (ver.  16). 

I  live ;  yet  not  I  (^A  Bi  ovk^tl  iy£).  The  semicolon  after 
live  in  A.  V.  and  Rev.  should  be  removed.  Rend. :  and  U 
18  no  longer  I  that  live^  bat  ChrUt^  etc.  The  new  life  of  Christ 
followed  his  crucifixion,  Rom.  vi.  9-11.  He  who  is  crucified 
with  Christ  repeats  this  experience.  He  rises  with  Christ 
and  shares  his  resurrection-life.  The  old  man  is  craoified 
with  Christ,  and  Christ  is  in  him  as  the  principle  of  his  new 
life,  Rom.  vi.  4-11.* 

I  now  live.  Emphasis  on  vvv  now^  since  the  beginning  of 
my  Christian  life,  with  an  implied  contrast  with  the  life  in 
the  flesh  before  he  was  crucified  with  Christ.  Then^  the  I 
was  the  centre  and  impulse  of  life.  Now^  it  is  no  longer  2^ 
but  Christ  in  me. 

By  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  Qod  (^i^  irUrm  rg  toO  ulw 
Tov  0€ov),  Better,  as  Rev.,  in  faiths  the  faith  which  %%  in  the 
Son  of  Qod.  Thus  the  defining  and  explicative  force  of  the 
article  r^  after  irUrrei  is  brought  out.  In  faith  is  better  than 
by  faith,  although  iv  is  sometimes  used  instrumentally.  A 
corresponds  better  with  iv  a-ap/cl  in  the  flesh.  It  exhibits 
faith  as  the  element  in  which  the  new  life  is  lived. 

And  gave  himself  (/val  irapatdvro^  iavrhv).  Kal  and  has 
an  explanatory  force  :  loved  me,  and^  ae  a  proof  of  hU  hve^ 
gave  himself.  For  wapaSSvro^  gave^  see  on  wa$  delivered^ 
Rom.  iv.  25. 

**  For  God  more  bounteons  was  himself  to  giTVi 
To  make  man  able  to  uplift  himself, 
Than  if  he  only  of  himself  had  pardoned.** 

Dahts,  FaradUo,  vfl.  116-117. 

*  See  International  Commentary  on  Pkilippians  and  FMUmamf  ] 
on  **  Paulas  Conception  of  Righteousness  by  Faith,**  p.  128 IL 


Cr.  n.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  QALATIAN8.  109 

For  me  (Jnrip  ifiov).     See  on  far  the  ungodly^  Rom.  v.  6. 

21.  Frustrate  (itfrrA).  Annul  or  invalidate.  Comp. 
Mk.  vii.  9 ;  1  Cor.  i.  19 ;  Gal.  iii.  16. 

The  grace  of  Qod  (riiv  x^P^^  ''^^  dcoO).  Xa/M?  is,  pri- 
marily, that  which  gives  joy  (x^p^).  Its  higher,  Christian 
meaning  is  based  on  the  emphasis  of  freeness  in  a  gift  or 
favour.  It  is  the  free,  spontaneous,  absolute  loving-kindness 
of  God  toward  men.  Hence  often  in  contrast  with  the  ideas 
of  debU  Ictw^  works^  9in.  Sometimes  for  the  gift  of  grace,  the 
benefaction^  as  1  Cor.  xvi.  8 ;  2  Cor.  viii.  6, 19 ;  1  Pet.  i.  10, 
13.    So  here :  the  grctdoue  gift  of  God  in  the  offering  of  Christ. 

Is  dead  (^awdOavev).  More  correctly,  died;  pointing  to 
the  historical  incident. 

In  vain  {BoDpehp}.  Groundlessly,  without  cause.  See  on 
2  Th.  iii.  8.  The  sense  here  is  not  common.  It  is  not  found 
in  Class.,  and  in  N.  T.  only  J.  xv.  25.  In  LXX,  see  Ps. 
xxxiv.  7, 19 ;  cviii.  8 ;  cxviii.  161  ;  1  Sam.  xix.  6 ;  Sir.  xx. 
23 ;  xxix.  6.  Comp.  Ignatius,  TralL  x.  Paul  says  :  **'  I 
do  not  invalidate  the  grace  of  God  in  the  offering  of  Christ, 
as  one  does  who  seeks  to  reestablish  the  law  as  a  means  of 
justification  ;  for  if  righteousness  comes  through  the  law, 
there  was  no  occasion  for  Christ  to  die." 

Additional  Note  on  Verses  14-21. 

The  coarse  of  thought  in  Paul's  address  to  Peter  is  difficult  to  follow. 
It  will  help  to  simplify  it  if  the  reader  will  keep  it  before  him  that  the 
whole  passage  is  to  be  interpreted  in  the  light  of  Peter's  false  attitude  — 
as  a  remonstrance  against  a  particular  state  of  things. 

The  line  of  remonstrance  is  as  follows.  If  you,  Peter,  being  a  Jew, 
do  not  live  as  a  Jew,  but  as  a  Grentile,  as  you  did  when  you  ate  with 
Grentiles,  why  do  you,  by  your  example  in  withdrawing  from  Grentile 
tables,  constrain  Gentile  Christians  to  live  as  Jews,  obsenring  the  separa- 
tive ordinances  of  the  Jewish  law?    This  course  is  plainly  inconsistent. 

Even  you  and  I,  bom  Jews,  and  not  Gentiles — sinners  —  denied  the 
obligation  of  these  ordinances  by  the  act  of  believing  on  Jesus  Christ. 
In  professing  this  faith  we  committed  ourselves  to  the  principle  that  no 
one  can  be  justified  by  the  works  of  the  law. 


110  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TB9TAMBNT.      [Gb.  UL 

Bat  it  may  be  said  that  we  were  in  no  better  case  by  thus  abandoning 
the  law  and  legal  righteousness,  since,  in  the  very  effort  to  be  justified 
through  Christ,  we  were  shown  to  be  sinners,  and  therefore  in  the  same 
category  with  the  Gentiles.  Does  it  not  then  follow  that  Christ  is  proved 
to  be  a  minister  of  sin  in  requiring  us  to  abandon  the  law  as  a  means  of 
justification  ? 

No.  God  forbid.  It  is  true  that,  in  seeking  to  be  justified  in  Christ, 
we  stood  revealed  as  sinners,  for  it  was  Christ  who  showed  us  that  we 
could  not  be  justified  by  the  works  of  the  law ;  that  all  oar  legal  atrict- 
ness  only  left  us  sinners.  But  the  inference  is  false  that  Christ  is  thexebj 
shown  to  be  a  minister  of  sin. 

For  to  say  that  Christ  is  a  minister  of  sin,  is  to  say  that  I,  at  his  bid- 
ding,  became  a  transgressor  by  abandoning  the  law,  and  tiiat  the  law  is 
the  only  true  standard  and  medium  of  righteousness.  If  I  reassert  the 
obligation  of  the  law  after  denying  that  obligation,  I  thereby  assert  that 
I  transgressed  in  abandoning  it,  and  that  Christ,  who  prompted  and 
demanded  this  transgression,  is  a  minister  of  sin. 

But  this  I  deny.  The  law  is  not  the  true  standard  and  medium  of 
righteousness.  I  did  not  transgress  in  abandoning  it  Christ  is  not  m 
minister  of  sin.  For  it  was  the  law  itself  which  compelled  me  to  abandon 
the  law.  The  law  crucified  Christ  and  thereby  declared  him  aoeursed. 
In  virtue  of  my  moral  fellowship  with  Christ,  I  was  (ethically)  crucified 
with  him.  The  law  declared  me  also  accursed,  and  would  have  no  more 
of  me.  The  act  of  the  law  forced  me  to  break  with  the  law.  Through 
the  law  I  died  to  the  law.  Thus  I  came  under  a  new  principle  of  life.  I 
no  longer  live,  but  Christ  lives  in  me.  If  I  should  declare  that  righteous- 
ness is  through  the  law,  by  reasserting  the  obligation  of  the  law  as  yoo, 
Peter,  have  done,  I  should  annul  the  grace  of  God  as  exhibited  in  the 
death  of  Christ;  for  in  that  case,  durist's  death  would  be  si^rfluoos 
and  useless.    But  I  do  not  annul  the  grace  of  God. 


CHAPTER  m. 

1.  Foolish  (aviryroC).  See  on  L.  xxiv.  26.  In  N.  T.  and 
LXX  always  in  an  active  sense.  See  L.  xxiv.  25 ;  Rom.  L 
14 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  9 ;  Tit.  iii.  8.  Not)?  is  used  by  Panl  mainly 
with  an  ethical  reference,  as  the  faculty  of  moral  judgment. 
See  on  Rom.  vii.  28.  *Avthyro^  therefore  indicates  a  folly 
which  is  the  outgrowth  of  a  moral  defect.  Paul  is  not  allud- 
ing  to  a  national  characteristic  of  the  Galatians.* 

*  As  Lightfoot,  IntroduOion  to  Commentary  on  QataUanB^  p.  1& 


Oh.  m.]  THE  BPISTLE  TO  THB  QALATIANS.  Ill 

Hath  bewitched  (JfidcKavai).  N.  T.«.  In  Class,  with 
accusative,  to  Blander^  malign ;  with  dative,  to  envy^  grudge^ 
u%e  ill  words  to  another ^  bewitch  by  spells.*  For  the  verb  in 
LXX,  see  Deut.  xxviii.  54,  66 ;  Sir.  xiv.  6,  8.  The  noun 
fiaaKavta  (not  in  N.  T.)  in  LXX,  Wisd.  iv.  12  (the  bewitch- 
ing^ ;  4  Mace.  i.  26  (the  evil  eye')  ;  4  Mace.  ii.  15  (slander). 
See  also  Plato,  Phaedo^  95  B  (evil  eye).  The  adjective  fida- 
icavo^  (not  in  N.  T.)  appears  in  LXX,  Prov.  xxiii.  6 ;  xxviii. 
22  (having  an  evil  ey^  ;  Sir.  xiv.  8  ;  xviii.  18 ;  xxxvii.  11 
(envious).  See  also  Aristoph.  Knights^  103 ;  Plut.  671  (slan- 
derous^ a  calumniator).  Ignatius  (Rom.  iii.)  uses  it  of  grudg- 
ing the  triumph  of  martyrdom.  The  two  ideas  of  envy  or 
malice  and  the  evil  eye  combine  in  the  Lat.  invidere^  to  look 
maliciously.  The  o^aXyi^  irovrfp^  evil  eye  is  found  Mk.  vii. 
22.  PauFs  metaphor  here  is :  who  hath  cast  an  evil  spell  upon 
youf  Chrysostom,  followed  by  Lightfoot,  thinks  that  the 
passage  indicates,  not  only  the  baleful  influence  on  the  Gala- 
tians,  but  also  the  envious  spirit  of  the  false  teachers  who 
envy  them  their  liberty  in  Christ.     This  is  doubtful. 

Before  whose  eyes  (oh  Kar  o<l>0a\fioi^).  The  Greek  is 
stronger :  unto  whom^  over  against  your  very  eyes.  The 
phrase  Kar^  o^aXfioi/^  N.  T.^,  but  quite  frequent  in  LXX. 
Comp.  Kori,  irpdaomrop  to  theface^  Gal.  ii.  11. 

Hath  been  evidently  set  forth  (irpoeypd^).  The  differ- 
ent  explanations  turn  on  the  meaning  assigned  to  irpo :  either 
formerly^  or  openly^  publicly.  Thus  openly  portrayed.  The 
use  of  TTpoypwlKiv  in  this  sense  is  more  than  doubtful.  Pre- 
viously  written.  In  favour  of  this  is  the  plain  meaning  in 
two  of  the  three  other  N.  T.  passages  where  it  occurs  :  Rom. 
XV.  4 ;   Eph.  iii.  8.     Was  posted  up^  placarded.     It  is  the 


•  So  Aristot.  Prohl.  20,  84.  The  derivation  from  /3d^«,  /3<i^«w  to  speak  or 
talk  (Sieffert,  Lightfoot,  doubtfully,  Thayer)  is  doubtfal,  as  is  also  the  con* 
nection  with  Lat.  fasdnare  to  bewitch,  Comp.  Vulg.  fascinavit  vos.  See 
Ourtias,  Greek  Et^motogyy  Transl.  681,  and  Frellwitz,  Etymologisehes  W^ 
terbueh  der  grieefUtehen  Sprache^  sab  /M^caMt. 


112  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [CSx.  ID. 

usual  word  to  describe  public  notices  or  proclamatioiis.*  The 
more  probable  sense  combines  the  first  and  third  interpreta- 
tions. Rend,  opetdy  set  forth.  This  suits  btfore  whose  eyes, 
and  illustrates  the  suggestion  of  the  evil  eye  in  bewitched. 
Who  could  have  succeeded  in  bringing  you  under  the  spell 
of  an  evil  eye,  when  directly  before  your  own  eyes  stood 
revealed  the  crucified  Christ? 

Crucified  among  you  (ip  v/up  ifrravfHOfA^w^).  'Ei^  vfU9 
among  you  is  omitted  in  the  best  texts.  Cfrueified  emphati- 
cally closes  the  sentence.  Christ  was  openly  set  forth  as 
erueified. 

2.  This  only.  I  will  convince  you  of  your  error  by  this 
one  point.  Do  you  owe  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit  to  the  works 
of  the  law,  or  to  the  message  of  faith  ? 

Received  ye,  etc.  The  answer  lies  in  the  question.  You 
cannot  deny  that  you  received  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit  by  the 
message  of  faith. 

The  hearing  of  faith  (Jkmotjf:  witmoK).  See  on  ch.  i.  28. 
For  hearing^  render  message.  So,  often  in  N.  T.  See  Matt. 
iv.  24 ;  xiv.  1 ;  xxiv.  6 ;  J.  xii.  88.  LXX,  1  Sam.  ii.  24 ; 
2  Sam.  xiii.  80 ;  Tob.  x.  18 ;  Hab.  iii.  2.t 

8.  So  foolish.  Explained  by  what  follows.  Has  yonr 
folly  reached  such  a  pitch  as  to  reverse  the  true  order  of 
things  ?     Comp.  1  Cor.  xv.  46. 

Having  begun  (ivap^dfievoi).  P^.  Comp.  Philip,  i.  6 ; 
2  Cor.  viii.  6.    Having  commenced  your  Christian  life.    The 

•  See  Arifitoph.  Av.  460;  Just.  Mart.  Apol.  2,  62;  Plat  CanMus^  11. 
So,  ace.  to  some,  Jude  4,  registered  for  condemnatioii.  Comp.  1  Maoc.  x.  86» 
enrolled. 

t  Many  of  the  earlier  interpreters,  the  hearing  ofthefaUh^  i.«.,  the  reoq>- 
tion  of  the  gospel ;  but  the  faith  is  not  used  in  the  Pauline  episUes  as  =  the 
gospel.  Others,  as  Lightfoot  and  Lipsius,  fearing  which  comes  of  faith,  Boft 
dKo^  is  habitually  used  in  N.  T.  in  a  passive  sense  (see  on  1  Th.  iL  18),  and 
the  opposition  ia  not  between  doing  and  hearingt  bat  between  the  Imp  and 
faUh. 


Ch.  m.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIAKS.  118 

verb  is  common  in  Class,  in  the  sense  of  beginning  a  sacrifice 
or  other  religious  ceremony ;  but  it  is  not  likely  that  any 
such  figurative  suggestion  is  attached  to  it  here,  as  Lightfoot. 

In  the  Spirit  (irvevfiari).  Or,  by  mean$  of  the  Spirit. 
The  Holy  Spirit,  as  the  inspirer  and  regulator  of  the  life. 

Are  ye  made  perfect  (hrireXeiaOe).  The  word  is  found 
in  connection  with  ivdfix^cOai  to  hegifiy  in  2  Cor.  viii.  6; 
Philip,  i.  6.  The  A.  V.  and  Rev.  render  here  in  the  passive 
voice.  The  active  voice,  always  in  N.  T.  with  the  object 
expressed,  means  to  bring  to  completion.  See  Rom.  xv.  28 ; 
2  Cor.  vii.  1 ;  Philip,  i.  6 ;  Heb.  viii.  5.  The  passive  only 
1  Pet.  V.  9.  It  is  true  that  the  verb  in  the  middle  voice  is 
not  found  in  either  N.  T.  or  LXX ;  but  it  is  not  uncommon 
in  Class,  and  answers  better  to  the  middle  ivap^dfievoi  having 
begun.  It  implies  more  than  bringing  to  an  end ;  rather  to 
a  consummation.  Rend.:  having  begun  in  the  spirit  are  ye 
coming  to  completion  in  the  flesh  t  The  last  phrase  has  an 
ironical  tinge,  suggesting  the  absurdity  of  expecting  per- 
fection on  the  Jewish  basis  of  legal  righteousness.  The  pres- 
ent tense  indicates  that  they  have  already  begun  upon  this 
attempt. 

The  flesh.  The  worldly  principle  or  element  of  life,  rep- 
resented by  the  legal  righteousness  of  the  Jew. 

4.  Have  ye  suffered  (hrdOere).  Or,  did  ye  suffer.  The 
exact  sense  is  doubtful.  By  some  it  is  held  that  the  ref- 
erence is  to  sufferings  endured  by  the  Galatian  Christians 
either  through  heathen  persecutions  or  Judaising  emissaries. 
There  is,  however,  no  record  in  this  Epistle  or  elsewhere  of 
the  Galatians  having  suffered  special  persecutions  on  account 
of  their  Christian  profession.  Others  take  the  verb  in  a  neut- 
ral sense,  have  ye  experienced^  or  with  a  definite  reference  to 
the  experience  of  benefits.  In  this  neutral  sense  it  is  used 
in  Class,  from  Homer  down,  and  is  accordingly  joined  with 
both  KOKW  evilly^  and  cS  well.    Paul  habitually  uses  it  in  the 

TOL.  IT. — 8 


114  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THB  KKW  TESTAIOEVT.      [Ch.  IIL 

sense  of  suffering  evil,  and  there  is  no  decisive  instaDce, 
either  in  N.  T.  or  LXX,  of  the  neutral  sense.  In  Class., 
where  it  is  used  of  the  experience  of  benefits,  it  is  always 
accompanied  by  some  qualifying  word.  When  it  stands  alone 
it  signifies  to  suffer  evil.  The  evidence  on  the  whole  makes 
yery  strongly  for  the  meaning  euffer;  in  which  case  the  refer- 
ence is,  probably,  to  the  annoyances  suffered  from  Judaising 
Christians.  It  must  be  said,  on  the  other  hand,  that  a  refer- 
ence to  such  annoyances  seems  far-fetched.  If  we  could 
translate  did  ye  experience  (so  WeizsScker,  Lipsius,  Sieffert), 
the  reference  would  be  to  the  impartation  of  the  gifts  of  the 
Spirit. 

In  vain  (ei#c^).    So  that  ye  have  fallen  from  the  faith  and 
missed  the  inheritance  of  suffering  and  the  rich  fruitage  of 
your  spiritual  gifts.      See  Matt.  v.  10-72;   Rom.  viii.  17; 
2  Cor.  iv.  17. 

if  it  be  yet  in  vain  (jd  ye  teal  elicff).    The  A.  V.  misses 

the  force  of  the  particles.  Kal  should  b€  closely  joined  with 
€i#c^,  with  the  sense  of  really.     If^  that  ie^itbe  reaUy  in  vain. 

5.  Tlierefore  (pvv).  Resumes  the  theught  of  ver.  2  (w. 
8,  4  being,  practically,  parenthetical),  in  order  to  adduce  the 
example  of  Abraham  as  a  proof  of  justification  by  faith. 
The  thought  of  ver.  2  is  further  emphasised.  The  gift  of 
the  Spirit,  and  the  bestowment  of  miraculous  powers,  is  a 
purely  divine  operation  in  believers,  which  is  not  merited 
by  legal  works,  but  can  be  received  and  experienced  only 
through  the  message  of  faith. 

He  tliat  ministeretli  (6  iinxopffy&v).  Or  supplieth.  See 
2  Cor.  ix.  10 ;  Col.  ii.  19 ;  2  Pet.  i.  5.  The  idea  of  abun- 
dant supply  (Lightf oot),  if  conveyed  at  all,  resides,  not  in  the 
preposition  iirl^  which  indicates  direction,  but  in  the  simple 
verb,  which  is  used  of  abundant,  liberal  supply.  Me  ^at 
ministereth  is  God. 

Worketh  (ivepy&v).    See  on  1  Th.  u.  18. 


Cb.  m.]  THE  EPISTLB  TO  THE  GALATIAK8.  115 

Miracles  (Swd/iei^^.  See  on  Matt.  xi.  20.  Either  mtVo* 
clesn  as  Mk.  vi.  2 ;  1  Cor.  xii.  10,  or  miraculous  powers^  as 
1  Cor.  xii.  6 ;  Philip,  ii.  13 ;  Eph.  ii.  2.  The  analogy  of 
these  latter  passages  favours  the  second  meaning. 

Among  you  (^ip  viuv).  So,  if  Swd/iei^  is  explained  as 
miracles.      It  miraculous  powers^  render  in  you. 

6.  Even  as  («ca0a)9).  The  answer  to  the  question  of  ver. 
6  is  so  obvious  that  it  is  not  given.  Paul  proceeds  at  once 
to  the  illustration  —  the  argument  for  the  righteousness  of 
faith  furnished  in  the  justification  of  Abraham.  The  spirit- 
ual gifts  come  through  the  message  of  faith,  even  as  Abraham 
believed,  etc. 

Believed  Qod  (hrlarevaev  ry  ^e^).  See  on  Rom.  iv.  5. 
Believed  God's  promise  that  he  should  become  the  father  of 
many  nations.  See  Rom.  iv.  18-21.  The  reference  is  not 
to  faith  in  the  promised  Messiah. 

It  was  accounted  to  him  for  righteousness  (^tKoyCaOtf 
avT^  ek  hiKOMtrvvriv),  See  on  Rom.  iv.  5.  'EU?  does  not 
mean  instead  ofy  but  as.  His  faith  was  reckoned  a«  right- 
eousness—  as  something  which  it  really  was;  since  all  pos- 
sibilities of  righteousness  are  included  in  faith. 

7.  Know  ye  (yivakrKere).  Imperative.  It  may  also  be 
rendered  as  indicative,  ye  know^  but  the  imperative  is  livelier, 
and  the  statement  in  the  verse  is  one  of  the  points  which  the 
writer  is  trying  to  prove. 

They  which  are  of  faith  (pi  iic  wUrreas^.  'E#c  irlareo^^ 
from  or  out  of  faiths  is  found  with  the  verb  to  justify  (Rom. 
iii.  26,  80 ;  v.  1) :  with  other  verbs,  as  live  (Rom.  i.  17) ; 
eat  (Rom.  xiv.  28) :  with  the  noun  hucaioawq  righteousness 
(Rom.  i.  17  ;  ix.  80 ;  x.  6)  :  with  other  nouns,  as  promise 
(Gal.  iii.  22),  law  (Gal.  iii.  12).  For  parallels  to  the  phrase 
Si  Ic  vUrrem,  see  Rom.  iii.  26 ;  iv.  16;  xiv.  28;  Gal.  iii.  9. 


116  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ck.  m. 

It  denotes  believers  as  9prungfram^  or  receiving  their  9piritual 
eonditian  from  that  which  specially  characterises  them. 
Comp.  ol  i^  ipiOCa^  they  who  are  of  faction^  Rom.  ii.  8  ;  olhc 
wdfJLov  they  who  are  of  the  law^  Rom.  iv.  14 ;  o  ^  rrj^  oKriOeCa^ 
he  who  ie  of  the  truths  J.  xviii.  87. 

8.  The  scripture  (Ji  ypa4fif).  See  on  1  Tim.  v.  18.  The 
particular  paesage  cited  below.  See  on  Mk.  xii.  10  ;  J.  ii. 
22 ;  V.  47  footnote. 

Foreseeing  (irpolSowra).  The  passage  of  Soriptare  is 
personified.  Comp.  hath  concluded^  ver.  22.  The  Jews  had 
a  formula  of  reference,  ^^  What  did  the  Scripture  see  ?  *' 

Would  justify  (hucaioi).  Better  Justifieth.  The  present 
tense.  The  time  foreseen  was  the  Christian  present.  Comp. 
1  Cor.  iii.  13 ;  Matt.  xxvi.  2. 

Preached  before  the  gospel  (wpoeufjyyeKCa'aro).  N.  T.^. 
An  awkward  translation.  Better,  preached  the  gospel  b^ore- 
hand. 

All  nations  (iravra  rh  J^vti).  From  Gen.  xviii.  18 ;  comp. 
Gen.  xxii.  18,  LXX.  Gen.  xii.  8  reads  vrao-oi  al  ^vXal  ill 
the  tribes.  T^  idvri  was  the  collective  term  by  which  all 
non-Jews  were  denoted,  and  is  more  suitable  to  Faults  Gen- 
tile audience. 

Shall  be  blessed  (ivevXoytfOi^oPTai).  In  N.  T.  only  here. 
LXX,  Gen.  xii.  3 ;  xviii.  18 ;  xxii.  18 ;  xxvi.  4 ;  Sir.  xliv. 
21.  The  blessing  is  the  messianic  blessing  of  which  the 
Gentiles  are  to  partake  —  the  imparting  of  the  Spirit  as  the 
new  life-principle  and  the  pledge  of  future  blessedness  in 
Christ.  This  blessing  Abraham  shared  on  the  ground  of  his 
faith,  and  believers  shall  share  it  as  the  true  spiritual  chil- 
dren of  Abraham. 

in  thee  (iv  aoV).  Not,  through  thy  poiterity^  Cfhriit^  but  in 
the  fact  that  thou  art  blessed  is  involved  the  blessedness  of 


Ch.  in.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIAK8.  117 

the  Gentiles  through  faith,  in  so  far  as  they  shall  be  justified 
by  faith,  and  through  justification  receive  the  Holy  Spirit. 

9.  With  (jrini).  Not=KA:e  or  a«,  but  in  fellowship  with. 
Believers  are  regarded  as  homogeneous  with  Abraham,  and 
as  thus  sharing  the  blessing  which  began  in  him. 

Faithful  (wurr^').  Or  believing^  as  Acts  xvi.  1;  2  Cor.  vi. 
15 ;  1  Tim.  v.  16.  Those  who  are  of  the  faith  are  one  in 
blessing  with  him  whose  characteristic  was  faith. 

10.  Under  the  curse  (inro  icarapav).  Better,  under  curse. 
There  is  no  article.  The  phrase  is  general  s  accursed.  Comp. 
v^*  afiafnlap  under  nn,  Rom.  iii.  9.  The  specific  character 
of  the  curse  is  not  stated.  It  is  not  merely  the  wrath  of 
Grod  as  it  issues  in  final  destruction  (Meyer);  but  it  repre- 
sents a  condition  of  alienation  from  God,  caused  by  violation 
of  his  law,  with  all  the  penalty  which  accrues  from  it,  either 
in  this  life  or  the  next. 

Cursed  (^iwucardparo^^.  Only  here  and  ver.  13.  ^Class. 
In  LXX,  see  Gen.  iii.  14, 17;  Deut.  xxvii.  16-20 ;  Isa.  Ixv. 
20 ;  Wisd.  iii.  12 ;  xiv.  8,  etc. 

Continueth  —  in  (^ififidpei).  The  expression  is  figurative, 
the  book  of  the  law  being  conceived  as  a  prescribed  district 
or  domain,  in  which  one  remains  or  out  of  which  he  goes. 
Comp.  cantinus  in  the  faith,  Acts  xiv.  22 ;  in  the  covenant^ 
Heb.  viii.  9 ;  in  the  things  which  thou  hast  learned^  2  Tim. 
iii.  14. 

11.  But  (S^).  Better,  now.  The  Zk  continues  the  argu- 
ment, adding  the  scripture  testimony. 

By  the  law  (iv  vdiitf).  Rather,  in  the  sphere  of  the  law; 
thus  corresponding  with  continueth  in,  ver.  10. 

The  just  shall  live  by  faith  (o  hUaw;  he  irUrr€w:  ^i^aerai). 
Better,  the  righteous.     Quoted  from  Hab.  ii.  4,  and  appears 


118  WOBD  STUDIES  IK  THB  KBW  TESTAMBNT.       [Cb.  m 

in  Rom.  i.  17,  and  Heb.  x.  88.  The  LXX  has  /aov  my,  either 
after  S6cai09,  ^^  my  righteous  one  shall  live,  etc.,"  or  after  ir^- 
T€«9,  "by  my  faith  or  faithfulness.'"* 

13.  Hath  redeemed  (i^ySpeurev).  P^.  Better  redeemed^ 
Comp.  Gal.  iv.  5 ;  Eph.  v.  16 ;  Col.  iv.  6.  In  LXX  once, 
Dan.  ii.  8.    See  on  Col.  iv.  5. 

Us.     Referring  specially  to  Jews. 

Being  made  a  curse  (y€v6/i€vo9  tcardpa).  Better,  having 
became.     See  on  ch.  ii.  20. 

It  is  written.  From  LXX  of  Deut.  xxi.  28,  with  the 
omission  of  inro  Oeov  by  God  after  cursed.  Paul,  as  Light> 
foot  justly  says,  instinctively  omits  these  words,  since  Christ 
was  in  no  sense  accursed  by  God  in  his  crucifixion.  The 
statement  does  not  refer  to  Christ's  enduring  the  curse  in 
our  stead,  but  solely  to  the  attitude  in  which  the  law  placed 
Christ  by  subjecting  him  to  the  death  of  a  malefactor.  The 
law  satisfied  its  demand  upon  him,  and  thus  thrust  him  out 
of  the  pale  of  the  legal  economy.  We,  by  our  fellowship 
with  him,  are  likewise  cast  out,  and  therefore  are  no  longer 
under  curse. 

Upon  a  tree  (^l  ^vXov).  Originally  wood^  timber.  In 
later  Greek,  a  tree.  In  Class,  used  of  a  galhws  (Aristoph. 
FrogB^  736).  Often  of  the  stocks  (Aristoph.  Chuds^  592; 
Lysistr.  680 ;  KnighU,  367).  So  Acts  xvi.  24.  Of  the  cross. 
Acts  V.  30  ;  X.  39  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  24.  Ignatius  (Smym.  i.)  says 
that  Christ  was  nailed  up  for  our  sakes — of  which  fruit  are 
we.  That  is,  the  cross  is  regarded  as  a  tree,  and  ChristiaQS 
as  its  fruit.  Comp.  Trail,  ii.  See  the  interesting  remarks 
of  Lightf oot  on  the  symbolism  of  the  tree  of  life  in  Paradise 
(^Apostolic  Fathers,  Part  IL,  Vol.  IL,  p.  291). 


•  In  Heb.  z.  8S,  laod  after  hUawt  is  retained  by  Tiachendorf,  W«iM,  i 
BeT.  T.,  and  ia  bracketed  \tj  WH.    Volg.  baa/iM(ic«  antem  mens. 


Cb.  III.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIANS.  119 

14.  That  (}pa).  Marking  the  purpose  of  Christ  in  re- 
deeming from  the  curse  of  the  law. 

That  we  might  receive,  etc.  The  second  tpa  is  parallel 
with  the  first.  The  deliverance  from  the  curse  results  not 
only  in  extending  to  the  Gentiles  the  blessing  promised  to 
Abraham,  but  in  the  impartation  of  the  Spirit  to  both  Jews 
and  Gentiles  through  faith.  The  evXoyla  blessing  is  not 
God's  gift  of  justification  as  the  opposite  of  the  curse ;  for 
in  vv.  10,  11,  justification  is  not  represented  as  the  opposite 
of  the  curse,  but  as  that  by  which  the  curse  is  removed  and 
the  blessing  realised.  The  content  of  the  curse  is  deatJ^ 
ver.  13.  The  opposite  of  the  curse  is  life.  The  subject  of 
the  promise  is  the  life  which  comes  through  the  Spirit.  See 
J.  vii.  39 ;  Acts  ii.  17,  38,  39 ;  x.  45,  47;  xv.  7,  8 ;  Rom.  v. 
5 ;  viii.  2,  4,  6,  11 ;  Eph.  i.  18. 

15.  After  the  manner  of  men  («car^  avOpmrov).  Ac- 
cording to  human  analogy;  reasoning  as  men  would  reason 
in  ordinary  affairs.  The  phrase  is  peculiar  to  Paul.  See 
Rom.  iii.  5 ;  1  Cor.  iii.  3 ;  ix.  8  ;  xv.  32  ;  Gal.  i.  11.  Comp. 
itvOpdympo^  (U  a  man^  Rom.  vi.  19. 

Though  it  be — yet.  The  A.  V.  and  Rev.  give  the  cor- 
rect sense,  but  the  order  of  the  Greek  is  peculiar.  "Oiutm^  yet 
properly  belongs  to  ov&W  no  man :  "  Though  a  man's  coven- 
ant yet  no  man  disannuUeth  it.''  But  iiutK  is  taken  out  of 
its  natural  place,  and  put  at  the  beginning  of  the  clause, 
before  avOpamov^  so  that  the  Greek  literally  reads :  "  Yet  a 
man's  covenant  confirmed  no  one  disannuUeth,  etc."  A 
similar  displacement  occurs  1  Cor.  xiv.  7. 

Covenant  (ttaOrjicfiv).  Not  testament.  See  on  Matt.  xxvi. 
28,  and  Heb.  ix.  16. 

Confirmed  (^x&evpnfA^p).  P^.  See  2  Cor.  ii.  8.  In 
LXX,  Gen.  xxiii.  20  ;  Lev.  xxv.  30  ;  4  Mace.  vii.  9.  From 
mvpoq  supreme  power.     Hence  the  verb  carries  the  sense  of 


120  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TBSTAMSlirT.       [Gs-  UL 

authoritative  confirmation,  in  this  case  by  the  contracting 

parties. 

Disannulleth  (AOereT).    See  on  bring  to  noMnff^  1  Cor.  L 

19.     Kev.  maketh  void, 

Addeth  thereto  (hriSiardaireTai).  N.  T.®.  Adds  new 
specitications  or  conditions  to  the  original  covenant,  which 
is  contrary  to  law.  Comp.  iwiSiaOi^tcff  a  $eeond  will  or  eodieil^ 
Joseph.  B.  J.  ii.  2,  3 ;  Ant.  xvii.  9,  4.  The  doctrine  of  the 
Judaisers,  while  virtaally  annulling  the  promise,  was  appar- 
ently only  the  imposing  of  new  conditions.  In  either  caae 
it  was  a  violation-  of  the  covenant. 

16.  The  course  of  thought  is  as  follows.  The  main  point 
is  that  the  promises  to  Abraham  continue  to  hold  for  Christ- 
ian believers  (ver.  17).  It  might  be  objected  that  the  law 
made  these  promises  void.  After  stating  that  a  human 
covenant  is  not  invalidated  or  added  to  by  any  one,  he  would 
argue  from  this  analogy  that  a  covenant  of  Ood  is  not  an- 
nulled by  the  law  which  came  afterwards.  But  before  reach- 
ing this  point,  he  must  call  attention  to  the  fact  that  the 
promises  were  given,  not  to  Abraham  only,  but  to  his  de- 
scendants. Hence  it  follows  that  the  covenant  was  not  a 
mere  temporary  contract,  made  to  last  only  up  to  the  time 
of  the  law.  Even  a  man's  covenant  remains  uncancelled 
and  vidthout  additions.  Similarly,  God's  covenant-promises 
to  Abraham  remain  valid ;  and  this  is  made  certain  by  the 
fact  that  the  promises  were  given  not  only  to  Abraham  but 
to  his  seed ;  and  since  the  singular,  need^  is  used,  and  not 
Beeds^  it  is  evident  that  Christ  is  meant. 

The  promises  (at  iirayjeXCcu).     Comp.  Rom.  ix.  4.    The 

promise  was  given  on  several  occasions.* 

Were  made  (ippiBriirav).     Rend,  were  9pohen. 

*  See  Clement,  Ad  Corinth,  x.,  who  enumerates  the  different  lonns  of  the 
promise  to  Abraham,  citing  Gen.  xii  1-3 ;  xiii  14-10 ;  and  Gen.  zr.  S,  6L 
See  alao  Gen.  zr.  18 ;  zyU.  8 ;  zziL  lS-18. 


gh.  iu.]  the  epistle  to  the  galatians.  121 

To  his  seed  (t^  awipfuari,  ainov).  Emphatic,  as  making 
for  bis  conclusion  in  ver.  17.  There  can  be  no  disannulling 
by  the  law  of  a  promise  made  not  only  to  Abraham,  but  to 
his  seed. 

Not  —  to  seeds  (ov — roU  awipiMunv),  He  means  that 
there  is  significance  in  the  singular  form  of  expression,  as 
pointing  to  the  fact  that  (me  descendant  (seed)  is  intended  — 
Christ.  With  regard  to  this  line  of  argument  it  is  to  be  said, 
1.  The  original  promise  referred  to  the  posterity  of  Abraham 
generally^  and  therefore  applies  to  Christ  individually  only  as 
representing  these :  as  gathering  up  into  one  all  who  should 
be  incorporated  with  him.  2.  The  original  word  for  seed  in 
the  O.  T.,  wherever  it  means  progeny^  is  used  in  the  singu- 
lar, whether  the  progeny  consists  of  one  or  many.  In  the 
plural  it  means  grains  of  seed^  as  1  Sam.  viii.  15.  It  is  evi- 
dent that  Paul's  argument  at  this  point  betrays  traces  of  his 
rabbinical  education  (see  Schoettgen,  Horae  Hehraicae^  Vol. 
I.,  p.  736),  and  can  have  no  logical  force  for  nineteenth-cen- 
tury readers.   Even  Luther  says:  " Zum  stiche  zu  schwach."  * 

Of  many  (^l  woW&v).  Apparently  a  unique  instance 
of  t]ie  use  of  hrl  with  the  genitive  after  a  verb  of  speaking. 
The  sense  appears  in  the  familiar  phrase  ^^  to  speak  upon  a 
subject,"  many  being  conceived  as  the  basis  on  which  the 
speaking  rests.     Similarly  i^*  hnk  of  one. 

17.  And  this  I  say  (rovro  Sk  \^m).  Now  I  mean  this. 
Not  strictly  the  conclusion  from  vv.  15, 16,  since  Paul  does 
not  use  this  phrase  in  drawing  a  conclusion  (comp.  1  Cor.  i. 
12,  and  rovro  h4  ^lu^  1  Cor.  vii.  29;  xv.  60).     It  is  rather 


•  With  this  compare  the  words  of  EUicott  '*  It  may  be  true  that  similar 
arguments  occur  in  rabbinical  writers :  it  may  be  true  that  vwip/ta  is  a  col- 
lective noun,  and  that  when  the  plural  is  used  *  grains  of  seed  ^  are  implied. 
All  this  may  be  so,  — nevertheless,  we  have  here  an  interpretation  which  the 
apostle,  writing  under  the  illumination  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  has  deliberately 
propounded,  and  which  therefore,  whatever  difficulties  may  at  first  appear 
in  it,  is  profoundly  and  indisputably  true.** 


122  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  HL 

the  application,  for  which  the  way  was  prepared  in  ver.  16* 
of  the  analogy  of  ver.  16  to  the  inviolable  stability  of  God's 
covenant. 

Four  hundred  and  thirty  years  after.  Bengel  remarks : 
^^  The  greatness  of  the  interval  increases  the  authority  of  the 
promise."  * 

To  make  of  none  effect  (irarapT^oi).  See  on  Rom 
iii.  8. 

18.  In  the  analogy  of  ver.  15  there  was  contemplated  the 
double  possibility  of  invcUidatian  or  addition.  With  relation 
to  God's  promise,  the  Judaisers  insisted  on  addition;  since, 
while  they  preached  faith  in  the  promise  and  in  its  fulfilment 
in  Christ,  they  made  the  inheritance  of  the  promise  dependent 
upon  the  fulfilling  of  the  law.  Paul,  on  the  other  hand,  holds 
that  the  Judaistic  addition  involves  invalidation.  Salvation 
must  rest  either  upon  the  promise  or  upon  the  law.  The 
Judaiser  said,  upon  the  promise  and  the  law.  For  God  gave 
the  inheritance  to  Abraham  by  promise.  It  has  been  shown 
that  the  law  did  not  abrogate  the  promise.  Hence,  if  the 
inheritance  be  of  the  law  it  is  no  more  of  the  promise. 
Comp.  Rom.  iv.  14. 

Qave  (^icexdpi^rraC).  Freely  bestowed  as  a  gracious  gift. 
See  on  L.  vii.  21. 

19.  Wherefore  then  serveth  the  law?  (rl  oiv  6  i^^ao?;). 
Lit.  w?iat  then  is  the  laWy  or,  why  then  the  law  t  What  is  its 
meaning  and  object?  A  natural  question  of  an  objector, 
since,  according  to  Paul's  reasoning,  salvation  is  of  promise 
and  not  of  law. 

•  The  LXX  of  Ex.  xii.  40  which  Paul  is  assumed  to  follow,  says  that  the 
Bojoom  of  Israel  in  Egypt  and  in  ike  land  of  Canaan  was  4S0  years,  aoooid- 
ing  to  one  reading ;  but  according  to  another,  435  years.  Lightfoot  says  the 
6  in  the  Vatican  Ms.  is  erased,  but  Swete  retahis  it  in  his  edition  of  the 
LXX.  The  words  in  the  land  of  Canaan  are  not  in  the  Hebrew.  In  Gen. 
XT.  13  (comp.  Acts  vii.  0)  400  years  are  given. 


Cr.  m.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIAKS.  128 

It  was  added  (irpoaerdOrf^.  Comp.  wapeurfjXBep  came  in 
bende^  Rom.  y.  20.  Not  as  an  addition  to  the  promise,  which 
is  contrary  to  ver.  18,  but  as  a  temporary,  intermediate  insti* 
tation,  in  which  only  a  subordinate  purpose  of  Grod  was 
expressed. 

Because  of  transgressions  (r&v  wapafidamv  x^P^y).  In 
order  to  set  upon  already  existing  sins  the  stamp  of  positive 
transgression  of  law.  Comp.  Rom.  iv.  5 ;  v.  13.  Note  the 
article,  the  transgressions,  summing  them  up  in  one  mass. 
Not,  in  order  to  give  the  knowledge  of  sins.  This,  it  is  true, 
would  follow  the  revelation  of  sins  as  transgressions  of  law 
(Rom.  iii.  20;  vii.  13);  but,  1.  the  phrase  because  of  trans- 
gressians  does  not  express  that  thought  with  sufficient  defin- 
iteness.  If  that  had  been  his  meaning,  Paul  would  probably 
have  written  r^  hriyvoHr&o^  r&v  irapafida&av  ;^a/My  an  account 
of  the  knowledge  of  tranegresHons.  2.  He  meant  to  describe 
the  office  of  the  law  as  more  than  giving  the  knowledge  of 
sins.  Its  office  was,  in  revealing  sin  as  positive  transg^ssion, 
to  emphasise  the  objective,  actual,  contrary  fact  of  righteous- 
ness according  to  the  divine  ideal,  and  to  throw  sin  into 
contrast  with  that  grand  ideal. 

The  seed.  Christ,  whose  advent  was  to  introduce  the 
fulfilment  of  the  promise  (ver.  16). 

Ordained  (&ara7ek).  The  verb  means  to  arrange^  appoint^ 
prescribe.  Of  appointing  the  twelve.  Matt.  xi.  1 :  of  enjoining 
certain  acts,  L.  viii.  55;  xvii.  10;  1  Cor.  vii.  17:  of  the 
decree  of  Claudius,  Acts  xviii.  2.  Here,  describing  the  form 
or  mode  in  which  the  law  was  added ;  the  arrangement  made 
for  giving  it. 

By  angels  (hC  ayy^kuv).  Better,  through  angels  as  agents 
and  intermediaries.  Comp.  ek  Biarayii^  ayyeXnv  with  refer- 
en>ee  to  arrangements  of  angels;  or  as  it  was  ordained  by  angels^ 
Acts  vii.  63.  The  tradition  of  the  giving  of  the  law  through 
angels  appears  first  in  Deut.  xxxiii.  2  (but  comp.  LXX  and 


124  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  TUS  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Cm.  m 

the  Hebrew).  See  Heb.  ii.  2;  Acts  vii.  88,  68.  In  the 
later  rabbinical  schools  great  importance  was  attached  to 
this  tradition,  and  it  was  not  without  influence  in  shaping 
the  doctrine  of  angelic  mediation  which  formed  one  of  the 
elements  of  the  Colossian  heresy.  Josephus  (^Ant.  zv.  6,  8) 
relates  that  Herod  excited  the  Jews  to  battle  by  a  speech,  in 
which  he  said  that  they  had  learned  the  holiest  of  laws  from 
God  through  angels.  It  is  a  general  O.  T.  idea  that  in  great 
theophanies  God  appeare  surrounded  with  a  heavenly  host. 
See  Hab.  iii.  8;  Isa.  Ixvi.  15;  Zech.  xiv.  6;  Joel  iii.  11.  The 
idea  of  an  angelic  administration  is  also  familiar.  See  Ex. 
xxiii.  20;  xxxii.  34;  xxxiii.  14;  Isa.  Ixiii.  9;  Josh.  ▼•  14. 
The  agency  of  angels  indicates  the  limitations  of  the  older 
dispensation  ;  its  character  as  a  dispensation  of  the  flesh. 

In  the  hand  of  a  mediator  {iv  ^etpl  ii^lrov).     'Ey  ;^cfpl  6y 

the  agency  of.  A  Hebraism.  In  this  sense,  not  elsewhere  in 
N.  T.  Soe  LXX,  Gen.  xxxviii.  20;  Lev.  xvi.  21.  In  the 
hand  of  Moacn,  Lev.  xxvi.  46;  Num.  iv.  87,  41,  45,  49. 
Comp.  ainf  x^V^  ayyiKov  with  the  hand  of  the  angel^  Acts 
vii.  85.  For  lualrr^  mediator^  see  on  1  Tim.  ii.  5,  and  comp. 
Heb.  viii.  6;  ix.  15;  xii.  24.  It  is  a  later  Greek  wotA^ 
signifying  also  umpire^  arbitrator^  and  appears  in  LXX  only 
in  Job.  ix.  88.  The  mediator  here  is  Moses,  who  is  often  so 
designated  by  rabbinical  writers.  The  object  is  not  (as 
Meyer)  to  enable  the  reader  to  realise  the  glory  of  the  law 
in  the  dignity  and  formal  solemnity  of  its  ordination,  but  to 
indicate  the  inferior,  subordinate  position  held  by  the  law  in 
comparison  with  the  promisey  not  the  gospel.  A  glorification 
of  the  law  cannot  be  intended,  since  if  that  were  contemplated 
in  the  mention  of  angels  and  the  mediator,  the  statement  woold 
tend  to  the  disparagement  of  the  promise  which  was  given 
without  a  mediator.  Paul,  in  the  section  iii.  6-iv.  7,  aims  to 
show  that  the  law  does  not,  as  the  Judaisers  assume,  stand  in 
a  relation  to  the  divine  plan  of  salvation  as  direct  and  positive 
as  does  the  promise,  and  that  it  has  not,  like  the  promise  and 
its  fulfilment,  an  eternal  significance.  On  the  contrary,  it  has 
only  a  transitory  value.     This  estimate  of  the  law  does  not 


Cb.  III.]  THE  EPISTT.K  TO  THE  GALATIAN8.  125 

contradict  Paul's  assertions  in  Rom.  vii.  12-25.  In  repre- 
senting the  law  as  subordinate  and  temporary  he  does  not 
impugn  it  as  a  divine  institution. 

20.  Now  a  mediator  is  not  a  mediator  of  one  (o  Sk  ii&rtnfi 
ivoi  ovK  itmv).  Observe,  1.  A^  is  explanatory^  not  antithetic. 
The  verse  illustrates  the  conception  of  mediator.  2.  The  arti- 
cle, the  mediator,  has  a  generic  force  :  the  mediator  according 
to  the  general  and  proper  conception  of  his  function.  Comp. 
the  apostle  (2  Cor.  xii.  12);  the  shepherd,  the  good  (J.  x.  11). 
3.  'E^k  of  onej  is  to  be  explained  by  the  following  el?,  so  that 
it  is  masculine  and  personal.  We  are  not  to  supply  party  or 
law.  The  meaning  is  :  the  conception  of  mediator  does  not 
belong  to  an  individual  considered  singly.  One  is  not  a 
mediator  of  hb  single  self,  but  he  is  a  mediator  between 
two  contracting  parties;  in  this  case  between  God  and  the 
people  of  Israel,  as  Lfev.  xxvi.  46 ;  thus  differing  from  Christ, 
who  is  called  the  mediator  of  a  new  covenant  (Heb.  viii.  6 ; 
ix.  15;  xii.  24).  The  new  covenant,  the  gospel,  was  not  a 
contract.  Accordingly  ver.  20  serves  to  define  the  true  con- 
ception of  a  mediator,  and  through  this  definition  to  make 
clearer  the  difference  between  the  law,  which  required  a 
mediator,  and  the  promise,  which  is  the  simple  expression 
of  God's  will.  The  very  idea  of  mediation  supposes  two 
parties.  The  law  is  of  the  nature  of  a  contract  between  God 
and  the  Jewish  people.  The  validity  of  the  contract  depends 
on  its  fulfilment  by  both  parties.  Hence  it  is  contingent, 
not  absolute. 

But  Qod  is  one  (6  Si  Oei^  ek  iarCv).  God  does  not  need  a 
mediator  to  make  his  promise  valid.  His  promise  is  not  of 
the  nature  of  a  contract  between  two  parties.  His  promise 
depends  on  his  own  individual  decree.  He  dealt  with  Abra- 
ham singly  and  directly,  without  a  mediator.  The  dignity  of 
the  law  is  thus  inferior  to  that  of  the  promise. 

21.  Against  the  promises  (jcark  r&p  ivayyeKi&v).  Does 
it  follow  from  the  difference  between  the  law  and  the  promises 


126  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ck.  OL 

that  they  are  in  antagODism  ?    Paul  supposes  this  objeotion  on 
the  part  of  a  Jewish  Christian. 

Qod  forbid  (^^  yAfonv).  See  on  Rom.  iii.  4.  This  could 
only  be  true  in  case  the  law  gave  life^  for  life  piust  come 
either  through  the  promises  or  through  the  law.  If  the  law 
is  against  the  promises,  and  makes  them  invalid,  it  follows 
that  life  must  come  through  the  law,  and  therefore  righteous- 
ness, without  which  there  is  no  life,  would  veriljf  (6vtoo^^^  just 
as  the  Judaisers  claim,  be  through  the  law. 

By  the  law.  Tisch.,  Rev.  T.,  Weiss,  retain  he  v6§A€vfrani^ 
renUtinff  from  the  law.  WH.  read  iv  v6iJLtp  in  the  law.  The 
meaning  is  substantially  the  same  with  either  reading^:  in  the 
one  ceise  proceeding  from^  in  the  other  residing  in  the  law. 

22.  But  it  is  not  true  that  the  law  gives  life,  for  the  law, 
according  to  scripture,  condemned  all  alike. 

The  scripture  (i^  ypa^).    Scripture  b  personified.     See 

on  ver.  8. 

Hath  concluded  (awAcXeiaev).  Better,  hath  shut  up,  as  a 
jailer.  Only  in  Paul,  with  the  exception  of  L.  v.  6.  Frequent 
in  LXX.  Not  included  with  others^  but  confined  as  within  an 
enclosure,  as  L.  v.  6,  of  the  net  enclosing  the  fish.  Comp. 
Ex.  xiv.  3;  Josh.  vi.  1 ;  1  Mace.  iv.  31.  Scripture,  in  its 
divine  utterances  on  the  universality  and  guilt  of  sin,  is 
conceived  as  a  jailer  who  shuts  all  up  in  sin  as  in  a  prison. 
Comp.  Rom.  iii.  10-19;  xi.  32. 


All  (r^  irdvra).     Neuter,  all  things  collectively :  sa  all 
For  the  neuter  in  a  similar  comprehensive  sense,  see  1  Cor. 
i.  27;  Col.  i.  20;  Eph.  i.  10. 

That  (Xvay  In  order  that.  That  which  is  represented 
through  a  personification  as  the  act  of  Scripture,  is  the  act  of 
God,  according  to  a  definite  purpose  that  the  promise  should 
be  inherited  by  believers  only,  through  faith  in  Jesus  Christ. 


Ch.  in.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIANS.  127 

The  promise  (17  ^a77eX^).  That  is,  the  thing  promised ; 
the  inheritance^  ver.  18. 

By  faith  (iic  wiarefo^^.  Const,  with  the  promine^  not  with 
might  be  given.  The  promised  gift  which  is  the  result  of 
faith.  The  false  teachers  claimed  that  it  was  the  result 
of  works. 

To  them  that  believe  (roU  wurrevovinp).  Not  tautologi- 
cal. Even  the  Judaisers  held  that  salvation  was  intended 
for  believers,  but  also  that  legal  obedience  was  its  procuring 
cause ;  against  which  Paul  asserts  that  it  is  simply  for  those 
that  believe. 

23.  But  the  office  of  the  law  as  a  jailer  was  designed  to  be 
only  temporary,  until  the  time  when  faith  should  come.  It 
was  to  hold  in  custody  those  who  were  subjected  to  sin,  so 
that  they  should  not  escape  the  consciousness  of  their  sins 
and  of  their  liability  to  punishment. 

Faith  (rifv  irltmv).  The  subjective  faith  in  Christ  which 
appropriates  the  promise.     See  on  ch.  i.  23. 

We  were  kept  Qi<l>povpovfie0a).  Better,  kept  in  wardy  con- 
tinuing the  figure  in  shut  up^  ver.  22.  The  imperfect  tense 
indicates  the  continued  activity  of  the  law  as  a  warder. 

Under  the  law  (yird  vofiov).  Const,  with  were  kept  in 
ward,  not  with  shut  up.  We  were  shut  up  with  the  law 
as  a  warder,  not  for  protection,  but  to  guard  against  escape. 
Comp.  Wisd.  xvii.  15.  The  figure  of  the  law  as  pedagogue 
(ver.  24)  is  not  anticipated.  The  law  is  conceived,  not  as  the 
prison,  but  as  the  warder,  the  lord  or  despot,  the  power  of  sin 
(see  1  Cor.  xv.  56 ;  Rom.  vii.),  by  whom  those  who  belong 
to  sin  are  kept  under  lock  and  key  —  under  moral  captivity, 
without  possibility  of  liberation  except  through  faith. 

Shut  up  unto  the  faith  (trvptcXeulfievoi  ek  rifp  irltmv).  Ew 
unto  or  for  expresses  the  object  of  keeping  in  ward.     It  is  not 


128  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THK  KEW  TESTAMBirr.       [Gii.  m 

temporal,  untile  which  is  a  rare  usage  in  N.  T.,  bat  mth  a  view 
to  our  pasting  into  the  $tate  of  faith. 

Which  should  afterwards  be  revealed  (^ftdXXowrat^ — Avo- 
Ka\vil>0rjpcu).  The  position  of  fUXKovaap  emphasises  the  f utore 
state  of  things  to  which  the  earlier  conditions  pointed.  The 
faith  was  first  revealed  at  the  coming  of  Christ  and  the  goepeL 

24.  Wherefore  (Sore).  Better,  8o  that.  Theological  con- 
sequence of  the  previous  statements. 

Our  schoolmaster  (waiBaya^i^  ^/i&v}.  Our.  Paul  speaks 
as  a  Jew  of  Jews  especially.  Schoolnuuter  (TrtuSayc^d^  P^.) 
is  an  error.  The  word  means  an  overseer  or  guardian.  See 
on  1  Cor.  iv.  15.  Thttor  (Rev.)  is  defensible  on  the  groond 
of  etymology,  tueri  to  look  upon^  thence  to  guard.  In  civil  law 
a  tutor  is  a  person  legally  appointed  for  the  care  of  the  person 
and  property  of  a  minor.  So  Bacon  (Adv.  of  Learning^  ii. 
19) :  ''  the  first  six  kings  being  in  truth  as  tutore  of  the  state 
of  Rome  in  the  infancy  thereof.''  The  later  use  of  the  word, 
however,  in  the  sense  of  instructor^  has  so  completely  sup- 
planted the  earlier,  that  the  propriety  of  the  Revisers'  ren- 
dering is  questionable.  The  law  is  here  represented,  not  as 
one  who  conducts  to  the  school  of  Christ ;  for  Christ  is  not 
represented  here  as  a  teacher,  but  as  an  atoner ;  but  rather  as 
an  overseer  or  guardian^  to  keep  watch  of  those  committed  to 
its  care,  to  accompany  them  with  its  commands  and  prohibi- 
tions, and  to  keep  them  in  a  condition  of  dependence  and 
restraint,  thus  continually  bringing  home  to  them  the  con- 
sciousness of  being  shut  up  in  sins,  and  revealing  sin  aa 
positive  transgression.* 

26.  For  ye  are  all  the  children  of  Qod  (Trains  yhp  tijel 
Oeov  iare).  Better,  ye  are  all  sons  of  God.  Note  1.  The 
change  of  person,  ye  are.     Comp.  we^  our^  ut,  w.  28,  24,  26. 

•  See  an  inteiesting  pttsage  in  Plato,  hfi^is^  207,  SOS. 


Cb.  m.]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OALATIAK8.  129 

He  now  addresses  the  Gralatians,  who  were  mostly  Gentiles, 
and  includes  all  Christians,  Jewish  and  Gentile.  2.  The 
emphasis  is  on  $ons  of  Ood  rather  than  on  all;  for  his  object 
is  to  show  that,  after  the  coming  of  faith,  they  are  no  more 
under  the  care  of  a  guardian.  *Tiol  signifies  sons  of  full  age 
(comp.  ch.  iv.  1)  who  have  outgrown  the  surveillance  of  the 
guardian ;  so  that  sans  is  emphasised  as  against  children. 
Paul  describes  Christians  both  as  r^eva  dtov  children  of  God 
(Rom.  viii.  16,  21 ;  ix.  8 ;  Philip,  ii.  15),  and  viol  Oeov  sons 
of  God  (Rom.  viii.  14,  19  ;  ix.  26).  Both  tAcvov  and  vi69 
signify  a  relation  based  on  parentage.  The  common  distinc- 
tion between  rixvov  as  emphasising  natural  relationship,  and 
vU^  as  marking  legal  or  ethical  status,  should  not  be  pressed. 
In  LXX  both  words  are  applied  ethically  to  Israel  as  God's 
beloved  people.  See  Isa.  xxx.  1 ;  Wisd.  xvi.  21 ;  Joel  ii. 
28 ;  Zech.  ix.  18 ;  and  Isa.  xliii.  6 ;  Deut.  xiv.  1 ;  Wisd.  ix. 
7 ;  xii.  19.  John  never  uses  vUk  to  describe  the  relation  of 
Christians  to  God;  but  he  attaches  both  the  ethical  relation  and 
that  of  conferred  privilege,  as  well  as  that  of  birth,  to  ritcvov. 
See  J.  i.  12 ;  1  J.  iii.  1, 10 ;  J.  i.  18 ;  iii.  8,  7 ;  1  J.  iii.  9 ; 
iv.  7 ;  V.  1,  4, 18.  Paul  often  regards  the  Christian  relation 
from  a  leg^  point  of  view  as  vlodeaia  adoption^  a  word  used 
only  by  him.  See  Rom.  viii.  16,  28 ;  Gal.  iv.  6 ;  Eph.  i.  6 ; 
but  in  Rom.  viii.  14, 17,  we  have  both  viol  and  rAcvoy  and 
both  in  the  ethical  sense.  In  Rom.  viii.  21  rAcpa  has  the 
legal  sense.  In  Rom.  ix.  8;  Eph.  v.  1,  the  ethical  sense. 
8.  In  Christ  Jesus.  Const,  with  faith.  The  article  before 
wiareea^  faith  may  point  back  to  the  faith  previously  men- 
tioned, or  may  have,  as  so  often,  a  possessive  force,  your 
faith. 

27.  Were  baptized  into  Christ  (ej?  Xpurrhv  ifiairrMrrnf). 
See  on  Matt,  xxviii.  19.  Not  in  relation  to  Christ  (Meyer), 
but  into  spiritual  union  and  conmiunion  with  him.  Comp. 
Rom.  vi.  8  (see  note) ;  1  Cor.  xii.  12,  18,  27.  Paul  here 
conceives  baptism,  not  as  a  mere  symbolical  transaction,  bat 
as  an  act  in  which  believers  are  put  into  mystical  union  with 
the  crucified  and  risen  Lord.     Comp.  Rom.  vi.  8-11. 

TOL.  IV.— • 


ISO  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Gs.  lO. 

(You)  put  on  Christ  (Xpurrw  hf^vaaade).  The  phrase 
only  here  and  Rom.  xiii.  14.  The  figurative  use  of  the  verb 
occurs  only  once  in  the  Gospels,  L.  xxiv.  49,  but  often  in 
Paul,  1  Cor.  XV.  58 ;  Eph.  iv.  24 ;  Col.  iii.  10,  12,  etc. 
Chrysostora  (^Hom.  xiii.  on  Ephesians)  remarks,  **  We  say  of 
friends,  one  prU%  on  the  other,  meaning  thereby  much  love 
and  unceasing  fellowship."  In  LXX  quite  often  in  the  fignr- 
ative  sense,  as  Judg.  vi.  34 ;  1  Chron.  xii.  18 ;  2  Chron.  vi. 
41 ;  Job  viii.  22 ;  xxix.  14 ;  Ps.  cviii.  18.  Similarly  in 
class.,  Plato,  Rep.  620,  of  Thersites  putting  on  the  form  of  a 
monkey :  Xen.  Cyr.  ii.  1,  18,  of  insinuating  one's  self  into 
the  minds  of  hearers.  So  the  Lat.  induere  :  Cicero,  Ife  Off. 
iii.  10,  48,  to  assume  the  part  of  a  judge :  Tac.  Ann.  xvi.  28, 
to  take  on  the  part  of  a  traitor  or  enemy.  To  put  on  Christ 
implies  making  his  character,  feelings  and  works  our  own. 
Thus  Chrysostom  :  ^^  If  Christ  is  Son  of  God,  and  thou  hast 
put  him  on,  having  the  Son  in  thyself  and  being  made  like 
unto  him,  thou  hast  been  brought  into  one  family  and  one 
nature.''  And  again:  **He  who  is  clothed  appears  to  be 
that  with  which  he  is  clothed." 

28.  With  this  putting  on  of  Christ,  the  distinctions  of 
your  ordinary  social  relations  —  of  nation,  condition,  sex  — 
vanish.     Comp.  Rom.  x.  12  ;  1  Cor.  xii.  18 ;  Col.  iii.  11. 

There  is  (ft/0-  Only  in  Paul  (1  Cor.  vi.  6  ;  Col.  iii.  11) 
and  Jas.  i.  17.  "Em  is  the  abbreviation  of  ivem  there  u  tfi 
or  among. ^ 

Male  nor  female  (Jipaev  teal  drjiKv).  Comp.  Matt.  xix.  4. 
He  has  said  "  Jew  nor  Greek  "  ;  "  bond  nor  free."  Here  he 
says  ^^male  and  (jcaX)  female  " ;  perhaps  because  political  and 

«  Ellicott  and  Light! oot  deny  this,  and  say  that  %wi  is  the  lengthened  f6rm 
of  the  adverbialised  preposition  iv,  with  which  Ion  must  Ibe  sapplied.  Bnt 
both  retain  in  their  texts  the  accentuation  In,  whereas  the  lengthened  f6rm 
of  the  preposition  is  M,  In  1  Cor.  vi.  5,  and  often  in  Class.,  Mwi  and  iw  are 
found  together,  showing  that  In  stands  independently  as  a  compoond  word 
See  Xen.  Anah.  t.  3,  11 ;  Hdt  Tii.  112 ;  Plato,  PKaedo,  77  B. 


Ch.  iy.]  the  epistle  to  the  oalatians.  181 

social  distinctions  are  alterable,  while  the  distinction  of  sex 
is  unalterable,  though  absorbed  in  the  new  relation  to  Christ. 
Yet  see  Col.  iii.  11,  where  we  find,  "not  Greek  and  Jew,  cir- 
cumcision and  uncircumcision/' 

Ye  are  all  one.  One  moral  personality.  The  individual 
differences  are  merged  in  the  higher  unity  into  which  all  are 
raised  by  their  common  life  in  Christ.  This  is  the  one  new 
man^  Eph.  ii.  15. 

29.  Abraham's  seed.  As  being  one  with  Christ.  See 
vv.  7,  16.  In  Rom.  iv.  Paul  shows  that  Abraham  was  justi- 
fied by  faith,  and  was  thus  constituted  the  spiritual  father  of 
all  believers  in  Christ,  whether  circumcised  or  uncircumcised. 
The  purpose  of  God  in  making  the  inheritance  of  the  promise 
dependent  on  faith  was  that  the  promise  might  be  sure  to  aU 
the  seed.  Abraham,  he  says,  is  ^^the  father  of  tis  aW^  (Rom. 
iv.  16).  This  spiritual  paternity  does  away  with  the  current 
Jewish  notion  of  physical  paternity.  Physical  relationship 
with  Abraham  is  of  no  significance  in  the  economy  of  salva- 
tion. The  apostle  *^  discovers  the  basis  of  Christian  univers- 
alism  in  the  very  life  of  him  in  whose  person  theocratic 
particularism  was  founded.  He  has  demonstrated  the  exist- 
ence of  a  time  when  he  represented  Gentilism,  or,  to  speak 
more  properly,  mankind  in  general ;  and  it  was  during  this 
period,  when  he  was  not  yet  a  Jew,  but  simply  a  man,  that 
he  received  salvation"  (Godet). 


CHAPTER  IV. 

The  last  words  of  ch.  iii.,  ^^ heirs  according  to  the  promise," 
are  now  further  discussed.  It  is  shown  that  the  capability 
of  heirship,  which  was  first  conferred  through  Christ,  could 
not  enter  earlier  into  the  history  of  mankind,  because  man- 
kind was  still  in  its  minority  ;  and  its  majority,  its  sonship, 
was  first  entered  upon  through  Christ.  The  way  of  the  law 
was  not,  as  the  Jews  supposed,  a  direct  way  to  the  fulfilment 


182  WORD  BTUDIM  19  THS  HEW  nVTAMKNT.       [Gii.  IV. 

of  the  divine  promise.  At  the  same  time,  it  did  not  atterlj 
lead  away  from  the  tme  goal.  It  was  a  ronndaboat  way  to 
it.  Sabatier  (VApdtre  Paul)  obaervee :  ""Tbe  law  is  neither 
abeolately  identicnl  with  the  promise,  nor  absolutely  opposed 
to  it.  It  is  not  the  negation  of  the  promise,  but  is  distinct 
from  it  and  subordinate  to  it.  Its  i^al  purpose  lies  in  the 
promise  itself.  It  is  an  essential  but  transitional  element  in 
the  historical  development  of  humanity.  It  must  disappear 
on  attaining  its  goal.  *  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law.*  **  But 
why  was  this  way  necessary  ?  Why  did  not  God  open  the 
way  of  faith  leading  to  the  inheritance  of  the  promise  inuned- 
lately  after  the  promise  was  given  ?  The  answer  to  tins  was 
indicated  in  iii.  24-26.     It  is  now  given  more  folly. 

1.  Now  I  say  (X^€»5^).  Introducing  a  continued,  explan- 
atory discimsion.     Comp.  ch.  iii.  17 ;  v.  16  ;  1  Cor.  i.  12. 

The  heir  (6  K\ripov6fu^^.  See  on  tnheritanee^  1  Pet.  i.  4. 
The  article  is  generic  as  in  the  mediator^  ch.  iii.  20. 

A  child  (vrfinoi).  A  minor.  See  on  1  Cor.  iii.  1.  Used 
by  Paul  in  contrast  with  riXeio^full  grown.  See  Eph.  iv.  18 ; 
1  Cor.  xiv.  20  ;  Philip,  iii.  15.  The  Jews  called  proselytes 
or  novices  haheB.     See  Rom.  ii.  20. 

Lord  of  all.   Legally,  by  right  of  birth,  though  not  actually. 

2.  Tutors  (hnrpdirovti).  Better,  guardians.  See  on  L. 
viii.  3.  Only  here  in  Paul.  A  general  term,  covering  all 
to  whom  supervision  of  the  child  is  intrusted,  and  should  not 
be  limited  to  watBaytDyJ^  (ch.  iii.  24).  See  2  Mace.  xi.  1 ; 
xiii.  2  ;  xiv.  2. 

Governors  (^oUov6fiov^}.  Better,  stewards.  Lat.  dispens- 
atores.  More  special  than  guardians^  signifying  those  who 
had  charge  of  the  heir's  property.  See  on  L.  xvi.  1.  In 
later  Greek  it  was  used  in  two  special  senses  :  1.  The  slave 
whose  duty  it  was  to  distribute  the  rations  to  the  other  slaves : 


C&  IV.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OALATIAK8.  183 

80  L.  xii.  42.  2.  The  land-ttetpard :  so  L.  xvi.  1.  Comp. 
Rom.  xvi.  28,  o  oUovdfio^  r^  irdkeco^^  commonly  rendered 
eitjf-trea9urer :  A.  V.  chamberlain.*  In  Lucian,  Alex.  89, 
the  Roman  procurators,  or  fiscal  administrators,  are  called  ol 
KaCaapo^  oUov6fAoi ;  comp.  1  Esdr.  iv.  49  ;  Esth.  viii.  9.  The 
dupeneatar  in  the  Roman  household  had  charge  of  the  accounts 
and  made  the  payments  (see  Cicero,  ad  Ait.  xi.  1 ;  Juv.  Sat. 
i.  91).  He  was  commonly  a  slave.  Christian  teachers  are 
called  ^^ stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  God''  and  ^*of  the 
grace  of  God "  (1  Cor.  iv.  1 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  10),  as  those  who 
have  received  the  counsels  of  God  and  impart  them  to  men. 
A  bishop  or  overseer  is  also  called  *'a  steward  of  God'' 
(Tit.  i.  7). 

The  time  appointed  (wpoOeafila^^  N.T.^  ^LXX.  In 
Athenian  law  the  terra  limited  for  bringing  actions  and  pros- 
ecutions. TlpoOeafiCa^  v6fio^  a  statute  of  limitatians.  It  was 
also  applied  to  the  time  allowed  a  defendant  for  paying  dam- 
ages, after  the  expiration  of  which,  if  he  had  not  paid,  he  was 
called  {nrepi^/iepo^,  or  i/cwfxiOea'fio^^  or  inrepirfMefrfio^  one  who 
had  gone  over  his  day  of  payment  Whether  Paul's  figure 
assumes  that  the  father  is  dead  or  living  is  a  point  which  does 
not  affect  his  argument.  It  is  not  easy  to  decide.  As  Alford 
justly  remarks  :  "  the  antitype  breaks  through  the  type  and 
disturbs  it,  as  is  the  case  wherever  the  idea  of  inheritance  is 
spiritualised."  TlpoOeaiila  an  appointed  time  for  the  termina- 
tion of  the  minority^  would  seem  to  imply  that  the  father  is 
conceived  as  living ;  since,  if  he  were  dead,  that  matter 
would  be  regulated  by  statute,  f 

3.  We.  Not  Jewish  Christians  only,  but  all  Christians. 
For  in  ver.  5,  Jewish  Christians  are  distinctly  characterised 


•  Hatch,  Es9ay»  in  Biblical  Greek,  p.  78,  thinks  that  it  means  the  admin- 
istrator of  the  citif  lands.  'Oucowo/da  in  papyri  of  the  flnt  and  second  centuries 
A.D.  often  signifies  record,  document. 

t  The  living  father,  Meyer,  Sieffert.  Alford,  Ellicott,  Eadie,  leave  ft 
undecided.  The  dead  father,  Lipsius,  Ligjitfoot,  with  the  majority  of  older 
interpretexB. 


134  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  IV. 

as  those  under  the  law,  while  the  following  we^  subjects  of 
Christian  adoption,  points  back  to  the  we  in  this  verse.  Again, 
elements  of  the  world  is  too  wide  a  conception  to  snit  the  law, 
which  was  given  to  Israel  only. 

Elements  of  the  world  (rh  croi^x^la  rot)  tcSaptovy.      For 
the  word  aroix^ia  in  N.  T.  see  Col.  ii.  8,  20 ;    Heb.  v.  12 ; 
2  Pet.  iii.  10,  12.     See  on  2  Pet.  iii.  10.      Interpretations 
differ.    1.  Elements  of  knowledge^  rudimentary  religious  ideas. 
See  Heb.  v.  12.      The  meaning  of  world  will  then  be,  the 
material  as  distinguished  from  the  spiritual  realm.    Elements 
of  the  world  will  be  the  crude  beginnings  of  religion,  suited 
to  the  condition  of  children,  and  pertaining  to  those  who  are 
not  Christians :    elementary  religious  truths  belonging  to 
mankind  in  general.      Thus  the  Jewish  economy  was  of  the 
world  as  appealing  to  the  senses,  and  affording  only  the  first 
elements  of  a  spiritual  system.     The  child-heir  was  taught 
only  faint  outlines  of  spiritual  truth,  and  was  taught  them 
by  worldly  symbols.     2.  Elements  of  nature — of  the  physical 
world,  especially  the  heavenly  bodies.     See  2  Pet.  iii.  10, 12 ; 
Wisd.  vii.  17.      According  to  this  explanation,  the  point 
would  be  that  the  ordering  of  the  religious  life  was  regulated 
by  the  order  of  nature ;  "the  days,  months,  times,''  etc.  (ver. 
10),  as  well  as  the  heathen  festivals,  being  dependent  on  the 
movements  of  the  heavenly  bodies.     This  was  the  patristic 
view  (Ambrose,  Augustine,  Chrysostom,  Theodoret).    8.  The 
elements  of  the  world  are  the  personal^  elemental  spirits.    This 
seems  to  be  the  preferable  explanation,  both  here  and  in  Col. 
ii.  8.    According  to  Jewish  ideas,  all  things  had  their  special 
angels.     In  the  Book  of  Jubilees^  ch.  ii.,  appear,  the  angel  of 
the  presence  (comp.  Isa.  Ixiii.  9);  the  angel  of  adoration ;  the 
spirits  of  the  wind,  the  clouds,  darkness,  hail,  frost,  thunder 
and  lightning,  winter  and  spring,  cold  and  heat.    In  the  Book 
of  Enochs  Ixxxii.  10-14,  appear  the  angels  of  the  stars,  who 
keep  watch  that  the  stars  may  appear  at  the  appointed  time, 
and  who  are  punished  if  the  stars  do  not  appear  (xviii-  15). 
In  the  Apocalypse  of  John  we  find  four  angels  of  the  winds 
(xiv.  18);  the  angel  of  the  waters  (xvi.  5);  the  angel  in  the 


Ch.  IV.]  THE   EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIAN8.  185 

8iin  (xix.  17).  In  Heb.  i.  7  we  read,  ^'  who  maketh  his  angels 
winds.'^  Paul  also  recognises  elemental  forces  of  the  spiritual 
world.  Hie  thorn  is  "  a  messenger  of  Satan "  (2  Cor.  xii. 
7)  ;  Satan  prevents  his  journey  to  Thessalonica  (1  Th.  ii. 
18)  ;  the  Corinthian  offender  is  to  be  "delivered  to  Satan " 
(1  Cor.  V.  6)  ;  the  Kingdom  of  God  is  opposed  by  "princi- 
palities and  powers "  (1  Cor.  xv.  24)  ;  Christians  wrestle 
against  "  the  rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this  world  ;  against 
the  spiritual  hosts  of  wickedness  in  the  upper  regions"  (Eph. 
vi.  12).  In  this  passage  the  elements  of  the  world  are  com- 
pared with  overseers  and  stewards.  This  would  seem  to 
require  a  personal  interpretation.  In  ver.  8,  "  did  service  to 
them  which  by  nature  are  no  gods,"  appears  to  be  =  "  in 
bondage  under  the  elements,"  suggesting  a  personal  interpre- 
tation of  the  latter.  The  Galatians  had  turned  again  to  the 
observance  of  times  and  seasons  (ver.  10),  which  were  con- 
trolled by  the  heavenly  bodies  and  their  spirits.* 

4.  Fulness  of  the  time  (to  wXiiptofxa  rov  yjnivov).  The 
moment  by  which  the  whole  pre-messianic  period  was  com- 
pleted. Comp.  Eph.  i.  10.  It  answers  to  the  time  appointed 
of  the  Father  (ver.  2).  For  irXtiptoiia  see  on  J.  i.  16.  The 
meaning  of  the  word  is  habitually  passive  —  that  which  is 
completed^  full  complement.  There  are  frequent  instances  of 
its  use  with  the  genitive,  as  "  fulness  of  the  earthy  blessing^ 
time^  the  sea^  Christ^^^  in  all  which  it  denotes  the  plenitude  or 
completeness  which  characterises  the  nouns. f 

Sent  forth  (i^aTrdareikev).  From  himself :  from  his  heav- 
enly glory.     This  does  not  mean  that  God  then,  for  the  first 


•  See  E.  Y.  Hincks,  Journal  of  Bibl  LU.,  Vol.  XV.,  1896,  p.  183.  Otto 
Everling,  Die  paulinische  Angelologie  und  Ddmonologie,  p.  65  £f.  H.  von 
8oden,  on  Col.  it  8,  in  the  Hand-Commentar,  A.  Ritachl,  Bechlfertigung 
und  Versdhnung,  Sd  ed.,  ii.,  p.  252.  F.  Spitta,  Der  zweUe  Brief  des  Petrus, 
etc.,  p.  263  ff.  £.  Ktihl,  Meyer  series.  On  Peter  and  Jude.  T.  K.  Abbott, 
International  Commentary,  on  Col.  ii.  8. 

t  See  T.  K.  Abbott  on  Eph.  i.  23,  Intemationdl  Commentary,  and  comp. 
Lightfoot^B  detached  note  in  Commentary  on  Colossians,  p.  323. 


186  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ck.  IV. 

time,  embodied  what  had  previously  been  a  mere  ideal,  bat 
that  he  sent  forth  a  preexisting  person.     See  Philip,  ii.  6.* 

Made  of  a  woman  (yev6/i€vop).  Or  bam.  Repeated,  and 
expressing  the  fact  that  Christ  became  a  man,  as  disting^uished 
from  his  prehistoric  form  of  being. 

Under  the  law.  The  earthly  being  of  Christ  began  under 
the  law.  He  was  not  only  of  human  birth,  but  of  Jewish 
birth ;  subjected  to  all  the  ordinances  of  the  law,  as  circum- 
cision for  instance,  like  any  other  Jewish  boy. 

5.  To  redeem  (tva  i^ayopdajf).  See  on  ch.  iii.  18.  To 
redeem  from  the  dominion  and  curse  of  the  law.  The  means 
of  redemption  is  not  mentioned.  It  cannot  be  merely  the 
birth  of  Christ  of  a  woman  and  under  the  law.  These  are 
mentioned  only  as  the  preliminary  and  necessary  conditions 
of  his  redeeming  work.  The  means  or  method  appears  in 
ch.  iii.  13. 

We  might  receive  {awo\dfia>fA€v^.  Not  receive  again  or 
back^  as  L.  xv.  27,  for  adoption  was  something  which  men 
did  not  have  before  Christ ;  but  receive  from  the  giver. 

The  adoption  (t^p  vioOeaCav),  P®.  See  on  Rom.  viii. 
15,  and  comp.  Rom.  ix.  4  ;  Eph.  i.  5.  Not  sonship,  but  son- 
ship  conferred. 

6.  Because  ye  are  sons  (^0*  ^^^  ^^  ^^  ^^  sense  at 
the  beginning  of  a  clause  see  Rom.  ix.  7 ;  1  Cor.  xii.  15 ;  J. 
XV.  19  ;  XX.  29.  The  emphasis  is  on  eons.  The  spirit  would 
not  be  given  if  ye  were  not  %on%.  Others  take  &n  as  demon- 
strative, ae  a  proof  that  ye  are  sons;  but  examples  of  sucii 
usage  are  wanting.     It  is  not  a  proof  of  the  fact  of  sonship 

*  See  InUrnationtU  Commentary  on  Philippians  and  I^Uemon,  p.  88,  and 
A.  B.  Brace,  The  Humiliation  of  Christ,  p.  431.  Also  W.  Beyschlag,  IXs 
Chriatologie  dee  Neuen  Testaments,  and  Neutestamentliehe  Theologies  2  Aofl., 
Vol.  n.,  p.  77  ff. 


Cr.  IV.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OALATIAK8.  187 

that  the  apostle  is  giving,  but  a  eansequence  of  it.  Comp. 
Rom.  viii.  16,  where  the  witness  of  the  Spirit  attests  the 
sonship. 

The  Spirit  of  his  Son.  The  Holy  Spirit  which  animated 
Jesus  in  his  human  life,  and  which,  in  the  risen  Christ,  is  the 
life-principle  of  believers.  See  1  Cor.  xv.  45,  and  comp.  Rom. 
viii.  9-11.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  called  the  Spirit  of  Christy 
Rom.  viii.  9,  10,  where  Paul  uses  Spirit  of  Q-od^  Spirit  of 
Christ  and  Christ  as  convertible  terms.  The  phrase  Spirit  of 
Jesus  Christ  only  Philip,  i.  19.  In  J.  iii.  84  Christ  is  repre- 
sented as  dispensing  the  Spirit.  He  is  fully  endowed  with 
the  Spirit  (Mk.  i.  10  ;  J.  i.  82)  :  he  sends  the  Spirit  from 
the  Father  to  the  disciples,  and  he  is  the  burden  of  the  Spirit's 
testimony  (J.  xv.  26  ;  xvi.  7,  9,  10,  16).  The  Paraclete  is 
given  in  answer  to  Christ's  prayer  (J.  xiv.  16).  Christ 
identifies  his  own  coming  and  presence  with  those  of  the 
Spirit  (J.  xiv.  17, 18).  Paul  identifies  him  personally  with 
the  Spirit  (2  Cor.  iii.  17). 

Our  hearts.  Note  the  interchange  of  persons  :  we  might 
receive,  ye  are  sons,  our  hearts.     Comp.  Rom.  vii.  4. 

Crying  (jcpa^op).  A  strong  word,  expressing  deep  emo- 
tion. The  verb  originally  represents  the  sound  of  a  croak  or 
harsh  scream  ;  thence,  generally,  an  inarticulate  ery ;  an 
exclamation  of  fear  or  pain.  The  cry  of  an  animal.  So 
Aristoph.  Knights,  1017,  of  the  barking  of  a  dog  :  286,  287, 
of  two  men  in  a  quarrel,  trying  to  bawl  each  other  down : 
Frogs,  258,  of  the  croaking  of  frogs.  This  original  sense 
appears  in  N.  T.  usage,  as  Matt.  xiv.  26 ;  xv.  23 ;  xxvii. 
50  ;  Mk.  V.  5,  etc.,  and  is  recognised  even  where  the  word  is 
used  in  connection  with  articulate  speech,  by  adding  to  it  the 
participles  \iiy»v,  X^ovre^  saying,  or  SiSdortca>p  teaching.  See 
Matt.  viii.  29  ;  xv.  22  ;  Mk.  iii.  11 ;  J.  vii.  28,  etc.  In  Mk. 
X.  47  the  inarticulate  cry  and  the  articulate  utterance  are 
distinguished.  At  the  same  time,  the  word  is  often  used  of 
articulate  speech  without  such  additions,  as  Mk.  x.  48  ;  xi. 
9  ;    XV.  18, 14  ;   L.  xviii.  89  ;  Acts  vii.  60  ;   xix.  34  ;  Rom. 


138  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ck  IV. 

viii.  15.  It  falls  into  more  dignified  association  in  LXX, 
where  it  is  often  used  of  prayer  or  appeal  to  God,  as  Judg. 
iii.  9, 16  ;  iv.  8  ;  vi.  7  ;  Ps.  xxi.  2,  5  ;  xxvii.  1 ;  liv.  16  ; 
and  in  N.  T.,  where  it  is  applied  to  solemn,  prophetic  utter- 
ance, as  Rom.  ix.  27  ;  J.  i.  15,  and  is  used  of  Jesus  himself, 
as  J.  vii.  28,  87  ;  xii.  44,  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  here. 
The  Spirit  is  represented  as  uttering  the  cry,  because  the 
Spirit  gives  the  inspiration  of  which  the  believer  is  the  organ. 
In  Kom.  viii.  15  the  statement  is  inverted.  The  believer 
cries  under  the  power  of  the  Spirit. 

Abba,  Father.  Comp.  Mk.  xiv.  36 ;  Rom.  viii.  16.  *0  iranjp 
the  Father^  is  not  added  in  order  to  explain  the  Aramaic 
Ahha  for  Greek  readers.  Rather  the  whole  phrase  *A/3/3d 
6  irarrip  had  passed  into  the  early  Christian  prayers,  the  Ara- 
maic title  by  which  Christ  addressed  his  Father  (Mk.  xiv. 
86)  being  very  early  united  with  the  Greek  synonym.  Such 
combinations  of  Hebrew  and  Greek  addresses  having  the 
same  meaning  were  employed  in  rabbinical  writings.  Comp. 
also  Apoc.  ix.  11 ;  xii.  9. 

7.  Servant  (80OX09).  Bondservant.  See  on  Matt.  xx. 
26 ;  Mk.  ix.  35  ;  Rom.  i.  1. 

Then  an  heir  (^koX  K\ripov6fAa^^.  Kal  marks  the  logical 
sequence.  Comp.  Rom.  viii.  17.  The  figure  is  based  upon 
Roman,  not  upon  Jewish,  law.  According  to  Roman  law,  all 
the  children,  sons  and  daughters,  inherited  alike.  According 
to  Jewish  law,  the  inheritance  of  the  sons  was  unequal,  and 
the  daughters  were  excluded,  except  where  there  were  no 
male  heirs.  Thus  the  Roman  law  furnished  a  more  truthful 
illustration  of  the  privileges  of  Christians.    Comp.  ch.  iii.  28. 

Of  God  through  Christ.  The  correct  reading  is  &^  0mi 
through  Qodj  omitting  Christ. 

8.  Over  against  their  filial  freedom  in  Christ,  Paul  sets 
their  lapse  into  subjection  to  the  elements  of  the  world 
(ver.  3). 


Ch.  IV.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OALATIAK8.  189 

Knew  not  God.    See  on  2  Th.  i.  8. 

Ye  did  service  QiSovXevaare).  Better,  were  in  bondage  or 
were  slaves. 

By  nature  (^mtcO-  Not  denying  their  existence  (comp. 
1  Cor.  viii.  5)  but  their  deity.  Emphasis  on  by  nature. 
Comp.  1  Cor.  x.  20. 

9.  Rather  are  known  of  God.  Rather  corrects  the  first 
statement,  have  known  God^  which  might  seem  to  attach  too 
much  to  human  agency  in  attaining  the  knowledge  of  God. 
The  divine  side  of  the  process  is  thrown  into  the  foreground 
by  are  known^  etc.  Known  does  not  mean  approved  or 
acknowledged^  but  simply  recognised.  Saving  knowledge  is 
doubtless  implied,  but  is  not  expressed  in  the  word.  The 
relation  of  knowledge  between  God  and  his  sons  proceeds 
from  God.  The  Galatians  had  not  arrived  at  the  knowledge 
of  God  by  intuition  nor  by  any  process  of  reasoning.  "  God 
knew  them  ere  they  knew  him,  and  his  knowing  them  was 
the  cause  of  their  knowing  him"  (Eadie).  Comp.  1  Cor. 
xiii.  12  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  19  ;  Matt.  vii.  28.  Dean  Stanley  remarks 
that  ^^our  knowledge  of  God  is  more  his  act  than  ours.''  If 
God  knows  a  man,  that  fact  implies  an  activity  of  God  which 
passes  over  to  the  man,  so  that  he,  as  the  subject  of  God's 
knowledge,  comes  into  the  knowledge  of  God.  In  N.  T. 
jivc^KeiP  often  implies  a  personal  relation  between  the  knower 
and  the  known,  so  that  knowledge  implies  influence.  See 
1  Cor.  ii.  8  ;  J.  i.  10  ;  ii.  24  ;  xvii.  8.  For  a  parallel  to 
this  interchange  between  the  active  and  the  passive,  see 
Philip,  iii.  12. 

How  (Trw).  "A  question  full  of  wonder'*  (Bengel). 
Comp.  /  marvel^  ch.  i.  6. 

Turn  ye  again  (iirurrp4<l>er€  irdkip).  Better,  the  continu- 
ous present,  are  ye  turning^  as  of  a  change  still  in  progress. 
Comp.  ch.  i.  6.     HdXip  again^  according  to  N.  T.  usage,  and 


140  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TBBTAHENT.       (Cb.  HT. 

corresponding  with  wdKiP  StmOev  in  the  following  clause. 
Not  baeki  which  is  the  earlier  sense  and  the  nsnal  classical 
meaning. 

Weak  and  beggarly  elements  {turdevti  icai  vr^xk  aro^ 
;^£ta).  For  elemewU  see  on  ver.  3.  For  imtyk  heggarljf^  see 
on  Matt.  V.  3.  The  two  adjectives  express  tiie  utter  impo- 
tence of  these  ^^  elements ''  to  do  and  to  bestow  what  was  done 
and  given  by  God  in  sending  his  Son  into  the  world.  Comp. 
Rom.  viii.  8 ;  Heb.  vii.  18. 

Again  Qtrdkiv  avwOeii).  ''K,iw0€»  (Saw  abate)  adds  to  irdXw 
the  idea  of  going  back  to  the  beginning.  Its  primary  meaning 
is  from  above;  thence,  from  the  fint^  reckoning  in  a  descend- 
ing series.  So  L.  i.  3  ;  Acts  xxvi.  5.*  Such  combinatioiis 
as  this  are  not  uncommon  in  N.  T.  and  Class.  See,  for 
instance,  Acts  xviii.  21 ;  Matt.  xxvi.  42 ;  Acts  x.  15 ;  J. 
xxi.  16.  But  these  additions  to  wdXiv  are  not  pleonastic. 
They  often  define  and  explain  it.  Thus,  J.  xxi.  16,  wdXtw 
marks  the  repetition  of  Jesus'  question,  Seurepop  the  number 
of  the  repetition.  He  asked  again^  and  this  was  the  eeeand 
time  of  asking. 

Ye  desire  (BiXere).  It  was  more  than  a  mere  desire. 
They  were  bent  on  putting  themselves  again  into  bondage. 
See  on  Matt.  i.  19. 

10.  Ye  observe  (irapanipeurOe).  See  on  Mk.  iii.  2,  and 
J.  xviii.  12,  und  comp.  Joseph.  Ant.  iii.  5,  5,  waparrfpehf  Tck 
ifiSofidSa^  to  watch  the  weeks.  The  word  denotes  ear^fulj 
scrupulous  observance,  an  intent  watching  lest  any  of  the 
prescribed  seasons  should  be  overlooked.  A  merely  legal  or 
ritual  religion  always  develops  such  scrupulousness. 

Days.  Sabbaths,  fast-days,  feast-days,  new  moons.  Comp. 
Kom.  xiv.  5,  6 ;  Col.  ii.  16. 

*  Dr.  Plummer  on  L.  i.  3  is,  I  think,  misuken  in  explaining  dpttOtw  tn 
Acts  zxfL  6  as  radkUus  (thoroughly). 


Ch.  IV.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OALATIAKS.  141 

Months.  Sacred  months.  Comp.  Isa.  Ixvi.  23.  In  the 
preexilic  time  the  months  were  mostly  not  named  but  num- 
bered firsts  second^  thirds  etc.,  and  this  usage  appears  also  in 
the  post-exilic  writings  of  the  O.  T.  Only  four  months  had 
special  names  :  the  first,  Abib,  the  ear-month,  which  marked 
the  beginning  of  harvest  (Ex.  xiii.  4 ;  xxiii.  15  ;  xxxiv.  18)  : 
the  second,  Sif  or  Ziv,  the  flower-month  (1  K.  vi.  1,  87):  the 
seventh,  Ethanim,  the  month  of  streaming  rivers  fed  by  the 
autumnal  rains  (1  K.  viii.  2)  :  the  eighth,  Bui,  the  month  of 
rain  (1  K.  vi.  38).  In  the  post-exilic  time  names  for  all  the 
months  came  into  use,  the  most  of  which  appear  in  the  Pal- 
myrene  inscriptions  and  among  the  Syrians.  According  to 
the  Talmud,  the  returning  Jews  brought  these  names  from 
Babylon.  The  names  of  all  are  found  in  a  month-table  dis- 
covered at  Nineveh.  Nisan  corresponds  to  Abib  (Neh.  ii.  1 ; 
Esth.  iii.  7),  answering  to  the  latter  part  of  March  and  April. 
Jjar  answered  to  Ziv  (Targ.  2  Chron.  xxx.  2),  our  May. 
Tisri  to  Ethanim,  the  seventh  month  of  the  ecclesiastical, 
and  the  first  of  the  civil  year,  corresponding  to  October. 
Marcheschwan  (see  Joseph.  Ant.  i.  3,  3)  answered  to  Bui  and 
November.  Tisri,  being  the  seventh  or  sabbatical  month,  was 
peculiarly  sacred,  and  the  fourth  (Sivan,  June),  fifth  (Ab, 
August),  and  tenth  (Tebeth,  January)  were  distinguished 
by  special  fasts.* 

Times  (iccupo^).  Better,  seasons.  See  on  Matt.  xii.  1 ; 
Eph.  i.  10,  and  comp.  Lev.  xxiii.  4.  The  holy,  festal  seasons, 
as  Passover  Pentecost,  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  See  2  Chron. 
viii.  13. 

Years  (^i/tauroiJ?).  Sabbatical  years,  occurring  every  sev- 
enth year.  Not  years  of  Jubilee,  which  had  ceased  to  be 
celebrated  after  the  time  of  Solomon. 

11.  I  am  afraid  of  you  (j^fioviuu  v/ao?).  Not  a  felici- 
tous translation,  though  retained  by  Rev.      Rather,  ^^  I  am 

•  See  Ewald,  AniiquUieB  of  Imrael  (tnms.),  p.  842  £L  Riehm,  Handw.  de$ 
Bib,  Alterth,,  Art.  ''MonMe.'*  Sohnder,  EeQinschriften,  8d  ed.  Wiewler, 
Chronologie. 


142  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [CSh.  IY. 

afraid  for  you  or  concerning  you.*'  The  second  v/ao?  is  not 
attracted  into  the  principal  clause  so  as  to  read,  ^*  I  am  afraid 
lest  I  have  bestowed  labour/*  etc.  The  two  clauses  are  dis- 
tinct, lam  afraid  about  you:  then  the  reason  for  the  fear  is 
added,  lest  I  have  bestowed^  etc. 

Upon  you  (ek  v/ao?).  Lit.  into  you.  The  labour,  though 
in  vain,  had  borne  directly  upon  its  object.  See  the  same 
phrase  Rom.  xvi.  6. 

In  vain  (eU^).  Comp.  ch.  iii.  4 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  2,  and  dt 
k€v6p  to  no  purpose^  Philip,  ii.  16 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  1 ;  Gal.  ii.  2 ; 
1  Th.  iii.  5.  After  all  my  labour,  you  may  return  to  Juda- 
ism.    Luther  says :  ^^  These  words  of  Paul  breathe  tears.' 


»» 


12.  Be  as  I  am  (ytveaOe  m  iyA).  Better,  become  as  I 
am ;  free  from  the  bondage  of  Jewish  ordinances. 

I  am  as  ye  are  (xayw  i^  vfie!?).  UstheT^  I  became.  Sup- 
ply iy€p6fir)p  or  ydyopa.  Become  as  I  am,  for  I  became  a 
Gentile  like  you.  Comp.  Philip,  iii.  7,  8.  For  the  phrase 
yivArdcu  m  to  become  a«,  see  Matt.  vi.  16;  Rom.  ix.  29; 
1  Cor.  iv.  13 ;  ix.  20-22. 

Ye  have   not  injured  me  at  all  (pvidp  lu  rfiucrfaan). 

This  translation  misses  the  force  of  the  aorist,  and  conveys  a 
wrong  impression,  that  Paul,  up  to  this  time,  had  received 
no  wrong  at  the  hands  of  the  Galatians.  This  was  not  true. 
The  reference  is  to  his  earlier  relations  with  the  Galatians, 
and  is  explained  by  vv.  13, 14.  Rend,  ye  did  not  injure  me 
at  all.     Ye  did  not  injure  me  then,  do  not  do  so  now. 

13.  Ye  know  (olhart  80-  The  A.  V.  omits  Si  which  is 
wanting  in  some  Mss.  Ai  not  oppositional  as  commonly  ex- 
plained: ^^  Ye  did  not  injure  me,  but  on  the  contrary  ye  faiow, 
etc." ;  but  introducing  an  explanation  of  ye  did  not  ingwre 
me  by  reference  to  the  fact  that  they  might  easily  have  been 
moved  to  do  him  wrong  by  the  unfavourable  circumstanoea 


Cr.  iv.]  the  epistle  to  the  galatians.  143 

under  which  he  first  preached  the  gospel  to  them  (through 
infirmity  of  the  flesh).  The  formulas  oZSa  Bi^  olBaficp  Si^ 
oiBaT€  Sk<,  are  habitually  used  by  Paul  to  introduce  an  explan- 
ation  of  what  precedes,  from  a  new  point  of  view.  See 
Rom.  ii.  2 ;  iii.  19 ;  xv.  29 ;  Philip,  iv.  15.  The  general  sense 
therefore  is:  ^^Ye  did  not  wrong  me  at  all  as  you  might 
easily  have  been  moved  to  do ;  for  (8i)  you  know  in  what 
an  unfavourable  light  my  infirmities  placed  me  when  I  first 
came  among  you.'' 

Through  infirmity  (Si*  iaOAfeiav).  On  account  of  infirm- 
ity. Referring  to  the  fact  that  Paul,  in  his  first  journey, 
was  compelled  by  sickness  to  remain  in  Galatia,  and  preached 
to  the  Galatians  during  this  enforced  sojourn.  This  fact 
made  their  kindly  reception  the  more  commendable.* 

At  the  first  (to  irpir^pov).  Either  generally,  at  an  earlier 
time  than  the  present  (as  J.  vi.  62 ;  ix.  8 ;  1  Tim.  i.  13),  or 
the  first  time  (as  Heb.  vii.  27).  Here  in  the  latter  sense. 
Paul  had  visited  the  Gralatians  twice  before  he  wrote  this 
letter. 

14.  My  temptation  which  was  in  my  flesh  (rov  ireipaa- 
fiip  vfjL&v  iv  T^  aapKl  fiov}.  The  correct  reading  is  ireipao'/ibp 
vfjL&v  your  temptation.  The  trial  to  which  they  were  sub- 
jected by  his  bodily  infirmity  (ver.  13),  and  which  might 
have  tempted  them  to  treat  him  with  indifference. 

Ye  despised  not  nor  rejected  (oifK  i^ovOeviiaaTe  ovSi  i^en-- 
rvaare).  Commonly  explained  by  making  both  verbs  govern 
your  temptation.  Thus  the  meaning  would  be :  "  You  were 
tempted  to  treat  my  preaching  contemptuously  because  of 
my  bodily  infirmity ;  but  you  did  not  despise  nor  reject  that 
which  was  a  temptation  to  you."  This  is  extremely  far- 
fetched, awkward,  and  quite  without  parallel  in  Paul's  writ- 

•  See  WeizBltoker,  Apo$toli9ehe  ZeUaUer  (trans.),  L  112.  McGiffert,  Tito 
Apoatolie  Age^  p.  177  fl.  Bamaay,  The  Church  in  the  Baman  Bmfire^  p. 
02  0. 


144  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  IV, 

ings  or  elsewhere.  It  does  not  suit  the  following  but  received 
msy  etc.  It  lays  the  stress  on  the  Galatians*  resistance  of  a 
temptation  to  despise  Paul ;  whereas  the  idea  of  a  temptation 
is  incidental.  On  this  construction  we  should  rather  expect 
Paul  to  say:  ^^  Ye  did  despise  and  repudiate  this  temptation.'* 
Better,  make  your  temptation^  etc.,  dependent  on  jfe  know 
(ver.  13) ;  place  a  colon  after  fienh^  and  make  both  verbs 
govern  me  in  the  following  clause.  Rend.  "Ye  know  how 
through  infirmity  of  the  flesh  I  preached  the  gospel  to  you 
the  first  time,  and  (ye  know)  your  temptation  which  was  in 
my  flesh  :  ye  did  not  despise  nor  reject  me,  but  received  me." 
The  last  clause  thus  forms  one  of  a  series  of  short  and  de- 
tached clauses  beginning  with  ver.  10.  'Oi/ic  i^vOeif^core  ye 
did  not  set  at  nought^  from  oxi^  nothing.  The  form  oiSiv  occurs 
L.  xxii.  35  ;  xxiii.  14  ;  Acts  xix.  27 ;  xxvi.  26  ;  1  Cor.  xiii.  2 ; 
2  Cor.  xi.  8.  For  the  compound  here,  comp.  L.  xviii.  9 ; 
xxiii.  11;  Acts  iv.  11;  2  Cor.  x.  10.  ^lass.  ^IBJ^mrwran 
spurned^  N.  T.^.  Lit.  spat  out.  A  strong  metaphor,  adding 
tJie  idea  of  contempt  to  that  of  setting  at  nought.  Comp. 
Hom.  Od.  V.  322;  Aristoph.  TFa«p«,  792.  The  two  verbs 
express  contemptuous  indifference.  *EfUaai  to  vomit,  as  a 
figure  of  contemptuous  rejection,  is  found  in  Apoc.  iii.  16. 
The  simple  irnkiv  to  spit  only  in  the  literal  sense  in  N.  T. 
Mk.  vii.  33 ;  viii.  23 ;  J.  ix.  6,  and  no  other  compound  occurs. 

As  an  angel.  Bengel  says :  ^^  The  flesh,  infirmity,  temp- 
tation, are  unknown  to  angels ;  wherefore  to  receive  as  an 
angel  is  to  receive  with  great  veneration." 

As  Jesus  Christ.  With  even  higher  honour  than  an  angel. 
Comp.  Matt.  x.  40 ;  J.  xiii.  20. 

15.  Where  is  then  the  blessedness  ye  spake  of?  (wov 
oiv  0  fjLa/capuTfid^  vfi&v).  Maxapurfio^^  P^.  Comp.  Rom.  iv. 
6,  9.  Not  blessedness,  but  pronouncing  blessed^  felicitatian. 
**  What  has  become  of  your  self-gratulation  on  my  presence 
and  teaching  ?  "  Te  spake  of  is  an  attempt  to  render  v/mAp. 
Better,  "  Where  is  then  that  gratulation  of  yours  t^* 


Cr.  IV.]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIAN8.  145 

I  bear  you  record  (fMiprvpS).  Better,  mtne99.  Bear 
record  is  common  in  A.  V.  for  bear  witnesB.  Record  is  used 
both  of  a  person,  as  God  is  my  record^  Philip,  i.  8 ;  /  call 
God  for  a  record^  1  Cor.  i.  28,  and  in  the  sense  of  evidence  or 
teetimony.     So  Shaks.  Richard  II.  I.  i.  30  : 

**  First,  Heaven  be  the  record  to  my  speeoh." 

Plucked  out  {iiopv^avrei).  Lit.  dug  oat.  Only  here,  and 
Mk.  ii.  4,  of  digging  ap  the  roof  in  order  to  let  down  the 
paral3rtic  before  Jesus. 

Your  own  eyes  (joif^  64>Oa\fAoifi  vyAv).  Better,  your  eyes. 
Eyes,  as  most  treasured  possessions.  Comp.  Ps.  xvii.  8 ; 
Prov.  vii.  2 ;  Zech.  ii.  8.  Some  have  found  here  evidence 
that  Paul  was  afiBicted  with  disease  of  the  eyes.  See  Dr. 
John  Brown's  Horae  Subeecivae.  Accordingly  they  explain 
these  words,  "You  would  have  given  me  your  own  eyes  to 
replace  mine.'*  But  hf/Av  is  unemphatic,  your.  All  attempts 
to  connect  the  passage  with  Paul's  ^Hhorn  in  the  flesh'* 
(2  Cor.  xii.  7)  are  to  be  dismissed  as  fanciful. 

16.  Therefore  (A^re).  Better,  eo  then:  seeing  that  your 
love  for  me  has  waned. 

Your  enemy  (fyfipd^  vyAv).  ^Ex^po^  enemy ^  in  an  active 
sense,  as  is  shown  by  the  next  clause.  Not  passive,  an  olyect 
of  hatred^  which  would  have  the  pronoun  in  the  dative. 

Because  I  tell  you  the  truth  (JaXfidewov  ifuv).  *A\ri0€vuv^ 
only  here  and  Eph.  iv.  15,  means  to  9peak  the  truth  or  to  deal 
truly.  The  present  participle  refers  to  the  same  time  as 
y^opa  lam  become^  the  time  of  his  second  visit.  The  clause 
is  usually  construed  as  interrogative  (A.  V.).  It  is  rather 
a  direct  statement  with  a  slight  interrogative  suggestion. 
*^  So  then,  I  am  become  your  enemy,  am  I." 

17.  They  zealously  affect  you  (Xri^vaw  vfiSfi).  They 
are  zealously  paying  you  court  in  order  to  win  you  over  to 

▼OL.  IV.  — 10 


146  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  KBW  TESTAMENT.       [Gh.  IV« 

their  side.  Affect^  in  this  sense,  is  obsolete.  It  is  from 
affeetare^  to  strive  afttr^  eamtMy  denre.  So  Shake.  lhm»  9f 
Shr.  I.  i.  40  : 

**  In  brief,  sir,  ttudy  what  you  mott  sfleot" 

Ben  Jonson,  Alchem.  iii.  2  : 

*«  Fray  him  aloud  to  name  what  dlah  he  affeoti.*' 

As  a  noun,  desire.     So  Chancer,  TroU.  and  Ores$.  iii.  1891: 
**  As  CraasoB  dide  for  his  affeotis  wronge  "  (his  wrong  daatres). 

Comp.  1  Cor.  xii.  81;  xiv.  1. 

Not  well  (pif  icaX£9).     Not  in  an  honourable  way. 

Nay  (a\XA).     So  far  from  dealing  honourably. 

They  would  exclude  you  (iieie\€urai  vfA&9  OiKovaui). 
From  other  teachers  who  do  not  belong  to  their  party  — 
those  of  anti-Judaising  views  who  formed  the  sounder  part 
of  the  church. 

That  ye  might  affect  them  (Xva  airoi^  ^rikinnt).  So  that 
in  your  isolation  from  others,  you  might  be  led  to  seek  affili* 
ation  with  them. 

18.  It  is  good  —  in  a  good  thing.  Zi/Xo&r^ai  to  be  zeal- 
ously sought^  in  the  same  sense  as  before.  It  is  passive.  It 
is  good  for  you  Galatians  to  be  zealously  sought.  In  a  good 
thing  {iv  koK^)  answers  to  ov  Ka\m  not  honourably^  ver.  17. 
In  a  good  matter  —  the  interest  of  the  gospel.  Thus  Paul 
would  say :  "  These  Judaisers  zealously  strive  to  win  you  over 
to  their  views;  but  they  do  not  do  this  in  an  honourable  way. 
There  is  no  harm  in  seeking  to  interest  and  enlist  you,  pro- 
vided it  is  in  a  good  cause." 

19.  My  little  children  (r&cvCa  /aov).  Only  here  in  Paul^ 
but  often  in  John.  See  J.  xiii.  33;  1  J.  ii.  1, 12,  28;  iii.  7, 
18,  etc.*    See  on  ch.  iii.  26. 

*  The  reading,  however,  is  doubtful.  Tlschendorf ,  Weiss,  TregeHea,  read 
Wjcmi,  which  Westcott  and  Hort  give  in  margin. 


Ch.  it.]  the  epistle  to  the  galatiaks.  147 

I  travail  in  birth  again  (iraKiv  AStven).  Better  as  Rev.  of 
whom  I  am  again  in  travail.  *n£/iw  only  here  and  Apoc.  zii. 
2.  Gal.  iv.  27  is  a  quotation.  The  metaphorical  use  of  the 
word  is  frequent  in  O.  T.  See  Ps.  vii.  14;  Sir.  xix.  11; 
xxxi.  5;  xliii.  17;  Mic.  iv.  10;  Isa.  xxvi.  18;  Ixvi.  8.  Paul 
means  that  he  is  for  the  second  time  labouring  and  distressed 
for  the  Galatiau  converts,  with  the  same  anguish  which  at- 
tended his  first  efforts  for  their  conversion.  The  metaphor 
of  begetting  children  in  the  gospel  is  found  in  1  Cor.  iv.  15 ; 
Philem.  10.  It  was  a  Jewish  saying :  ^^  If  one  teaches  the 
son  of  his  neighbour  the  law,  the  Scripture  reckons  this  the 
same  as  though  he  had  begotten  him." 

Until  Christ  be  formed  in  you  (^^^9  ofi  /iopif>c90^  Xpurri^ 
iv  vfiiv).  The  forming  of  Christ  in  them,  their  attainment  of 
the  complete  inner  life  of  Christians,  is  the  object  of  the  new 
birth.  By  their  relapse  they  have  retarded  this  result  and 
renewed  Paul's  spiritual  travail.  The  verb  iiop^vp.  N.  T.^. 
The  idea  under  different  aspects  is  common.  See  Rom.  viii. 
9 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  16 ;  vi.  16 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  18 ;  Gal.  ii.  20 ;  Eph, 
iii.  17;  Col.  i.  27. 

20.  I  desire  (^^eXoi^).  Better,  IcotUdurish^  the  imperfect 
tense  referring  to  a  suppressed  conditional  clause,  as  (f  t^  were 
poeeible.     Comp.  Acts  xxv.  22 ;  Rom.  ix.  8. 

To  change  my  voice  (aXXofoi  rtiv  4>mvriv  fAov).  To  address 
you,  not  with  my  former  severity,  so  as  to  make  you  think  me 
your  enemy,  but  affectionately,  as  a  mother  speaks  to  her 
children,  yet  still  telling  them  the  truth  (^iXrfdevmv). 

I  stand  in  doubt  of  you  (airopovfuu  h  vfilv).  Lit.  lam 
perplexed  in  you.  For  this  use  of  ^v,  comp.  2  Cor.  vii.  16 1 
Gal.  i.  24.  Paul's  perplexity  is  conceived  as  taking  place  in 
the  readers.  For  the  verb,  see  on  Mk.  vi.  20 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  8. 
Paul  means  :  ^^  I  am  puzzled  how  to  deal  with  you ;  how  to 
find  entrance  to  your  hearts.'' 


148  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TE8TAXBMT.     [Gk.  IV. 

21-81.  Paal  now  defends  the  principle  of  Christian  free* 
dom  from  the  law  by  means  of  an  allegorical  interpretatiou 
of  the  history  of  Abraham's  two  sons.  He  meets  the  Juda- 
isers  on  their  own  Old  Testament  ground,  going  back  to  the 
statement  of  ch.  iii.  7. 

21.  Tell  me.  He  plunges  into  the  subject  without  intro- 
duction, and  with  a  direct  appeal. 

Desire  (^Aoi^re?).  Are  bent  an  being  under  the  law.  See 
on  ver.  9. 

Under  the  law  ({nr6  v6yyov).  For  v6i»a9  with  and  without 
the  article,  see  on  Rom.  ii.  12.  Here,  unquestionably,  of  the 
Mosaic  law. 

Hear  (hKovert).  (Do  ye  not)  hear  what  the  law  really 
says  :  listen  to  it  so  as  to  catch  its  real  meaning  ?  Comp. 
1  Cor.  xiv.  2 ;  LXX,  Gren.  xi.  7;  Deut.  zzyiii.  49.* 

The  law  (jhv  vofiov).  In  a  different  sense,  referring  to  the 
O.  T.  For  a  similar  double  sense  see  Rom.  iii.  19.  For 
W/A09  as  a  designation  of  the  O.  T.  generally,  see  1  Cor.  xiv. 
21 ;  J.  X.  24 ;  xii.  84 ;  xv.  25. 

22.  For  (70^).  Your  determination  to  be  under  the  law 
is  opposed  by  Scripture,  if  you  will  understand  it,  far  it  is 
written,  etc. 

A  bondmaid  (r^  ircLL^UnctfT).  The  bondmaid,  indicating 
a  well-known  character,  Hagar,  Gen.  xvi.  8.  The  word  in 
Class,  means  also  a  free  maiden ;  but  in  N.  T.  always  a  slave. 
So  almost  always  in  LXX ;  but  see  Ruth  iv.  12 ;  Judith 
xii.  13. 

23.  Was  bom  (yeyAnnirai.^.  Hoe  been  bom,  or  it  bom : 
perfect  tense,  treating  the  historical  fact  as  if  present. 

•  Others:  *« Do  ye  not  hear  it  as  it  is  read  in  yonr  woiahipping  aMem- 
hlies?'*  The  reading  dMi7ii^«ffrff  read  alovd^  read  ptf6Uelif,  ia  fonnd  ia 
DFO,  and  is  followed  by  the  Volg.,  non  lefjUHe. 


Ch.  it.]  the  EPISTLB  to  the  GALATIAN8.  149 

After  the  flesh  (iv«T^  adptcd).  According  to  the  regular 
course  of  nature.     Very  common  in  Paul. 

By  promise  (&'  ^a77e\^9).  Most  editors  retain  the 
article,  the  promise  of  Gen.  xvii.  16, 19;  zviii.  10.  Comp. 
Rom.  ix.  9.  In  virtue  of  the  promise ;  for  according  to 
natural  conditions  he  would  not  have  been  bom. 

24.  Are  an  allegory  (iirnp  iXKriyopovfUPa).  N.  T.^.  Lit. 
are  allegorised.  From  &Xko  another^  &yop€U€iv  to  speak.  Hence, 
things  which  are  so  spoken  as  to  give  a  different  meaning  from 
that  which  the  words  express.  For  parable^  aUegory^  fabUy 
and  proverb^  see  on  Matt.  xiii.  8.  An  allegory  is  to  be  dis- 
tinguished from  a  type.  An  O.  T.  type  is  a  real  prefiguration 
of  a  N.  T.  fact,  as  the  Jewish  tabernacle  explained  in  Heb.  ix., 
or  the  brazen  serpent,  J.  iii.  14.  Comp.  Rom.  v.  14 ;  1  Cor. 
X.  6, 11.  An  allegory  exhibits  figuratively  the  ideal  character 
of  a  fact.  The  type  allows  no  latitude  of  interpretation.  The 
allegory  lends  itself  to  various  interpretations.  This  passage 
bears  traces  of  Paul's  rabbinical  training.  At  the  time  of 
Christ,  Scripture  was  overlaid  with  that  enormous  mass  of 
rabbinic  interpretation  which,  beginning  as  a  supplement  to 
the  written  law,  at  last  superseded  and  threw  it  into  contempt. 
The  plainest  sayings  of  Scripture  were  resolved  into  another 
sense ;  and  it  was  asserted  by  one  of  the  Rabbis  that  he  that 
renders  a  verse  of  Scripture  as  it  appears,  says  what  is  not 
true.  The  celebrated  Akiba  assumed  that  the  Pentateuch 
was  a  continuous  enigma,  and  that  a  meaning  was  to  be  found 
in  every  monosyllable,  and  a  mystical  sense  in  every  hook  and 
flourish  of  the  letters.  The  Talmud  relates  how  Akiba  was 
seen  by  Moses  in  a  vision,  drawing  from  every  horn  of  every 
letter  whole  bushels  of  decisions.  The  oral  laws,  subsequently 
reduced  to  writing  in  the  Talmud,  completely  overshadowed 
and  superseded  the  Scriptures,  so  that  Jesus  was  literally 
justified  in  saying  :  ^  Thus  have  ye  made  the  commandment 
of  Ood  of  none  effect  through  your  tradition.'* 

Paul  had  been  trained  as  a  Rabbi  in  the  school  of  Hillel, 
the  founder  of  the  rabbinical  system,  whose  hermeneutio  rules 


150  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       ICb.  IY. 

were  the  basis  of  the  Talmud.  As  Jowett  justly  says: 
''Strange  as  it  may  at  first  appear  that  Paul's  mode  of 
interpreting  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  should  not  con- 
form to  our  laws  of  logic  or  language,  it  would  be  far 
stranger  if  it  had  not  conformed  with  the  natural  modes  of 
thought  and  association  in  his  own  day/'  His  familiarity 
with  this  style  of  exposition  gave  him  a  real  advantage  in 
dealing  with  Jews. 

It  is  a  much-mooted  question  whether,  in  this  passage,  Paul 
is  employing  an  argument  or  an  illustration.  The  former 
would  seem  to  be  the  case.  On  its  face,  it  seems  improbable 
that,  as  Dr.  Bruce  puts  it :  *'  it  is  poetry  rather  than  logic, 
meant  not  so  much  to  convince  the  reason  as  to  captivate  the 
imagination.''  *  Comp.  the  argument  in  ch.  iii.  16,  and  see 
note.  It  appears  plain  that  Paul  believed  that  his  interpreta- 
tion actually  lay  hidden  in  the  O.  T.  narrative,  and  that  he 
adduced  it  as  having  argumentative  force.  Whether  he  re- 
garded the  correspondence  as  designed  to  extend  to  all  the 
details  of  his  exposition  may  be  questioned  ;  but  he  appears 
to  have  discerned  in  the  O.  T.  narrative  a  genuine  type,  which 
he  expanded  into  his  allegory.  For  other  illustrations  of  this 
mode  of  treatment,  see  Rom.  ii.  24 ;  ix.  33 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  9,;  ix. 
9,10;  X.  l-4.t 

For  these  are.  Hagar  and  Sarah  are^  allegorically.  Sig- 
nify. Comp.  Matt.  xiii.  20,  38;  xxvi.  26,  28;  1  Cor.  x. 
4,16. 

The  one.     Covenant. 

From  Mount  Sinai  (airo  6pov^  l,tv£).  The  covenant  eman- 
ating from  Sinai :  made  on  that  mountain.  The  old  coven- 
ant.    See  2  Cor.  iii.  14. 


•  PauVs  Conception  of  Christianity,  p.  68. 

t  On  allegorical  interpretation  in  general  see  F.  W.  Famr,  JBiCoiir  qf 
Interpretation,  Bampton,  1865.  On  the  early  training  of  Panl,  DerenboQig, 
Hittoire  de  la  Palestine  d^apris  les  Tkalmuds,  cbs.  xxL  xxii. 


Ch.  IV.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIAN8.  151 

Which  gendereth  to  bondage  (efc  SovXeCav  yevp&aa) .  That 
is,  tlie  Sinaitic  covenant  places  its  children  in  a  condition  of 
bondage ;  note  the  personification  and  the  allegorical  blend- 
ing of  fact  and  figure. 

Which  is  Hagar  (^t«9  iarlv  ''Ayap).  The  Sinaitic  covenant 
is  that  which,  in  Abraham's  history,  is  Hagar :  which  is  alle- 
gorically  identified  with  Hagar  the  bondmaid. 

25.  For  this  Hagar  is  Mount  Sinai  in  Arabia  (to  8k  "Xyap 
Sti'A  6po^  iarlv  h  rp  *Apaff{a).  The  sentence  is  not  paren- 
thetical. This  covenant  is  the  Hagar  of  that  allegorical 
history  which  is  explained  by  the  resemblance  of  her  name 
to  the  Arabic  name  of  Sinai.  The  Greek  order  is  not  8po^ 
2tj/A,  as  ver.  24,  but  Sti^A  6po^^  in  order  to  bring  into  juxta- 
position the  two  names  which  are  declared  to  coincide.  The 
evidence,  however,  for  the  actual  identity  of  the  names  is 
deficient.  The  proper  name  Hagar  signifies  wanderer  or 
fugitive  (Arab,  hadschar^  comp.  Hegira^  the  term  for  the 
flight  of  Mahomet).  It  has  probably  been  confounded  with 
the  Arabic  chadschar  a  stone  or  rock^  which  cannot  be  shown 
to  be  an  Arabic  designation  of  Sinai.  The  similarity  of  the 
first  two  gutturals  might  easily  lead  to  the  mistake.* 

Answereth  to  (avwrrotxel)*  N.  T.^.  The  subject  of  the 
verb  is  Hagar,  not  Mount  Sinai.  Lit.  stands  in  the  same  row 
or  file  with.  Hence,  belongs  to  the  same  category.  See  on 
elements^  ch.  iii.  3.f 

Jerusalem  which  now  is.  As  contrasted  with  ^^  the  Jeru- 
salem above,"  ver.  26.  The  city  is  taken  to  represent  the 
whole  Jewish  race. 

*  See  Lightfoot*8  ezcuraos  in  Commentary  on  Oalatians^  p.  190  ff. 

t  LipsiuB  explains  the  verb  from  the  usage  of  grammarians,  as  having  letters 
of  equal  value,  and  sajrs  that  it  is  an  example  of  the  Oematria  of  the  rabbini- 
cal schools,  one  of  the  methods  of  esoteric  interpretation  by  which  a  numerical 
▼alue  was  given  to  the  letters  of  a  word,  and  the  word  was  connected  with  any 
other  word  the  letters  of  which  had  the  same  numerical  value,  as  Mashiaeh 
Messiah,  and  nach^uh  serpent. 


152  WORD  8Tin>rE8  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       iJOm.  TV. 

26.  Jerusalem  which  is  above  (i}  &w  *Icpou0'aX^/*).  Paul 
uses  the  Hebrew  form  'UpowraXiffA  in  preference  to  the  Greek 
'UpoaSXvfuij  which  occurs  Gal.  i.  17,  18 ;  ii«  1.  The  phrase 
Jeruialem  which  is  above  was  familiar  to  the  rabbinical  teach- 
ers, who  conceived  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  as  the  archetjrpe 
of  the  earthly.  On  the  establishment  of  Messiah's  kingdom, 
the  heavenly  archetype  would  be  let  down  to  earth,  and  would 
be  the  capital  of  the  messianic  theocracy.  Comp.  Heb.  zi.  10 ; 
xii.  22 ;  xiii.  14 ;  Apoc.  iii.  12 ;  xxi.  2.  Paul  here  means  the 
messianic  kingdom  of  Christ,  partially  realised  in  the  Christian 
church,  but  to  be  fully  realised  only  at  the  second  coming  of 
the  Lord.     For  &vn^  comp.  Philip,  iii.  14;  Col.  iii.  1,  2. 

Free  (^tkevddpa).  Independent  of  the  Mosaic  law ;  in  con- 
trast with  the  earthly  Jerusalem,  which,  like  Hagar,  is  in 
bondage.     The  Jerusalem  above  therefore  answers  to  Sarah. 

Which  is  (^i9  iirrlv).  The  double  relative  refers  to  ik§ 
JeniscUem  which  is  above^  not  to  free.  That  Jerusalem,  as  that 
which  is  our  mother,  is  free. 

The  mother  of  us  all.    Render,  our  mother.    Udwrrni^  mU 

does  not  belong  in  the  text. 

27.  The  last  statement  is  proved  from  Scripture,  LXX  of 
Isa.  liv.  1,  which  predicts  the  great  growth  of  the  people  of 
God  after  the  Babylonian  exile.  It  is  applied  to  the  unfruit- 
ful Sarah,  who  answers  to  the  Jerusalem  above,  and  who  is  a 
type  of  God's  dealings  with  her  descendants. 

Break  forth  iprj^p).  In  this  sense  not  in  N.  T.  The 
ellipsis  is  usually  supplied  by  i^pi^v  voice;  cause  thy  voice  to 
break  forth.  Others  prefer  cif^poavvriv  joy^  as  suggested  by 
€w^pdv0fiTt  r^oiee.  'Pri^i  ^viiv  occurs  Job  vi.  5,  of  the  low- 
ing of  the  ox ;  and  j^^drc^a-av^  j^^dro^  €v^po<nhniP  in  Isa.  xlix. 
IS ;  Iii.  9.  As  these  are  the  only  instances  in  LXX  in  which 
the  verb  is  used  in  this  sense,  as  the  quotation  is  from  Isaiah« 
and  as  the  verb  occurs  twice  in  that  prophecy  with  €u^poait^9 


Ch.  IV.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIAKS.  153 

/oy,  it  seems  better  to  supply  that  noun  here.     CavMe  joy  to 
break  forth. 

Many  more  children  than  (iro\\hrkr4Kva—iuLKKov1f). 
Incorrect.  Not  as  Lightfoot  and  others  for  irK^lova  fj  more 
than.  Rather,  **Many  are  the  children  of  the  solitary  one 
in  a  higher  degree  than  those  of  her  which  hath  a  husband.'* 
It  is  a  comparison  between  two  manj/s.  Both  had  many 
children,  but  the  solitary  had  a  greater  many. 

28.  As  Isaac  was  (^xariL  'Icro^).  Lit.  qfter  the  manner 
of  Isaac.  See  Rom.  ix.  7-9,  and,  for  this  use  of  icar^,  1  Pet. 
i.  15  ;  Eph.  iv.  24  ;  Col.  iu.  10. 

Children  of  promise  (hrayyeXla^  rAcpa).  Not  promised 
children^  nov  children  that  have  God*$  promise^  but, children 
who  are  not  such  by  mere  fleshly  descent,  as  was  Ishmael, 
but  by  promise,  as  was  Isaac  :  children  of  the  Jerusalem 
above,  belonging  to  it  ifi  virtue  of  Ood's  promise,  even  as 
Isaac  was  the  child  of  Sarah  in  virtue  of  God's  promise. 

29.  Notwithstanding  this  higher  grade  of  sonship,  the 
children  of  promise,  the  spiritual  children  of  Abraham,  are 
persecuted  by  the  Jews,  the  mere  bodily  children  of  Abra- 
ham, as  Isaac  was  persecuted  by  Ishmael. 

Persecuted  (^iBimtce).  Comp.  Gren.  xxi.  9,  where  Ishmael 
is  said  to  have  mocked  Isaac  (LXX,  irat^ovra  fierii}  :  but  the 
Jewish  tradition  related  that  Ishmael  said  to  Isaac :  ^^  Let  us 
go  and  seek  our  portion  in  the  field."  And  Ishmael  took  his 
bow  and  arrows  and  shot  Isaac,  pretending  that  he  was  in 
sport.     Paul  evidently  meant  something  more  than  Jeering. 

After  the  Spirit  (tcarii  irvAfid).  The  divine  Spirit,  which 
was  the  living  principle  of  the  promise.  Comp.  Rom.  iv.  17. 
The  Spirit  is  called  ^^  the  Spirit  of  the  promise,"  Eph.  i.  18. 

80.  What  saith  the  Scripture?  Giving  emphasis  to  the 
following  statement.     Comp.  Uom.  iv.  8 ;   z.  8 ;   xi.  2,  4. 


j54  word  8TUDIB8  IK  THS  KRW  TB8TAMS1IT.         JjCaLV, 

Qaotation  from  LXX  of  Gen.  xxi.  10.  For  the  words  qf 
this  hondwaman — with  my  %<m  iBoae^  Paul  sabstitutes  qf  the 
bondwoman — tcith  the  son  of  the  freewoman^  in  order  to  adapt 
it  to  his  context.  This  is  according  to  his  habit  of  adapting 
quotations  to  his  immediate  use.  See  1  Cor.  ii.  9 ;  zr.  65 ; 
Eph.  V.  14,  etc. 

Shall  not  be  heir  (ov  fj^  KXffpovofAiiaH).  Or,  ehaU  not 
inherit.  One  of  the  key-words  of  the  Epistle.  See  ch.  iiL 
18,  29  ;  iv.  1,  7.  The  Greek  negation  is  strong :  shall  bjf  no 
means  inherit.  Comp.  J.  viii.  35.  Lightfoot  says  :  ^  The 
law  and  the  gospel  cannot  coexist.  The  law  must  disappear 
before  the  gospel.  It  is  scarcely  possible  to  estimate  the 
strength  of  conviction  and  depth  of  prophetic  insight  which 
this  declaration  implies.  The  apostle  thus  confidently  sounds 
the  death-knell  of  Judaism  at  a  time  when  one  half  of  Christ- 
endom clung  to  the  Mosaic  law  with  a  jealous  affection  little 
short  of  frenzy,  and  while  the  Judaic  party  seemed  to  be 
growing  in  influence,  and  was  strong  enough,  even  in  the 
Gentile  churches  of  his  own  founding,  to  undermine  his  influ- 
ence and  endanger  his  life.  The  truth  which  to  us  appears 
a  truism  must  then  have  been  regarded  as  a  paradox." 


CHAPTER  r. 

1.  In  the  liberty  wherewith.  This  is  according  to  the 
reading  rff  i\£v0€pla  y.  Different  connections  are  proposed^ 
as  with  stand  fast^  as  A.  V. :  or  with  the  close  of  ch.  iv.,  as, 
"  we  are  not  children  of  the  bondwoman  but  of  the  free  with 
the  freedom  with  which  Christ  freed  us"  :  or,  "of  her  who  is 
free  vnth  the  freedom  with  which^'*^  etc.  But  ^  wherewith  must 
be  omitted.  A  new  clause  begins  with  tJ  ikeuBepi^.  Rend. 
for  freedom  did  Christ  set  tis  free.  For^  not  with  freedom. 
It  is  the  dative  of  advantage  ;  that  we  might  be  really  free 
and  remain  free.     Comp.  ver.  13,  and  J.  viii.  86. 

Made  (us)  free  (rikevOdpwrai).     With  the  exception  of 

J.  viii.  32,  36,  only  in  Paul. 


Gh.V.]  the  epistle  to  the  GALATIAN8.  155 

Stand  fast  (im/zvere).  Used  absolutely,  as  2  Th.  ii.  15. 
Mostly  in  Paul.     See  on  1  Th.  iii.  8.* 

Be  not  entangled  (fii^  Mx^dt).  Or,  held  emnared.  By 
Paul  only  here  and  2  Th.  i.  4.  Lit.  to  be  held  within.  For 
an  elliptical  usage  see  on  Mk.  vi.  19. 

Yoke  (Sv7^).  Metaphorical,  of  a  burden  or  bondage. 
Comp.  Matt.  xi.  29,  80  ;  Acts  xv.  10  ;  1  Tim.  vi.  1.  SimQ- 
arly  LXX,  Gen.  xxvii.  40  ;  Lev.  xxvi.  18 ;  2  Chron.  x.  4, 
9, 10, 11,  14.  So  always  in  N.  T.  except  Apoc.  vi.  6,  where 
it  means  a  pair  of  ictUee.  See  note,  and  comp.  Lev.  xix.  85, 
86 ;  Prov.  xi.  1 ;  xvi.  11 ;  Hos.  xii.  7. 

2.  Behold  (fSe).  Imperative  eingtUarj  appealing  to  each 
individual  reader. 

I  Paul.  Comp.  2  Cor.  x.  1;  Eph.  iii.  1;  Col.  i.  23. 
Asserting  his  personal  authority. 

If  ye  be  circumcised  (^^i^  irepirdfAvrfaOe).  Better,  receive 
eircumcision.  The  verb  does  not  mean  that  they  have  already 
been  circumcised.  It  states  the  case  as  supposable,  implying 
that  they  were  in  danger  of  allowing  themselves  to  be  cir- 
cumcised. 

Christ  will  profit  you  nothing.  Circumcision  is  the  sign 
of  subjection  to  the  Jewish  **  yoke "  —  the  economy  of  the 
law.  The  question  with  the  Galatians  was  circumcision  as 
a  condition  of  salvation.  See  ch.  ii.  8,  5  ;  Acts  xv.  1.  It 
was  a  choice  between  salvation  by  law  and  salvation  by  Christ. 
The  choice  of  the  law  involved  the  relinquishment  of  Christ. 

*  Lightfoot  says  that  ori^irM  does  not  appear  earlier  than  N.  T.  There  are, 
however,  three  instances  in  LXX  where  it  appears  as  a  various  reading :  Ex. 
ziv.  18 ;  Judg.  zvi.  26 ;  IK.  viiL  11.  In  the  two  latter  passages  it  is  the 
reading  of  B,  and  is  adopted  by  Swete.  Lightfoot  also  says  that  it  is  found 
only  in  Paul,  with  one  exception,  Mk.  xL  26.  It  occurs  Mk.  iiL  81 ;  J.  i.  26. 
In  J.  viii.  44  and  Apoc.  xiL  4  there  is  a  dispute  between  f^rriKtp  and  iarriKtw, 
In  both  cases  Westcott  and  Hort  adopt  the  former,  and  Tischendorf  the  latter. 


156  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  T^BTAJUNT.         [Gb.  V 

Comp.  ch.  ii.  21.  Chrysostom  says  :  ^^  He  who  is  circom- 
cised  is  circumcised  as  fearing  the  law :  but  he  who  fears  the 
law  distrusts  the  power  of  grace ;  and  he  who  distrusts  gaiiif 
nothing  from  that  which  he  distrusts/' 

3.  Again  (^rc^Xii^).     Probably  with  reference  to  what  he 

had  said  at  his  last  visit. 

Every  man.  Emphasising  and  particularising  the  general 
to  youy  you^  in  ver.  2. 

A  debtor  (o^iX^n;?).  In  N.  T.  mostly  of  one  under  moral 
obligation.  So  in  the  sense  of  rinner^  Matt.  vi.  12  ;  L.  ziii. 
4.  Comp.  Rom.  i.  14  ;  viii.  12.  Similarly  the  verb  o^CXjop 
to  owe,  us  L.  xi.  4  ;   xvii.  10  ;    Rom.  xv.  1,  etc.,  though  it  is 

frequent  in  the  literal  sense. 

To  do  I  lie  law  (Trot^croi).  Rare  in  N.  T.  See  J.  vii.  19 ; 
Rom.  ii.  18,  25  Qn-pcurarff).  Ttfpelv  to  obierve  the  law,  the 
tradition,  the  commandment,  Matt.  xix.  17  ;  Mk.  vii.  9 ; 
J.  xiv.  15  ;  Acts  xv.  5  ;  Jas.  ii.  10  :  wXripovp  to  fidfil  the 
law,  Rom.  xiii.  8  ;  Gal.  v.  14  ;  comp.  ivairXripovv^  Gal.  vi.  2 : 
if>v\d<ra€tv  to  keep  or  guard  the  law.  Acts  vii.  58 ;  zxi.  24 ; 
Gal.  vi.  13  :  also  with  commandments,  word  of  God  or  of 
Christ,  ordinances  of  the  law.  Matt.  xix.  20 ;  Mk.  z.  20 ; 
L.  xi.  28  ;  J.  xii.  47  ;  Rom.  ii.  26.  TeXelv  to  carry  out  the 
law,  Rom.  ii.  27  ;  Jas.  ii.  8.  IloirjaM  is  to  perform  what 
the  law  commands  :  'n)pAv  to  observe^  keep  an  eye  on  with  the 
result  of  performing  :  ^vkdaaeiv  to  guard  against  violation  : 
T€Kjdv  to  bring  to  fulfilment  in  action. 

The  whole  law  (Skov).  Comp.  Jas.  ii.  10.  Submission 
to  circumcision  commits  one  to  the  whole  law.  It  makes  him 
a  party  to  the  covenant  of  the  law,  and  the  law  requires  of 
every  one  thus  committed  a  perfect  fulfilment,  Gal.  iii.  10. 

4.  Christ  is  become  of  no  effect  unto  you  (jcaTqpf/fi'qrt 
hiro  Xpunrov).    Incorrect.    Lit.  ye  were  brought  to  nought  from 


Ch.  v.]  THB  BPI8TLE  TO  THE  GALATIAN8.  157 

Chrut.  Comp.  Rom.  vii.  2,  6.  Your  union  with  Christ  is 
dissolved.  The  statement  is  compressed  and  requires  to  be 
filled  out.  "  Ye  were  brought  to  nought  and  «o  separated 
from  Christ."  For  similar  instances  see  Rom.  iz.  3  ;  xi.  3. 
The  airofrom  properly  belongs  to  the  supplied  verb  of  separ- 
ation.    For  the  verb  tearapyeiv  see  on  Rom.  iii.  3. 

Ye  are  fallen  from  grace  (r^  ;^apiT09  i^erriaaTe).  For 
a  similar  phrase  see  2  Pet.  iii.  17.  Having  put  yourselves 
under  the  economy  of  salvation  by  law,  you  have  fallen  out 
of  the  economy  of  salvation  by  the  grace  of  Christ.  Paul's 
declarations  are  aimed  at  the  Judaisers,  who  taught  that  the 
Christian  economy  was  to  be  joined  with  the  legal.  His 
point  is  that  the  two  are  mutually  exclusive.  Comp.  Rom. 
iv.  4,  6,  14,  16.  The  verb  itcirlirrei^v  to  fall  out^  in  the  literal 
sense,  Acts  xii.  7  ;  Jas.  i.  11.  In  Class,  of  seamen  thrown 
ashore,  banishment,  deprivation  of  an  office,  degeneration,  of 
actors  being  hissed  off  the  stage. 

.  5.  For  we  (^fiek  y^p)-  Tkpfor  introduces  a  proof  of  the 
preceding  statement,  by  declaring  the  contrary  attitude  of 
those  who  continue  under  the  economy  of  grace.  Ye  who 
seek  to  be  justified  by  the  law  are  fallen  from  grace ;  far  we^ 
not  relying  on  the  law,  by  faith  wait  for  the  hope  of  right- 
eousness. 

Through  the  Spirit  {irvevftari).  The  Holy  Spirit  who 
inspires  our  faith.  Not  as  Lightfoot,  spiritually.  The  words 
irveifiaTi  ix  Triareoa^  are  not  to  be  taken  as  one  conception,  the 
Spirit  which  is  of  faiths  but  present  two  distinct  and  coor- 
dinate facts  which  characterise  the  waiting  for  the  hope  of 
righteousness ;  namely,  the  agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  con- 
trast with  the  fiesh  (comp.  Rom.  vii.  6  ;  viii.  4, 15, 16  ;  Eph. 
i.  13  ;  ii.  22),  and  faith  in  contrast  with  the  works  of  the  law 
(comp.  ch.  iii.  3,  and  see  ch.  ii.  16 ;  iii.  8 ;  Rom.  i.  17  ;  iii. 
22  ;  ix.  30  ;  x.  6). 

By  faith  (itc  irlcrtm).  Const,  with  toait^  not  with  right- 
eousness. 


158  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TBBTAMBNT.         [Cb-V. 

Wait  for  (jaireiclexiii^a).  Quite  often  in  Paul,  and  only 
twice  elsewhere,  Heb.  ix.  28  ;  1  Pet.  iii.  20.  See  on  Philip, 
iu.  20. 

The  hope  of  righteousness  {tkirlha  Sueatoainnfiy.  Hope 
for  the  object  of  hope,  as  Rom.  viii.  24 ;  Col.  i.  5 ;  Heb.  vi. 
18  ;  Tit.  ii.  18.  The  phrase  means  that  good  which  righteoue- 
ness  cauees  lie  to  hope  for.  Comp.  hope  of  the  calling  (Epb.  i. 
18  ;  iv.  4)  :  hope  of  the  goepel  (Col.  i.  23).* 

6.  in  Christ  Jesus.  In  the  economy  of  life  which  he 
inaugurates  and  inspires. 

Availeth  (Uryv^i).  Has  any  significance  or  practical  power. 
The  verb  in  Paul  only  here  and  Philip,  iv.  18.  See  on  2  Th. 
i.  9. 

Which  worketh  (ivepyovfiAni).  See  on  1  Th.  ii.  18.  Mid- 
dle voice,  comp.  Rom.  vii.  5 ;  2  Cor.  i.  6 ;  iv.  12 ;  2  Th.  ii. 
7  ;  Eph.  iii.  20.  Not  passive,  as  by  many  Roman  Catholic 
expositors,  faith  which  is  wrought  by  love. 

By  lo/e  (&'  aydirri^).  Not  that  justification  is  through 
love  ;  but  the  faith  of  the  justified,  which  is  their  subjective 
principle  of  life,  exhibits  its  living  energy  through  love  in 
which  the  whole  law  is  fulfilled  (ver.  14).     See  1  Tim.  i.  6 ; 

1  Th.  i.  3  ;  I  Cor.  xiii. 

7.  Ye  did  run  (^hpdxere).  Better,  as  giving  the  force  of 
the  imperfect,  ye  were  running.  You  were  on  the  right  road, 
and  were  making  good  progress  when  this  interruption  oc- 
curred.   Comp.  ch.  ii.  2 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  24-27 ;  Philip,  iii.  14  ; 

2  Tim.  iv.  7. 

Well  (/vaXtt?).  Bravely,  becomingly,  honorably  to  your- 
selves and  to  the  church.  Often  in  Paul.  See  Rom.  xi.  20  ; 
1  Cor.  vii.  87,  88  ;  2  Cor.  xi.  4  ;  Gal.  iv.  17  ;  Philip,  iv.  14. 

*  Comp.  IXrida  wpoff8oKaff9at,  Demos.  1408,  18,  and  IXviaA  vpo^'d^cipHu, 
Earip.  Alce$t.  130:  rpmraex^/icMK  r^r  fXrida,  Tit.  ii.  13.  Also  LXX,  Ism. 
zxYiU.  10;  2Maoc.  vU.  14. 


Ch.v.]  the  epistle  to  the  oalatians.  159 

Did  hinder  (M/co^).  See  on  1  Pet.  iii.  7.  Comp. 
1  Th.  ii.  18  ;  Rom.  xv.  22. 

Obey  the  truth  (aXi/^e/^  irelOarOai).  The  exact  phrase 
N.  T.^.  Disobey  (iweiOova)  the  truth,  Rom.  ii.  8  :  obedience 
(JnraKori)  of  the  truth,  1  Pet.  i.  22. 

8.  This  persuasion  (ij  weurfAovtf).  Or,  the  persuasion. 
N.  T.^.  ^LXX,  ^Class.  It  occurs  in  Ignatius,  Bom.  iii. 
and  Just.  Mart.  Ap.  i.  58.  The  sense  is  not  passive,  your 
being  per»%Mtded^  but  active,  the  persuasion  which  the  Judais- 
ing  teachers  exert  over  you.  Comp.  1  Cor.  ii.  4,  inOol^  XiyoK 
persuasive  words.  There  may  be  a  slight  word-play  on 
irelBeaOcu  and  ireiafiovif.  Obedience  to  the  truth  is  the  result 
of  the  persuasive  power  of  the  truth. 

Him  that  calleth  (rov  KaXouvrt^).  Very  often  applied  to 
God  by  Paul.  See  Rom.  viii.  80  ;  ix.  11 ;  1  Cor.  i.  9  ;  vii. 
15  ;  Gal.  i.  15  ;  1  Th.  ii.  12  ;  iv.  7  ;  v.  24  ;  2  Th.  ii.  14. 
The  persuasion  to  subject  yourselves  to  the  Jewish  law  does 
not  proceed  from  him  who  called  you  to  freedom  in  Christ. 

9.  A  little  leaven  (^iwcpk  K^y^ri).  A  proverbial  warning, 
which  appears  also  1  Cor.  v.  6.  It  refers,  not  to  the  doctrine 
of  the  false  teachers,  but  to  the  false  teachers  themselves. 
Comp.  Mk.  viii.  15.  With  the  single  exception  of  the  par- 
able. Matt.  xiii.  33,  leaven,  in  Scripture,  is  always  a  symbol 
of  evil.  Comp.  Ex.  xii.  15, 19  ;  xiii.  8,  7  ;  xxiii.  18  ;  Lev. 
ii.  11 ;  Deut.  xvi.  8.  This,  however,  is  no  warrant  for  the 
nonsense  which  has  been  deduced  from  it,  as  that  Jesus'  para- 
ble of  the  leaven  contains  a  prophecy  of  the  corruption  of 
Christianity.  Because  leaven  in  Scripture  is  habitually  the 
type  of  corruption,  we  are  ^^  none  the  less  free  to  use  it  in  a 
good  sense  as  Christ  did.  One  figure  need  not  always  stand 
for  one  and  the  same  thing.  The  devil  is  ^  a  roaring  lion,' 
but  Christ  is  also  *  the  lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah ' "  (Trench). 
It  is  an  apt  figure  of  secret,  pervading  energy,  whether  bad 
or  ^ood.     A  new  interest  is  given  to  the  figure  by  Pasteur's 


160  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TB8TAM1ENT.         [Gh.  Y. 

discovery  that  fermentation  is  a  necessary  conseqaence  of  the 
activity  and  growth  of  living  organisms.*  A  very  few  of 
these  Judaising  intruders  are  sufficient  to  corrupt  the  whole 
church. 

Lump  {4>vpafui).     P^.     See  on  Rom.  ix.  21. 

10.  In  the  Lord.     CouBt.  with  I  have  canfidenee. 

Will  be  —  minded  (if>povi^€T€).  The  word  denotes  a  gen- 
eral disposition  of  the  mind  rather  than  a  specifio  act  of 
thought  directed  at  a  given  point.  Comp.  Philip,  iii.  16, 
19  ;  iv.  2  ;  Rom.  viii.  5  ;  xi.  20  ;  1  Cor.  xiii.  11 :  and  4vA^ 
fffia  mind^  Rom.  viii.  6,  7,  27.  In  Class,  often  with  cd  weO^ 
KoKw  honourably^  opOw  righUy^  xaxik  misehievou$ltf.  Td  tuw 
ff>pov€lv  is  to  be  of  one's  party. 

He  that  troubleth  (o  rapcUrawv).  Comp.  ch.  i.  7.  Not 
with  reference  to  any  particular  individual,  as  Peter  or  James 
(Lipsius),  but  generally,  of  any  possible  person,  "  whoever 
he  may  be."  The  verb  is  used  by  Paul  ozdy  in  this  Epistle, 
and  refers  to  disturbance  of  faith  or  unity. 

11.  And  I.     In  sharp  contrast  with  the  disturber. 

If  I  yet  preach  circumcision  (el  irepirofi^v  in  iofp&ram). 

Commonly  explained  as  an  allusion  to  a  charge  circulated  by 
the  Judaisers  that  Paul  preached  or  sanctioned  the  circum- 
cision of  Gentile  converts  in  churches  outside  of  Ghdatia,  as, 
for  example,  in  the  case  of  Timothy,  Acts  xvi.  8.f  But  it  is 
quite  unlikely  that  any  such  charge  was  circulated.  The 
Judaisers  would  not  have  founded  such  a  charge  on  an  indi- 
vidual case  or  two,  like  Timothy's,  especially  in  the  face  of 
the  notorious  fact  that  Paul,  in  Jerusalem  and  Antioch,  had 
contested  the  demand  for  the  circumcision  of  Gentile  Christ* 


•  See  Dr.  William  H.  Thomflon's  admirable  little  volnme,  The  JParoklm 
by  the  Lake. 

t  So  li^tfoot,  M^er,  Ellicott,  Eadie. 


Ch.  v.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OALATIANS.  161 

lans  ;  and  Paul's  question,  **Why  do  I  suffer  persecution?'* 
would  have  been  pertinent  only  on  the  assumption  that  he 
Avas  charged  with  habitually^  not  oceationally^  preaching  cir- 
cumcision. Had  the  Judaisers  actually  circulated  such  a 
charge,  Paul  would  have  been  compelled  to  meet  it  in  a  far 
more  direct  and  thorough  manner  than  he  does  here.  He 
would  have  been  likely  to  formulate  the  charge,  and  to  deal 
incisively  with  the  inconsistency  in  his  preaching  which  it 
involved.  The  course  of  his  thought  is  as  follows :  "  He 
that  troubleth  you  by  preaching  circumcision  shall  bear  his 
judgment ;  but  /  am  not  a  disturber  —  not  your  enemy  (ch. 
iv.  16),  for  I  do  not  preach  circumcision ;  and  the  proof  of  this 
is  that  I  am  persecuted.  If  I  preached  circumcision,  there 
would  be  no  offence,  and  therefore  no  disturbance  ;  for  the 
cross  would  cease  to  be  an  offence,  if,  in  addition  to  the  cross, 
I  preached  just  what  the  Judaisers  assert,  the  necessity  of 
circumcision." 

Yet  (h-C).  As  in  the  time  before  my  conversion.  The 
,econd  h-t  is  not  temporal  but  logical,  as  Rom.  iii.  7  ;  ix.  19. 
What  further  ground  is  there  for  persecuting  me  ? 

Then  (S/ui).  As  a  consequence  of  my  preaching  circum- 
cision. 

The  offence  of  the  cross  (t^  tricdviaXov  rov  aravpov). 
Comp.  1  Cor.  i.  23.     For  offence^  see  on  offend^  Matt.  v.  29. 

Ceased  {/canifypireu).  Lit.  been  done  away  or  brayght  to 
nought.  See  on  ver.  4.  If  Paul  had  preached  circumcision 
as  necessary  to  salvation,  the  preaching  of  the  cross  would 
have  ceased  to  be  an  offence,  because,  along  with  the  cross, 
Paul  would  have  preached  what  the  Judaisers  demanded,  that 
the  Mosaic  law  should  still  be  binding  on  Christians.  The 
Judaisers  would  have  accepted  the  cross  with  circumcision, 
but  not  the  cross  ttutead  of  circumcision.  The  Judaisers  thus 
exposed  themselves  to  no  persecution  in  accepting  Christ. 
They  covered  the  offence  of  the  cross,  and  conciliated  unbe- 

TOL.    IT.  — 11 


162  WOED  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  V. 

lieving  Jews  by  maintaining  that  the  law  was  binding  upon 
Christians.     See  ch.  vi.  12. 

12.  They  were  cut  off  (airoKd^vrai).  More  correctly, 
wovld  cut  tJiemselves  off.  Perhaps  the  severest  expression  in 
Paul's  Epistles.  It  turns  on  Uie  practice  of  circumcision. 
Paul  says  in  effect :  "  These  people  are  disturbing  you  by 
insisting  on  circumcision.  I  would  that  they  would  make 
thorough  work  of  it  in  their  own  case,  and,  instead  of  merely 
amputating  the  foreskin,  would  castrate  themselves,  as  heathen 
priests  do.  Perhaps  that  would  be  even  a  more  powerful  help 
to  salvation.''  With  this  passage  should  be  compared  Philip, 
iii.  2,  3,  also  aimed  at  the  Judaisers  :  ^^  Beware  of  the  eonei' 
iian "  (r)fv  tcararofAi^v)^  the  word  directing  attention  to  the 
fact  that  these  persons  had  no  right  to  claim  circumcision  in 
the  true  sense.  Unaccompanied  by  faith,  love,  and  obedience, 
circumcision  was  no  more  than  physical  mutilation.  They 
belonged  in  the  category  of  those  referred  to  in  Lev.  xxi.  6. 
Comp.  Paul's  words  on  the  true  circumcision,  Rom.  ii.  28, 
29 ;  Philip,  iii.  3 ;  Col.  ii.  11. 

Which  trouble  (^avcurrarovpre;^.  Only  here  in  Paul,  and 
twice  elsewhere,  Acts  xvii.  6 ;  xxi.  38.  ^LXX.  Stronger 
than  rapcuraeiv  disturb.  Rather  to  upset  or  overthrow.  The 
usual  phrase  in  Class,  is  avdararov  iroieiv  to  make  an  upseU 
Used  of  driving  out  from  home,  ruining  a  city  or  country. 
See  on  madest  an  uproar^  Acts  xxi.  88.  Rev.  wMettU  is  too 
weak. 

13.  For  Qi^p)'  Well  may  I  speak  thus  strongly  of  those 
who  thus  overthrow  your  whole  polity  and  enslave  you,  for 
ye  are  called  for  freedom. 

Unto  liberty  {hr  ikeuOepia).  Better,  for  freedom.  See 
on  unto  uncleanness,  1  Th.  iv.  7.     'EttI  marks  the  intention. 

Only  (^fjuivov).  For  a  similar  use  of  the  word,  qualifying 
or  limiting  a  general  statement,  comp.  1  Cor.  vii.  89 ;  GaL 
u.  10 ;  PhiUp.  i.  27 ;  2  Th.  ii.  7. 


Ch.VJ  the  epistle  to   the  6ALATIAN8.  168 

Use  not  liberty  {r^v  iXevOepiav).  Use  is  not  in  the  Greek. 
We  may  supply  hold  or  make  or  turn. 

Occasion  (a^pfiffv).  See  on  Rom.  yii.  8.  Almost  exclus- 
ively in  Paul. 

To  the  flesh  (rrf  aapxi).  See  on  Rom.  yii.  5.  The  flesh 
here  represents  lovelessness  and  selfishness.  Christian  free- 
dom is  not  to  be  abused  for  selfish  ends.  Paul  treats  this 
subject  at  length  in  1  Cor.  viii. ;  xii.  25,  26.  Individual  lib- 
erty is  subject  to  the  law  of  love  and  mutual  service.  Comp. 
1  Pet.  ii.  16. 

By  love  (SiA  t^  aycf^ny^).  Or  through  love,  through  which 
faith  works  (ver.  6). 

14.  All  the  law  (o  ttS?  v6ijm).  More  correctly,  the  whole 
law.     Comp.  Matt.  xxii.  40. 

Is  fulfilled  (irerrKfipwrai).  Has  been  fulfilled.  Comp. 
Rom.  xiii.  8.  The  meaning  is  not  embraced  tn,  or  summed 
up  ifiy  but  complied  with.  In  Rom.  xiii.  9,  avcuce^XoAoOrai 
is  summed  up,  is  to  be  disting^uished  from  irerrXijpiOfeev  hath 
fulfilled  (ver.  8)  and  irXrifHoiJLa  fulfilment  (ver.  10).  The 
difference  is  between  statement  and  accomplishment.  See 
on  do  the  law^  ver.  8. 

15.  Bite  and  devour  (hdKvere  KaX  KareaOlere).  Strong 
expressions  of  partisan  hatred  exerting  itself  for  mutual 
injury.  AtUveiv  to  bite^  N.  T.^.  In  LXX  metaphorically, 
Mic.  iii.  5 ;  Hab.  ii.  7.  For  icareadUiv  devour^  comp.  Matt, 
xxiii.  18 ;  2  Cor.  xi.  20 ;  Apoc.  xi.  5. 

Be  consumed  (avaknOr^).  Rare  in  N.  T.  See  L.  ix.  54. 
Partisan  strife  will  be  fatal  to  the  Christian  community  as 
a  whole.  The  organic  life  of  the  body  will  be  destroyed  .by 
its  own  members. 


164  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Cb.  V- 

16.  Walk  (7r€f>i7raT€ir€).  Frequent  in  a  metaphorical  sense 
for  habitual  eimduet.  See  Mk.  vii.  5 ;  J.  viii.  12 ;  Acts  xxL 
21 ;  Rom.  vi.  4 ;  viii.  4 ;  1  Cor.  iii.  8 ;  Philip.  liL  18.  Never 
by  Paul  in  the  literal  sense. 

In  the  Spirit  (wpevfAari).  Rather,  by  the  Spirit,  as  the 
rule  of  action.  Comp.  Gal.  yi.  16 ;  Philip,  iii.  16 ;  Rom. 
iv.  12. 

Fulfil  (T€Xd(rf/T€).  Bring  to  fulfilment  in  action.  See  on 
do  the  law^  ver.  8. 

The  lust  (iviOvfilav).  Frequent  in  Paul,  and  usually  in 
a  bad  sense ;  but  see  Philip,  i.  28 ;  1  Th.  ii.  17,  and  comp. 
L.  xxii.  15.  The  phrase  Ivst  or  liMts  of  the  flesh  occurs  also 
£ph.  ii.  3 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  18 ;  1  J.  ii.  16.  It  means,  not  the  mere 
sensual  desire  of  the  physical  nature,  but  the  desire  which  is 
peculiar  to  human  nature  without  the  divine  Spirit. 

17.  Are  contrary  (avrOeeirai).  The  verb  means  to  lie 
opposite  to ;  hence  to  oppose^  withstand.  The  sentence  these 
—  to  the  other  is  not  parenthetical. 

So  that  (Xva).  Connect  with  these  are  contrary^  etc.  ^l« 
does  not  express  result^  but  purpose^  to  the  end  that^  —  the 
purpose  of  the  two  contending  desires.  The  intent  of  each 
principle  in  opposing  the  other  is  to  prevent  man's  doing 
what  the  other  principle  moves  him  to  do. 

Cannot  do  (/t^  troirjre).  A  mistake,  growing  out  of  the 
misinterpretation  of  ha  noted  above.  Rather,  each  works  to 
the  end  that  ye  may  not  do^  etc. 

The  things  that  ye  would  (h  Ulv  0i\rrre).  The  things 
which  you  will  to  do  under  the  influence  of  either  of  the  two 
contending  principles.  There  is  a  mutual  conflict  of  two 
powers.  If  one  wills  to  do  good,  he  is  opposed  by  the  flesh : 
if  to  do  evil,  by  the  Spirit. 


CH.y.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OALATIANS.  165 

18.  The  question  is,  which  of  these  two  powers  shall  pre- 
vail. If  the  Spirit,  then  you  are  free  men,  no  longer  under 
the  law.     Comp.  Rom.  vi.  11,  14. 

Under  the  law  (vwb  v6fAov).  The  Mosaic  law.  We  might 
have  expected,  from  what  precedes,  under  the  flesh.  But  the 
law  and  the  flesh  are  in  the  same  category.  Circumcision 
was  a  requirement  of  the  law,  and  was  a  work  of  the  flesh. 
The  ordinances  of  the  law  were  ordinances  of  the  flesh  (Heb. 
ix.  10,  13) ;  the  law  was  weak  through  the  flesh  (Rom.  viii. 
8).  See  especially,  Oal.  iii.  2-6.  In  Philip,  iii.  3  ff.  Paul 
explains  his  grounds  for  confidence  in  the  flesh  as  his  legal 
righteousness.  The  whole  legal  economy  was  an  economy 
of  the  flesh  as  distinguished  from  the  Spirit. 

19.  Manifest.  You  have  a  clearly  defined  standard  by 
which  to  decide  whether  you  are  led  by  the  Spirit  or  by  the 
flesh.     Each  exhibits  its  peculiar  works  or  fruits. 

Adultery  (^/loixela).    To  be  dropped  from  the  text. 

Un cleanness  {oKaOa/xria).    See  on  1  Th.  ii.  8. 

Lasciviousness  (^lureXyeia).    See  on  Mk.  yii.  22. 

20.  Witchcraft  (^ap/io/r^).  Or  eoreery.  Elsewhere  only 
Apoc.  xviii.  23.  From  <f>dpfAaKov  a  drug.  In  LXX,  see 
Ex.  vii.  11 ;  Wisd.  xii.  4 ;  Isa.  xlvii.  9.  Comp.  Acts  xix. 
19,  wepUpya  curious  arte^  note. 

Wrath  (^OvfioC).     Lit.  ufrathe.     See  on  J.  iii.  86. 

Strife  (^ipiOlai).  More  correctly,  faetiam.  From  ipiOo^  a 
hired  servant.  *Epi0ia  is,  primarily,  labor  for  hire  (see  Tob. 
ii.  11),  and  is  applied  to  those  who  serve  in  official  positions 
for  hire  or  for  other  selfish  purposes,  and,  in  order  to  gain 
their  ends,  promote  party  spirit  or  faction. 


166  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Qk.  V, 

Seditions  (Sixooraalai).  Better,  diviriom.  Only  here 
and  Rom.  xvi.  17.     Once  in  LXX,  1  Mace.  iii.  29. 

Heresies  (jiiipi<r€v;').  In  Paul  only  here  and  1  Cor.  xi.  19. 
See  on  2  Pet.  ii.  1.     Parties^  into  which  ditnsioni  crystallise. 

21.  Murders.    Omit  from  the  text. 

Revellings  (xAfioi).  Comp.  Rom.  xiii.  18 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  8. 
In  both  passages  coupled  with  drunkenness  as  here.  See  on 
1  Pet.  iv.  8. 

I  tell  you  before  (wpoX^eoi).  Better  btforeJumd,  or  as 
Rev.  I  forewarn  you.    P^.    Comp.  2  Cor.  xiii.  2 ;  1  Th.  iii.  4. 

The  kingdom  of  God.    See  on  L.  vi.  20. 

22.  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  (p  Kapiri^  rov  wpeifioro^y. 
The  phrase  N.  T.^.  Fruit,  metaphorical,  frequent  in  N.  T.» 
as  Matt.  iii.  8 ;  vii.  16 ;  J.  iv.  86 ;  xv.  8 ;  Rom.  i.  18 ;  vi.  21^ 
etc.  We  find  fruit  of  light  (Eph.  v.  9);  of  righteousness 
(PhiUp.  i.  11);  of  labour  (PhiUp.  i.  22);  of  the  lips  (Heb. 
xiii.  15).     Almost  always  of  a  good  result. 

Love  (^ayaTTf)^.  Comp.  love  of  the  Spirit,  Rom.  xv.  80.  In 
Class.  ^tXcii'  is  the  most  general  designation  of  love,  denoting 
an  inner  inclination  to  persons  or  things,  and  standing  op- 
posed to  fjuaelv  or  ixOalpeiv  to  hate.  It  occasionally  acquires 
from  the  context  a  sensual  flavour,  as  Hom.  Od.  xviii.  826 ; 
Hdt.  iv.  176,  thus  running  into  the  sense  of  ipav  which  de- 
notes sensual  love.  It  is  love  to  persons  and  things  grow- 
ing out  of  intercourse  and  amenities  or  attractive  qualities. 
l,Tdpy€iv  (not  in  N.  T.,  LXX,  Sir.  xxvii.  17)  expresses  a 
deep,  quiet,  appropriating,  natural  love,  as  distinguished 
from  that  which  is  called  out  by  circumstances.  Unlike 
if>i\€iv,  it  has  a  distinct  moral  significance,  and  is  not  applied 
to  base  inclinations  opposed  to  a  genuine  manly  nature.  It 
is  the  word  for  love  to  parents,  wife,  children,  king  or  coun- 


ch.v.]  the  epistle  to  the  galatians.  167 

try,  as  one's  own.  Aristotle  (iV»(?.  ix.  7,  3)  speaks  of  poets 
as  lovififf  (<rr^/p7oi/T€9)  their  own  poems  as  their  children. 
See  also  Eurip.  Med.  87.  ^Ayairdv  is  to  love  out  of  an  intel- 
ligent estimate  of  the  object  of  love.  It  answers  to  Lat. 
diligere^  or  Germ,  schdtzen  to  prize.  It  is  not  passionate 
and  sensual  as  ipav.  It  is  not,  like  ^Xciv,  attachment  to  a 
person  independently  of  his  quality  and  created  by  close 
intercourse.  It  is  less  sentiment  than  consideration.  While 
it>iX6lv  contemplates  the  person^  ayairav  contemplates  the  attri^ 
butes  and  character^  and  gives  an  account  of  its  inclination. 
^Ayairdv  is  really  the  weaker  expression  for  love,  as  that 
term  is  conventionally  used.  It  is  judicial  rather  than  affect- 
ionate. Even  in  classical  usage,  however,  the  distinction 
between  ayairav  and  ^tXelv  is  often  very  subtle,  and  well- 
nigh  impossible  to  express. 

In  N.  T.  hnOvfjLelv  to  desire  or  lust  is  used  instead  of  ipav. 
In  LXX  ayawav  is  far  more  common  than  <f>i\€tv.  ^iXelv 
occurs  only  16  times  in  the  sense  of  love^  and  16  times  in  the 
sense  of  kiss;  while  hyairav  is  foimd  nearly  800  times.  It 
is  used  with  a  wide  range,  of  the  love  of  parent  for  child,  of 
man  for  God,  of  God  for  man,  of  love  to  one's  neighbour  and 
to  the  stranger,  of  husband  for  wife,  of  love  for  God's  house, 
and  for  mercy  and  truth ;  but  also  of  the  love  of  Samson  for 
Delilah,  of  Hosea  for  his  adulterous  wife,  of  Amnon's  love 
for  Tamar,  of  Solomon's  love  for  strange  women,  of  loving  a 
woman  for  her  beauty.  Also  of  loving  vanity,  unrighteous- 
ness, devouring  words,  cursing,  death,  silver. 

The  noun  aydirtf,  ^Class.,  was  apparently  created  by  the 
LXX,  although  it  is  found  there  only  19  times.*  It  first 
comes  into  habitual  use  in  Christian  writings.  In  N.  T.  it 
is,  practically,  the  only  noun  for  love,  although  compound 
nouns  expressing  peculiar  phases  of  love,  as  brotherly  love, 
love  of  money ^  love  of  children,  etc.,  are  formed  with  ^/Xo9, 
as  ^iXaSeX^/a,  <f>i\apyvpla^  ^iXavOptairla.  Both  verbs,  ^iKdv 
and    ayairav   occur,    but    ayairav   more    frequently.      The 

•  Deisamann,  Neue  Bibelsludien^  p.  26  ff.,  holds  that  the  word  does  not 
originate  in  Biblical  Oreek.     His  remarks,  however,  are  not  conclusiye. 


168  WOBD  STUDIES  IK  THS  NEW  TESTAICBNT.        [Ok.  V. 

attempt  to  carry  out  consistently  the  classical  distinction 
between  these  two  must  be  abandoned.  Both  are  used  of 
the  love  of  parents  and  children,  of  the  love  of  God  for 
Christ,  of  Christ  for  men,  of  God  for  men,  of  men  for  Christ 
and  of  men  for  men.  The  love  of  man  for  God  and  of 
husband  for  wife,  only  iyairSv.  The  distinction  is  rather 
between  &yairav  and  iiri0v/A€lv  than  between  iiyairav  and 
<l>i\€iv.*  J^ve,  in  this  passage,  is  that  fruit  of  the  Spirit 
which  dominates  all  the  others.  See  vv.  18,  14.  Comp. 
1  Cor.  xiii ;  IJ.  ii.  5,  9-11 ;  iu.  11, 14-16 ;  iv.  7-11,  16-21 ; 
V.  1-8. 

Joy  ix^pcL).  Comp.  joy  of  the  Holy  Qho$t,  1  Th.  i.  6,  and 
see  Uom.  v.  2;  xiv.  17;  xv.  18;  2  Cor.  vi.  10;  Philip.  L  25; 
iv.  4;  1  Pet.  i.  8;  IJ.  i.  4. 

Peace  (jeiprivrf).     See  on  1  Th.  i.  1.    Here  of  mutual  peace 

rather  than  peace  with  God. 

Long  suffering  (^fMucpoOvfiia).  See  on  be  patient^  Jas.  y.  7, 
and  comp.  Rom.  ii.  4 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  6 ;  Eph.  iv.  2 ;  Col.  i.  11. 

Gentleness  (xpfiirroTffi^.  See  on  good^  Rom.  iii.  12 ;  ea^y^ 
Matt.  xi.  30;  gracious^  1  Pet.  ii.  3.  Better,  kindness;  a 
kindness  which  is  useful  or  serviceable. 

Goodness  (ayaOaxTwrf^.     P^.     See  on  Rom.  iiL  12. 

Faith  (ir/ijTi?).     Trustfulness. 

23.    Meekness  (irpairrf^^.    See  on  meek^  Matt.  y.  6. 

Temperance  (iy/cpdreid).  Only  here  by  Paul.  He  alone 
uses  iyKpareueaOai  to  have  eontinency^  1  Cor.  yii.  9 ;  ix.  25. 
See  on  is  temperate^  1  Cor.  ix.  25.  The  word  means  self- 
control^  holding  in  hand  the  passions  and  desires.     So  Xen. 

•  See  Professor  Sanday*s  note  on  the  history  of  dydwif^  CommmUary  om 
Bomana  (International),  p.  374. 


Ch.V.]  THB  EPI8TLB  TO  THE  OALATIANS.  169 

Mem.  i.  2, 1,  of  Socrates,  who  was  iyKpardararo^  fnoit  temjh 
erate  as  to  sexual  pleasures  and  pleasures  of  the  appetite. 

Such  (rotairmv).     Such  thingt^  not  j^er^on*. 

There  is  no  law  (pifK  ianv  v6fio9^.  Against  such  virtues 
there  is  no  law  to  condemn  them.  The  law  can  bring  no 
charge  against  them.     Comp.  1  Tim.  i.  9, 10. 

24.  They  that  are  Christ's  (pi  8i  rov  Xpurrov).  The  best 
texts  add  li/o-oi)  they  that  are  of  Christ  Jeeui.  Belong  to 
him.  The  exact  phrase  only  here.  But  see  1  Ck>r.  i.  12; 
iii.  28 ;  xv.  28 ;  2  Cor.  x.  7;  Gal.  iii.  29. 

Have  crucified  the  flesh  (r^y  aapxa  iaravpwrav).  The 
phrase  only  here.  Comp.  ch.  ii.  20;  vi.  14;  Rom.  vi.  6. 
The  line  of  thought  as  regards  death  to  sin  is  the  same  as  in 
Rom.  vi.  2-7, 11 ;  as  regards  death  to  the  law,  the  same  as  in 
Rom.  vii.  1-6. 

Affections  (iraOij/jLaaiv).  Better,  ptuiiane.  Often  suffer- 
ings^  as  Rom.  viii.  18 ;  2  Cor.  i.  5,  6,  7;  Philip,  iii.  10 ;  Heb. 
ii.  9.  Often  of  Christ's  sufferings.  Comp.  pasnons  of  sins^ 
Rom.  vii.  6  (see  on  motions').  ^LXX,  where  we  find  irdBci^ 
in  both  senses,  but  mostly  sufferings.  Ilodo?  also  in  N.  T., 
but  rarely  and  P^.  See  Rom.  i.  26 ;  Col.  iii.  5 ;  1  Th.  iv.  5 : 
always  of  evil  desires. 

25.  Lipsius  makes  this  verse  the  beginning  of  ch.  vi. 
Weizsacker  begins  that  chapter  with  ver.  26.  There  seems 
to  be  no  sufficient  reason.  Ver.  25  is  connected  naturally 
with  the  immediately  preceding  line  of  thought.  ^^Such 
being  your  principle  of  life,  adapt  your  conduct  (walk)  to 
it."  The  hortatory  form  of  ver.  26,  and  its  contents,  fall  in 
naturally  with  the  exhortation  to  walk  by  the  Spirit,  and 
with  the  reference  to  biting  and  devouring^  ver.  15,  and  envy- 
ings,  ver.  21.  The  connection  of  the  opening  of  ch.  vi.  with 
the  close  of  ch.  v.  is  not  so  manifest ;  and  the  address  brethren 


170  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Cb.  VI 

and  the  change  to  the  second  person  (vi.  1)  seem  to  indicate 
a  new  section. 

In  the  Spirit  (irvevfuvri).  Better,  by  the  Spirit,  the  dative 
being  instrumental  as  ver.  16. 

Walk  (oToix^ffiep)*  A  different  word  from  that  in  ver.  16. 
Only  in  Paul,  except  Acts  xxi.  24.  From  oto^x^  a  raw. 
Hence,  to  walk  in  line  ;  to  march  in  battle  order  (Xen.  C^r. 
vi.  8,  34).  'Lvvaroixcl  an^wereth  to^  Gal.  iv.  25  (note).  See 
also  on  aroix^la  elements^  Gal.  iv.  3.  Paul  uses  it  very  graphic- 
ally, of  falling  into  line  with  Abraham's  faith,  Rom.  iv.  12. 

26.  Desirous  of  vainglory  (/ccprfSofot).  N.  T.^.  Better, 
fain(/loriou8.  The  noun  tccpoSo^ia  vainglory  only  Philip,  ii.  3. 
In  LXX  see  Wisd.  xiv.  14 ;  4  Mace.  ii.  16 ;  viii.  18.  Origin- 
ally, vain  opinion^  error.  Ignatius,  Magn.  xi.,  speaks  of  fall- 
ing into  ayKiarpa  rifi  K€voBo^(a^  the  hooks  or  clutches  of  error. 
Ao^a  has  not  the  sense  of  opinion  in  N.  T.,  but  that  of 
reputation^  glory.  This  compound  means  having  a  vain 
conceit  of  possessing  a  rightful  claim  to  humour.  Suidas  de- 
fines any  vain  thinking  about  one's  self.  It  implies  a  contrast 
with  the  state  of  mind  which  seeks  the  glory  of  God.  The 
modes  in  which  vainglory  may  show  itself  are  pointed  out  in 
the  two  following  participles,  provoking  and  envying. 

Provoking  (irpoKaXovfievoC).  N.  T.^.  LXX,  only  2  Mace. 
viii.  11.  Lit.  calling  forth^  challenging^  and  so  stirring  up 
strife.     Very  common  in  Class. 


CHAPTER  FT. 

1.  Overtaken  in  a  fault  (jrpo\riti4>^i  —  &  nw,  wapairr^ 
imri).  The  verb  means  lit.  to  take  before;  to  anticipate  or 
forestall.  Elsewhere  only  Mk.  xiv.  8 ;  1  Cor.  xi.  21.  LXX, 
Wisd.  xviii.  17.  Not,  be  detected  in  the  act  by  some  one  else 
before  he  can  escape^  but  surprised  by  the  fault  itse\f;  hurried 


OK.VL]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIANB.  171 

into  error.  Thus  irp6  has  the  sense  of  before  he  is  aware^  and 
ip  is  instrumental,  by.*  For  fatUt  or  trespaasj  see  on  Matt, 
vi.  14. 

Spiritual  (irvevfAanKoY).  Comp.  1  Cor.  iii.  1.  Mostly  in 
Paul.  See  1  Pet.  ii.  5.  Those  who  have  received  the  Spirit 
and  are  led  by  him.  See  ch.  iii.  2,  3,  5,  14;  iv.  6;  v.  5,  16, 
18,  25.  He  leaves  it  to  the  readers'  own  conscience  whether 
or  not  they  answer  to  this  designation. 

Restore  (^Karapri^ere).  See  on  Matt.  iv.  21 ;  xxi.  16 ; 
L.  vi.  40;  1  Pet.  v.  10.  The  word  is  used  of  reconciling 
factions,  as  Hdt.  v.  28 ;  of  setting  bones ;  of  mending  nets, 
Mk.  i.  19 ;  of  equipping  or  preparing,  Rom.  ix.  22 ;  Heb.  x. 
5 ;  xi.  3 ;  of  manning  a  fleet,  or  supplying  an  army  with  pro- 
visions. Usually  by  Paul  metaphorically  as  here.  The  idea  of 
amendment  is  prominent :  set  him  to  rights :  bring  him  into  line. 
Comp.  2  Cor.  xiii.  11 ;  1  Cor.  i.  10. 

Spirit  of  meekness.  Comp.  1  Cor.  iv.  21.  Led  by  the 
Spirit  of  God,  whose  fruit  is  meekness  (v.  28).  For  the 
combinations  of  irvtO fjui  with  genitives,  see  on  Rom.  viii.  4, 
p.  87. 

Considering  (jrKoir&v).  Only  in  Paul,  except  L.  xi.  35. 
The  verb  means  to  look  attentively ;  to  fix  the  attention  upon 
a  thing  with  an  interest  in  it.  See  Rom.  xvi.  17 ;  2  Cor.  iv. 
18 ;  Philip,  ii.  4 ;  iii.  17.  Hence,  often,  to  aim  at  (comp. 
a/coTTov  mark^  Philip,  iii.  14).  Schmidt (iSyn.) defines:  **To 
direct  one's  attention  upon  a  thing,  either  in  order  to  obtain 
it,  or  because  one  has  a  peculiar  interest  in  it,  or  a  duty  to 
fulfil  toward  it.     Also  to  have  an  eye  to  with  a  view  of 

•  Interpreters  differ  in  the  explanation  of  vp^,  Lightf oot,  Ellicott,  Eadie, 
Tliayer,  Alford,  Weiss,  say  caught  in  the  fault  b^ore  he  can  escape.  But  this 
IS  an  unusual  meaning  of  the  verb,  which  is  certainly  not  settled  by  Wisd. 
xvii.  17.  Ellicott  objects  to  the  meaning  given  in  the  note,  that,  in  that  case, 
rp^  would  seem  to  excuse,  whereas  koX  appears  to  point  to  an  aggravation  of 
the  offence.  If  that  be  true,  then,  on  Fllicott's  explanation,  the  aggravatioii 
of  the  offence  would  appear  to  be  in  being  caught. 


172  WORD  STUDIBS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch  VI 

forming  a  right  judgment/*  Notice  the  passing  to  the  sin- 
gular number  —  ^^considering  thyself.'^  The  exhortation  is 
addressed  to  the  conscience  of  each.  Before  you  deal  severely 
with  the  erring  brother,  consider  your  own  weakness  and  sus- 
ceptibility to  temptation,  and  restore  him  in  view  of  that  fact. 

2.  One  another's  burdens  (aXXi^Xooy  rk  fidpri).  The  em- 
phasis is  on  one  another  b^  in  contrast  with  the  selfishness  which 
leaves  others  to  take  care  of  themselves.  The  primary  refer- 
ence in  burdens  is  to  moral  infirmities  and  errors,  and  the 
sorrow  and  shame  and  remorse  which  they  awaken  in  the 
offender. 

So  (phw^y     By  observing  this  injunction. 

Fulfil  QavairXfjpwrare).  The  verb  denotes,  not  the  filling 
up  of  a  perfect  vacancy,  as  the  simple  irXtjpouPj  but  the  sup- 
plying of  what  is  lacking  to  fulness ;  the  filling  up  of  a  partial 
void.     Comp.  1  Cor.  xvi.  17;  Philip,  ii.  80;  1  Th.  ii.  16.* 

8.  Think  (^BoKeT).  Sometimes  rendered  seems^  1  Cor.  xii. 
22;  2  Cor.  x.  9  ;  Gal.  ii.  9 ;  but  think  is  Paul's  usual  mean- 
ing.    Comp.  Matt.  iii.  9 ;  1  Cor.  xi.  16 ;  Philip,  iii.  4. 

To  be  something  (elvalri).  For  the  phrase  see  Acts  v.  86 ; 
viii.  9 ;  1  Cor.  iii.  7 ;  x.  19 ;  Gal.  ii.  6 ;  vi.  16. 

Deceiveth  (j^^pevairaTo).  N.  T.^.  ^LXX,  ^Class.  See 
the  noun  <f>pepa7rdTry:  deceiver^  Tit.  i.  10.  Denoting  subjective 
deception ;  deception  of  the  judgment.  The  simple  Snrarw 
to  deceive^  Eph.  v.  6 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  14 ;  Jas.  i.  26,  and  often  in 
LXX.  Lightfoot  thinks  the  compound  verb  may  possibly 
have  been  coined  by  Paul.f 

•  Quite  a  number  of  high  authorities  read  ivawXiifitJ^trt^  fatnre,  ye  §hatt 
fulfil. 

t  Blan,  howeyer  (N.  T.  Oramm.,  p.  68,  note),  says  that  ^pcwvanyt  ap- 
pears in  a  papyrus  of  the  second  century  b.c.  He  refers  to  Grenfell,  ^it  Al^ 
exandrian  Erotic  Fragment,  Oxford,  1896,  p.  3.  See  aibo  Sophocles,  UreeM 
Lexicon  of  the  Boman  atid  Byzantine  Periods^  sub  ^pcrardrvt. 


Ch.vi.j  the  epistle  to  the  galatians.  178 

4.  Prove  {BoKi/ui^hw^.  In  Class,  of  assaying  metals 
Comp.  LXX,  Prov.  viii.  10 ;  xvii.  8 ;  Sir.  ii.  6 :  also  1  Cor. 
iii.  18 ;  1  Pet.  i.  7.  It  is  the  classical  verb  for  testing  money; 
see  Plato,  Tim.  65  C.  AotcifAa^eiv  and  irvpowrdcu  to  bum  or  try 
by  fire  occur  together,  Jer.  ix.  7;  Ps.  xi.  6 ;  Ixv.  10.  Gen- 
erally, to  prove  or  examine^  as  1  Cor.  xi.  28 ;  1  Th.  v.  21. 
To  accept  that  which  is  approved,  1  Cor.  xvi.  8 ;  2  Cor.  viii. 
22;  ITh.  ii.  4. 

Rejoicing  (jh  Kaixni^^*  Better,  as  giving  the  force  of 
the  article,  '^  At«  glorying."  Kav^fta  is  the  matter  or  ground 
of  glorying,  see  Rom.  iv.  2  ;  1  Cor.  ix.  15 ;  not  the  act  (jcav- 
Xi70"*0»  ^  Rom.  iii.  27;  2  Cor.  i.  12.* 

In  himself  (ej?  iainhv).  Better,  with  regard  to  himself,  or 
a9  concerns.  For  this  use  of  ek  see  Rom.  iv.  20 ;  xv.  2 ; 
xvi.  6 ;  Eph.  iii.  16.  Not,  he  will  keep  his  glorying  to  himself 
or  abstain  from  boasting.  He  means  that  if,  on  examination, 
one  finds  in  himself  anything  to  boast  of,  his  cause  of  boast- 
ing will  lie  simply  and  absolutely  in  that,  and  not  in  his 
merit  as  compared,  to  his  own  advantage,  with  that  of 
another. 

Another  (t6v  frepov).  Better,  the  other,  or,  as  Rev.,  Ait 
neighbour.     See  on  Matt.  vi.  24. 

5.  Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens:  every  man  shall 
bear  his  own  burden.  A  kind  of  paradox  of  which  Paul 
is  fond.  See  Philip,  ii.  12,  18;  2  Cor.  vi.  8-10;  vii.  10; 
xii.  10.  Paul  meauF,  no  one  will  have  occasion  to  claim 
moral  superiority  to  his  neighbour, /or  (7^/>)  each  man's  self- 
examination  will  reveal  infirmities  enough  of  his  own,  even 
though  they  may  not  be  the  same  as  those  of  his  neighbour. 
His  own  burdens  will  absorb  his  whole  attention,  and  will 
leave  him  no  time  to  compare  himself  with  others. 

•  Still,  this  does  not  always  hold.     We  find  y4wnitaa,  SUtyf»^  tf Ai^io,  Ik^M, 


174  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Cr.  YL 

His  own  burden  (ro  tBiop  <f>ofniov^.  For  iSiov  awn^  see  on 
1  Tim.  vi.  1.  With  <f>opT(op  burden  comp.  fidprf  burdenSy 
ver.  2.  It  is  doubtful  whether  any  different  shade  of  mean- 
ing is  intended.  Originally  /Sdfn)  emphasises  the  weight  of 
the  burden,  <f^fyrCov  simply  notes  the  fact  that  it  is  some- 
thing to  be  borne  (^peiv)^  which  may  be  either  light  or  heavy. 
See  Matt.  xi.  30  ;  xxiii.  4  ;  Ps.  xxxvii.  4 ;  L.  xi.  46.  Comp. 
Acts  xxvii.  10,  the  leading  of  a  ship. 

6.  But,  although  each  man  is  thus  individualised  as  regards 
his  burdens,  Christian  fellowship  in  all  morally  good  things 
is  to  be  maintained  between  the  teacher  and  the  taught.  The 
passage  is  often  explained  as  an  injunction  to  provide  for  the 
temporal  wants  of  Christian  teachers.*  But  this  is  entirely 
foreign  to  the  course  of  thought,  and  isolates  the  verse  from 
the  context  on  both  sides  of  it.  As  vv.  1-5  refer  to  moral 
errors,  in  aU  good  things  has  naturally  the  same  reference,  as 
do  good  in  ver.  10  certainly  has.  ,  The  exhortation  therefore 
is,  that  the  disciple  should  make  common  cause  with  the 
teacher  in  everything  that  is  morally  good  and  that  promotes 
salvation.  The  introduction  at  this  point  of  the  relation  of 
disciple  and  teacher  may  be  explained  by  the  fact  that  this 
relation  in  the  Galatian  community  had  been  disturbed  by 
the  efforts  of  the  Judaising  teachers,  notably  in  the  case  of 
Paul  himself ;  and  this  disturbance  could  not  but  interfere 
with  their  common  moral  effort  and  life. 

Him  that  is  taught  (6  Karfixoviievusi).    See  on  L.  i.  4. 

In  the  word  (jov  \6yov).  The  gospel.  Usually  in  Paul 
with  some  qualifying  word,  as  of  God.  Comp.  Acts  iv.  4 ; 
viii.  4 ;  xi.  19 ;  xiv.  26 ;  xvi.  6 ;  1  Th.  i.  6 ;  Col.  iv.  8. 

Communicate  (koiiwv€(t<o).  Hold  fellowship  with ;  par- 
take with.  Not  impart  to.  The  word  is  used  of  giving  and 
receiving  material  aid  (Philip,  iv.  15) :  of  moral  or  spiritual 

•  So  many  ancient  interpreten,  and  Lightfoot,  Ellicott,  De  Wttte,  Sadla» 
Alford. 


CB.yi.]  THB  EPISTLE  TJ  THE  GALATIAKS.  175 

participation  (Rom.  xv.  27;  1  Tim.  v.  22  ;  2  J.  11):  of  par- 
ticipation in  outward  conditions  (Heb.  ii.  14):  in  sufferings 
(1  Pet  iv  18). 

7.  Be  not  deceived  (/a^  irT^vaaOe).  For  the  phrase  see 
1  Cor.  vi.  9 ;  xv.  88 ;  Jas.  i.  16.  Deceive  is  a  secondary 
sense;  the  primary  meaning  being  lead  a$tray.  See  on 
Mk.  xii.  24.  The  connection  of  the  exhortation  may  be 
with  the  entire  section  from  ver.  1  (Eadie  and  Sieffert),  but 
is  more  probably  with  ver.  6.  The  Ghdatians  are  not  to 
think  that  it  is  a  matter  of  no  consequence  whether  their 
fellowship  be  with  their  Christian  teachers  who  preach  the 
word  of  truth,  or  with  the  Judaising  innovators  who  would 
bring  them  under  bondage  to  the  law. 

Is  not  mocked  (ov  fAVKrrjpt^ercu).  N.  T.^.  Quite  often 
in  LXX.  See  1  K.  xviii.  27  ;  2  K.  xix.  21 ;  Job  xxii.  19 ; 
Prov.  i.  80.  Also  the  noun  fAVKTrfpurfiS^  mockery^  Job  xxxiv. 
7;  Ps.  xxxiv.  16.  See  Ps.  of  Sol.  iv.  8.  The  verb,  literally, 
to  turn  up  the  nose  at.  Comp.  Horace,  Sat.  i.  6,  5,  naeo  sus- 
pendis  aduneo^  ii.  8,  64 ;  JEpiat.  i.  19,  45. 

That  (toSto).  Most  emphatic.  That  and  nothing  else. 
Comp.  Matt.  vii.  16 ;  2  Cor.  ix.  6. 

8.  To  his  flesh  (efe  t^i'  adpKa  iatnov).  Rather,  his  own 
flesh.  '£i9  into :  the  flesh  being  conceived  as  the  soil  into 
which  the  seed  is  cast.  Comp.  Matt.  xiii.  22.  His  otan^ 
because  the  idea  of  personal,  selfish  desire  is  involved. 

Corruption  (j^Oopdv).  Primarily,  destruction^  ruin;  but  it 
also  has  the  sense  of  deterioration^  decay^  as  1  Cor.  xv.  42. 
Comp.  Aristotle,  RheU  iii.  8, 4  :  "  And  thou  didst  sow  (hnrei- 
pai)  shamefully  (aiaypw)  and  didst  reap  (iOeplaa^^  miserably 
(jcokS^).'^  See  also  Plato,  Phaedrus,  260  D,  and  on  deJUe^ 
Rom.  iii.  17. 

The  Spirit.  The  Holy  Spirit :  not  the  higher  nature  of 
man. 


176  WOBD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Gte.VL 

Eternal  life  (^c^v  aUmov).  See  on  2  Th.  i.  9  (additional 
note). 

9.  Be  weary  (hKcuc&iuv).  Lit.  faint  or  hie  lieart.  Comp* 
2  Th.  iii.  13. 

In  due  season  (jccup^  IBCqi).  In  the  season  which  is  pecul- 
iarly the  harvest-time  of  each  form  of  well-doing.  See  on 
ver.  6. 

Faint  (iic\v6fA€voi).  Only  here  in  Paul.  See  Matt.  zr. 
82 ;  Mk.  viii.  8 ;  Heb.  xii.  8,  6.  Lit.  to  be  loo%ened  or  re- 
laxed^  like  the  limbs  of  the  weary. 

10.  As  we  have  opportunity  (Jk  xcupbv  ix^f^'  As  there 
is  a  proper  season  for  reaping,  there  is  likewise  a  proper 
season  for  sowing.  As  this  season  comes  to  us,  let  us  sow 
to  the  Spirit  by  doing  good.     Comp.  Eph.  y.  16 ;  Col.  iy.  6. 

Let  us  do  good  (ipya^dfieOa  to  ayadiv).  Let  us  work  the 
good.  For  the  distinctive  force  of  ipyd^eadtu  see  on  3  J.  6 ; 
and  for  ttoUIv  to  do^  on  J.  iii.  21.  Comp.  Col.  iii.  28  where 
both  verbs  occur.  Ti  hyaOov  is,  of  course,  the  morcMy  good 
as  distinguished  from  what  is  merely  usrful  or  profitable^  but 
includes  what  is  beneficent  or  kindly.  See  Philem.  14 ;  Eph* 
iv.  28  ;  1  Th.  iii.  6 ;  Rom.  v.  7.  Here,  in  a  general  sense^ 
embracing  all  that  is  specified  in  w.  1,  2,  3, 10. 

Unto  them  who  are  of  the  household  of  faith  (wpii  rov^ 
olKeioi^  T^9  7r^€o>9).  Tlpb^  combines  with  the  sense  of  direct-- 
ion  that  of  active  relation  with,  Comp.  Matt.  xiii.  56 ;  Mk. 
ix.  16,;  J.  i.  1;  Acts  iii.  26;  xxviii.  25;  1  Th.  iv.  12;  Heb. 
ix.  20.  Frequently  in  Class,  of  all  kinds  of  personal  inter- 
course. See  Hom.  Od.  xiv.  881 ;  xix.  288 ;  Thucyd.  ii.  69 ;  iv. 
16;  vii.  82;  Hdt.  i.  61.  ^Oik^Iol  of  the  hotueholdj  rare  in 
N.  T.  See  Eph.  ii.  19 ;  1  Tim.  v.  8.  Quite  often  in  LXX  of 
kinemen.  It  is  unnecessary  to  introduce  the  idea  of  a  house- 
hold here,  as  A.  V.,  since  the  word  acquired  the  general  sense 


ch.  vl]  the  xpistlb  to  the  galatians.  177 

of  pertaining  or  belonging  to.  Thus  oUeloi  ^Xoo-o^/a9  or 
y&oypa^la^  belonging  to  philosophy  or  geography^  philosophers^ 
geographers.     So  here,  belonging  to  the  faith,  believers. 

11.  How  large  a  letter  (wrfXCKot/i  ypdfAfiaaiv).  More  cor- 
rectly, toith  how  large  letters,  TpdfA/uiTa  may  mean  an  epistle^ 
as  Lat.  literae^  or  epistles  ;  but  Paul  habitually  uses  iirurroXii 
for  an  epistle.  TpafAfjuiaiv  means  tvith  characters^  and  tfi^XA 
/roi9  refers  to  their  size.  It  is  claimed  by  some  that  the  large 
characters  are  intended  to  call  the  attention  of  the  readers  to 
the  special  importance  of  the  close  of  the  letter.     See  below. 

I  have  written  (hfpa^).  The  aorist  may  refer  to  the 
whole  of  the  preceding  letter,  or  to  the  concluding  verses 
which  follow.  In  either  case  it  is  probably  an  instance  of  the 
epistolary  aorist,  by  which  the  writer  puts  himself  at  the  time 
when  his  correspondent  is  reading  his  letter.  To  the  corre- 
spondent, I  write  has  changed  itself  into  I  wrote.  Similarly 
the  Lat.  scripsi.  "Eire/A'^a  I  sent  is  used  in  the  same  way. 
See  Acts  xxiii.  30  ;  Philip,  ii.  28  ;  Col.  iv.  8  ;  Philem.  11. 

With  mine  own  hand  (t^  ifn^  X^vO-  '^^  aorist  iypa^fta  is 
epistolary,  and  refers  to  what  follows.  The  concluding  verses 
emphasise  the  main  issue  of  the  letter,  that  the  Judaising  in- 
truders are  trying  to  win  the  Galatians  over  to  the  economy 
of  circumcision  which  is  opposed  to  the  economy  of  the  cross. 
It  is  therefore  quite  probable  that  Paul  may  have  wished  to 
call  special  attention  to  these  verses.  If  so,  this  special  call 
lies  in  the  words  with  my  own  hand^  and  not  in  with  haw  large 
letters^  which  would  seem  to  have  been  added  to  call  attention 
to  the  apostle's  handwriting  as  distinguished  from  that  of  the 
amanuensis.  **  Mark  carefully  these  closing  words  of  mine. 
I  write  them  with  my  own  hand  in  the  large  characters  which 
you  know.** 

12.  To  make  a  fair  show  (eiirpoamrriffai).  N.  T.^. 
^Class.     ^LXX. 

yoL.  IT.— 12 


178  WORD  STUDIBS  IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  VL 

In  the  flesh  {ip  aapKl^.  Qualifying  the  verb  to  make  a  fair 
%how.  The  whole  phrase  is  well  explained  by  Ellicott :  **  To 
wear  a  specious  exterior  in  the  earthly,  unspiritual  element  in 
which  they  move."  'Ei'  aapKC  is  not  =  among  meny  nor  being 
carnal^  nor  as  regards  fleshly  things.  The  desire  to  make  a 
good  appearance  irrespective  of  inward  truth  and  righteous- 
ness, is  prompted  by  the  unrenewed,  fleshly  nature,  and  makes 
its  fair  showing  in  that  sphere. 

They  constrain  (^oth-oi  &vayKd^ovaiv).  Neither  A.  V.  nor 
Rev.  gives  the  strong,  definitive  force  of  oSroi.  It  is  these  — 
the  Judaising  emissaries,  that  constrain,  etc.    Comp.  ch.  iii.  7. 

Only  lest  (fi6vop  Xva — ^4^).  Or,  that  they  may  not.  Hav- 
ing no  other  object,  or  only  from  the  motive  that,  etc 

For  the  cross  (r^  aravp^^.  Better,  by  reason  of  the  cross. 
Because  of  preaching  a  crucified  Messiah.  See  on  ch.  v.  11. 
The  Judaisers  attempted  to  cover  with  the  law — the  require- 
ment of  circumcision — the  ^* offence"  of  a  crucified  Messiah. 

13.  Neither  they  themselves  who  are  circumcised  (ovSi 
—  ol  wepiTCfjLPOfAepoi  aurol).  For  neither^  translate  not  even. 
Const,  themselves  with  keep  the  law.  The  persons  referred  to 
are  the  same  as  those  in  ver.  12.  The  participle  tells  nothing 
as  to  the  antecedents  of  these  persons,  whether  Jewish  or 
heathen.  It  is  general,  those  who  are  receiving  circumcision. 
It  is  =  the  circumcision-party;  and  the  present  participle  rep- 
resents them  as  in  present  activity.  They  are  circumcised 
themselves,  and  are  endeavouring  to  force  circumcision  upon 
others. 

Keep  the  law  (p6/iop  ^vKdaaovaip^.  See  on  ch.  v.  8. 
They  are  in  the  same  category  with  all  who  are  circumcised, 
who  do  not  and  cannot  fully  observe  the  law.  Comp.  ch. 
iii.  10  ;  V.  8.  Hence,  if  circumcision  develops  no  justifying 
results,  it  is  apparent  that  their  insistence  on  circumcision 
proceeds  not  from  moral,  but  from  fleshly  motives. 


Oh.  VL]  the  epistle  TO  THE  GALATIANS.  179 

That  they  may  glory  in  your  flesh  (Iva  h  r^  viA/erip^  actpxl 
icavx^^vTfu).  May  boast,  not  of  your  fulfilling  the  law,  but 
in  your  ceremonial  conformity  ;  your  becoming  legal  zealots 
like  themselves.  They  desire  only  that  you,  like  them,  should 
make  a  fair  show  in  the  flesh.  For  the  formula  KavxpurOai 
iv  to  glory  in^  see  Rom.  ii.  17 ;  v.  8 ;  1  Cor.  i.  31 ;  2  Cor. 
X.  16. 

14.  Contrast  of  Paul's  own  boasting  and  its  ground  with 
those  of  the  false  apostles. 

By  whom  (Si*  oC).  The  relative  may  refer  either  to  the 
cross,  by  which^  or  to  Christ,  by  wliam.  The  cross  was  a 
stumbling-block  to  the  Jews  (ch.  iii.  18),  and  it  is  the 
crucified  Christ  that  Paul  is  emphasising.  Comp.  ch.  ii. 
20 ;  V.  24. 

The  world  (jc6ayL0/^).  See  on  J.  i.  9 ;  Acts  xvii.  24 ;  1 
Cor.  iv.  9. 

15.  A  new  creature  (^Kaivii  KrUnsi).  Comp.  2  Cor.  v.  17. 
For  K<uvri  new  see  on  Matt.  xxvi.  29.  For  tcrlai^  on  Rom. 
viii.  19 ;  2  Cor.  v.  17.  Here  of  the  thing  created^  not  of  the 
act  of  creating.  The  phrase  was  common  in  Jewish  writers 
for  one  brought  to  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God.  Comp. 
Eph.  ii.  10, 15. 

16.  Rule  (jcav6vi).  ?<>.  See  on  2  Cor.  x.  18, 16.*  Em- 
phasis on  rule  not  thi%. 

Peace  be  on  them  (^elp^ptf  hr  airobfi).  The  only  instance 
of  this  formula  in  N.  T.  Commonly  etpi^vrf  with  the  simple 
dative,  peace  unto  you^  as  J.  xx.  19,  21 ;  Rom.  i.  7 ;  1  Cor. 
i.  8 ;  Gal.  i.  8,  etc.  In  the  Catholic  Epistles,  with  irXrfivpdeitf 
be  multiplied.     See  1  Pet.  i.  2;  2  Pet.  i.  2;  Jude  2. 

Mercy  (jfXeo9).  In  the  opening  salutations  of  the  Pastoral 
Epistles  with  grace  and  pec^ce ;  also  in  2  J.  8.  In  Jude  2 
with  peace  and  hve. 

•ForUiehifU>x7oltliewoidMeW«s(oott,Caiioii(^<^3r.  T.,  AppendixA. 


180  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Cb.  VI 

And  upon  the  Israel  of  Qod.  The  zeal  and  may  be  simply 
connective,  in  which  case  the  Israel  of  Chd  may  be  different 
from  a%  many  as  walk^  etc.,  and  may  mean  truly  converted 
Jews.  Or  the  xal  may  be  explicative,  in  which  case  the  Israel 
of  God  will  define  and  emphasise  as  many  aSy  etc.,  and  will 
mean  the  whole  body  of  Christians,  Jewish  and  Gentile.  In 
other  words,  they  who  walk  according  to  this  rule  form  the 
true  Israel  of  God.  The  explicative  xai  is  at  best  doubtful 
here,  and  is  rather  forced,  although  clear  instances  of  it  may 
be  found  in  1  Ck>r.  iii.  5 ;  xv.  88.  It  seems  better  to  regard  it 
as  simply  connective.  Then  Sa-oi  will  refer  to  the  individual 
Christians,  Jewish  and  Gentile,  and  Israel  of  God  to  the  same 
Christians,  regarded  collectively,  and  forming  the  true  messi- 
anic community. 

17.  Henceforth  (rov  Xoiirov).  Only  here  and  Eph.  vi.  10. 
Commonly  t6  Xoiwdv.  The  genitive  is  temporal ;  at  any  time 
in  the  future  as  distinguished  from  throughout  the  future. 

Trouble  me  (jc6irov^  fun — vapex^rooi).  Lit.  give  me  trouh* 
Us;  make  it  necessary  for  me  to  vindicate  my  apostolic  au- 
thority and  the  divine  truth  of  my  gospel. 

Bear  In  my  body.    Comp.  2  Cor.  iv.  10. 

Marks  (ariyfiaTa').  N.  T.^.  The  wounds,  scars,  and  other 
outward  signs  of  persecutions  and  sufferings  in  the  service  of 
Christ.  Comp.  2  Cor.  xi.  28  ff .  The  metaphor  is  the  brands 
applied  to  slaves  in  order  to  mark  their  owners.  Hence 
Rev.,  I  bear  branded.  Brands  were  also  set  upon  soldiers, 
captives,  and  servants  of  temples.  See  on  Apoc.  xiii.  16,  and 
comp.  Apoc.  vii.  8 ;  xiv.  1,  9, 11.  The  scars  on  the  apostle's 
body  marked  him  as  the  bondservant  of  Jesus  Christ.  The 
passage  naturally  recalls  the  legend  of  Francis  of  Assisi. 

18.  The  grace,  etc.  The  same  form  of  benediction  oocun 
Philem.  25. 


dLVL]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIANS.  181 

Brethren.  Rev.  rightly  puts  the  word  at  the  end  of  the 
verse.  The  position  is  unusual.  It  would  seem  as  if  Paul 
intended  to  close  this  severe  letter  with  an  assurance  that  the 
^^  foolish  Galatians ''  were  still  his  brethren :  They  are  ad- 
dressed as  ^^  brethren,''  ch.  iv.  12;  v.  11;  vi.  1.  Comp.  1 
Cor.  xvi.  24. 


THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES. 


THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES. 


INTRODUCTION. 


Thb  two  Epistles  to  Timothy  and  the  Epistle  to  Titos  are 
called  the  Pastoral  Epistles  because  they  consist  chiefly  of 
instructions  and  admonitions  to  pastors. 

Their  authenticity  is  disputed;  The  current  of  modem 
criticism  is  against  their  Pauline  authorship,  but  it  is  sup- 
ported  by  high  authorities. 

I.  The  three  letters  are  closely  allied,  and  stand  or  fall 
together.  While  each  has  its  peculiarities,  they  contain 
considerable  common  matter;  and  their  general  situation 
and  aim  are  substantially  the  same.  They  oppose  heresies, 
seek  to  establish  a  definite  church  polity,  and  urge  adherence 
to  traditional  doctrine.  Their  style  is  similar.  Certain 
expressions  which  occur  nowhere  else  in  the  N.  T.  are  found 
in  all  three.  Whole  sentences  are  in  almost  verbal  agree- 
ment. 

II.  They  exhibit  certain  resemblances  to  the  Pauline 
Epistles,  notably  to  Romans.  If  the  writer  is  not  Paul,  he 
is  manifestly  familiar  with  Paul's  teachings. 

III.  As  to  the  external  evidence  for  these  letters,  there 
seems  good  reason  to  believe  in  the  existence,  at  an  early 
date,  either  of  the  letters  in  their  present  form,  or  of  docu- 
ments on  which  the  letters  were  constructed  later.  Not 
much  reliance  can  be  placed  on  the  traces  which  occur  in 

186 


186  tKTBODUCTION  TO  THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES. 

Clement's  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians :  perhaps  a  little  more 
on  those  in  the  Ignatian  Epistles,  although  many  of  these  are 
merely  analogies  of  expression  which  may  have  been  acci- 
dental, or  echoes  of  current  religious  phraseology.  An 
unmistakable  reminiscence  appears  in  Polycarp's  Epistle  to 
the  Philippians  (Philip,  iv;  1  Tim.  vi.  7,  10).  There  are 
no  echoes  in  Hermas  or  in  the  Didache,  and  none  of  import- 
ance in  Barnabas.  Justin  Martyr  has  a  few  characteristic 
expressions  of  the  Pastorals,  which  may  be  only  accidental 
coincidences.  The  Muratorian  Canon  enrols  the  three  as 
canonical,  and  expressly  justifies  their  reception  because, 
being  private  letters,  their  canonicity  might  be  called  in 
question.  They  are  found  in  the  Peshitto  and  Old  Latin 
Versions,  and  are  accepted  and  cited  as  Pauline  by  Clement 
of  Alexandria,  Irenaeus,  and  Tertullian.  At  the  end  of  the 
second  century  they  have  a  recognised  place  among  the 
Pauline  Epistles.  It  is,  however,  significant,  that  they  were 
excluded  from  Marcion's  Canon.  It  cannot  be  positively 
affirmed  that  Marcion  knew  them,  although  his  acquaintance 
with  them  would  seem  to  be  implied  by  Tertullian  (Adv. 
Mare.  v.  21),  who  says  that  it  was  strange  how  Marcion 
could  have  accepted  a  letter  written  to  one  man  (Philemon), 
and  have  rejected  the  two  to  Timothy  and  the  one  to  Titus. 
On  the  assumption  that  they  were  known  to  Marcion,  it 
is  said  that  he  cut  and  carved  the  New  Testament  Scriptures 
to  suit  his  own  views,  and  that  there  was  therefore  nothing 
strange  in  his  rejecting  the  Pastorals.  But  besides  rejecting 
the  whole  of  the  New  Testament  with  the  exception  of  ten 
Epistles  of  Paul  and  the  Gospel  of  Luke  which  he  mutilated, 
Marcion  applied  the  knife  to  the  Pauline  Epistles.  In  view 
of  his  reverence  for  Paul  as  the  only  true  apostle  and  rep- 
resentative of  Jesus  Christ,  and  for  Paul's  Epistles  as  con- 
taining the  only  true  gospel, — it  is  strange  that,  knowing 
the  Pastorals  as  Pauline,  he  should  have  rejected  them  en 
nuuae^  instead  of  merely  altering  or  abridging  them  to  suit 
himself.  Tatian  also  rejected  the  two  letters  to  Timothy, 
but  accepted  Titus,  because  it  contained  nothing  adverse  to 
ascetic  practices. 


INTBODUCnON  TO  THF  PASTORAL  EPISTLES.  187 

rV.  Chbonological  Considerations.  —  Was  Paul  re- 
leased from  his  first  imprisonment  and  imprisoned  a  second 
time?  Can  a  place  be  found  for  the  three  letters  in  his 
recorded  history  ? 

It  is  claimed  that  Paul  was  released  from  prison  after  his 
first  confinement  at  Rome  (Acts  xxviii.  16-81)  and  that  he 
then  continued  his  missionary  labours  in  Ephesus,  Epirus, 
Macedonia,  and  Crete :  that  he  was  again  arrested  and  im- 
prisoned, and  that  the  second  imprisonment  was  terminated 
by  his  execution. 

Of  this  there  is  no  sound  historical  evidence  whatever. 
The  narrative  of  Acts  leaves  him  in  his  first  confinement. 
The  ordinary  course  of  argument  forms  a  circle.  The  hy- 
pothesis of  a  second  imprisonment  can  be  sustained  only  by 
the  Pastoral  Epistles  if  they  are  authentic.  Their  authentic- 
ity can  be  shown  only  on  that  hypothesis.  The  only  evidence 
adduced  for  the  second  imprisonment  outside  of  these  letters 
is,  1.  A  passage  in  Clement's  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  (V.)) 
as  follows :  (Paul)  "  having  preached  the  gospel  both  in  the 
Ektst  and  in  the  West,  received  the  glorious  renown  due  to  his 
faith,  having  taught  righteousness  to  the  whole  world,  and 
having  come  to  the  boundary  of  the  West,  and  having  borne 
his  testimony  before  the  rulers.  Thus  he  departed  out  of 
the  world.''  The  main  point  is  having  come  to  the  boundary 
of  the  Weit  (Arl  to  r^p/ui  rrj^  Svo-eoi?  iX0a>v).  It  is  claimed 
that  this  expression  refers  to  Spain,  and  that  Clement  thus 
records  the  fulfilment  of  the  apostle's  intention  stated  in 
Rom.  XV.  24,  28.  Others,  however,  hold  that  it  refers  to 
Rome.*  Apart  from  this  difference,  which  it  is  impossible 
to  settle,  the  whole  statement  is  general,  vague,  and  rhe- 
torical, and  has  no  historical  value. 

2.  The  Muratorian  Canon  (about  170  a.d.)  contains  a 
passage  apparently  to  the  effect  that  Luke  relates  to  The- 
ophilus  the  things  which  fell  under  his  own  notice,  and  evi- 
dently declares  as  apart  from  his  purpose  the  martyrdom  of 


•  All  that  ean  be  said  in  fayoor  of  the  reference  to  Spain,  is  said  by 
Bp.  Lightfoot,  8.  Clement  of  Borne,  ad  loc. 


188  INTRODUCTION  TO  THB  PASTORAL  EPISTLES. 

Peter ;  but  the  departure  of  Paul  setting  out  from  the  city 
to  Spain  —  here  the  text  is  mutilated.  How  the  writer 
intended  to  complete  it  can  only  be  guessed.  The  passage 
is  worthless  as  evidence.  8.  After  these  two  we  have  noth- 
ing until  the  fourth  century,  when  Eusebius  says  that  there 
was  a  tradition  that  the  apostle  again  set  forth  to  the  minis- 
try of  his  preaching,  and  having  a  second  time  entered  the 
same  city  of  Rome,  was  perfected  by  his  martyrdom  before 
Nero.  That  in  this  imprisonment  he  wrote  the  second  Epistle 
to  Timothy  (JT.  E,  ii.  22,  25).  This  is  all.  Jerome  merely 
echoes  Eusebius.  Eusebius  does  not  mention  Spain.  His- 
tory does  not  show  any  apostolic  foundation  in  Spain.  Nei- 
ther Irenaeus,  Caius,  TertuUian,  nor  Origen  allude  to  such 
a  mission;  and  although  Irenaeus,  TertuUian,  and  Origen 
mention  the  death  of  Paul  at  Rome,  they  say  nothing  of  any 
journeys  subsequent  to  his  first  arrival  there.  Dr.  McGiffert 
remarks  (note  on  Euseb.  ii.  22,  2):  "The  strongest  argu- 
ment against  the  visit  to  Spain  is  the  absence  of  any  trace  of 
it  in  Spain  itself.  If  any  church  there  could  have  claimed 
the  great  apostle  to  the  Gentiles  as  its  founder,  it  seems 
that  it  must  have  asserted  its  claim,  and  the  tradition  have 
been  preserved  at  least  in  that  church." 

It  is  also  said  that  2  Tim.  iv.  16, 17  implies  that  Paul  had 
had  a  hearing  and  been  discharged  and  permitted  to  preach. 
The  assumption  is  entirely  gratuitous.  The  words  may 
liave  referred  to  a  hearing  during  his  first  captivity,  when 
he  was  delivered  from  imminent  danger,  but  not  set  at 
liberty. 

In  short,  historical  evidence  for  a  release  from  the  first 
Roman  imprisonment,  a  subsequent  missionary  activity,  and 
a  second  imprisonment,  is  utterly  wanting.  It  seems  hardly 
conceivable  that  no  traces  of  a  renewed  ministry  should  be 
left  in  history  except  these  instructions  to  friends  and  pupils. 
If  Paul  was  Uberated  from  his  first  imprisonment,  it  is  singu- 
lar that  Luke  should  not  have  recorded  the  fact  as  a  triumph 
of  the  gospel. 

Such  being  the  case,  it  remains  only  to  find  a  place  for  these 
letters  in  the  recorded  ministry  of  Paul.      This  cannot  be 


INTRODUCTION   TO  THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES.  189 

done.     There  is  no  period  of  that  ministry,  from  Damascus 
to  Rome,  into  which  they  will  fit.* 

V.  Style  and  Diction.  — The  most  formidable  objection 
to  the  Pauline  authorship  of  these  Epistles  is  furnished  by 
their  style  and  diction,  which  present  a  marked  contrast  with 
those  of  the  Pauline  letters.  That  the  three  Pastorals  con- 
tain 148  words  which  appear  nowhere  else  in  the  N.  T.,  and 
304  which  are  not  found  in  Paul's  writings,  are  facts  which, 
by  themselves,  must  not  be  allowed  too  much  weight.  Hap- 
axlegomena  are  numerous  in  the  several  Pauline  Epistles. 
Second  Corinthians  has  about  90 :  Romans  and  1st  Corin- 
thians each  over  a  hundred :  Ephesians  about  40.  That 
words  like  TroXt/reXi;?  and  oUovpyik  appear  in  the  Pastorals 
and  not  in  Paul,  counts  for  no  more  than  that  6X0x6X179 
occurs  only  in  1st  Thessalonians,  and  afiapi^^  only  in  2d 
Corinthians. 

But  we  are  not  dealing  with  individual  letters,  but  with  a 
group  of  letters,  nearly,  if  not  absolutely,  contemporaneous. 
It  i$  a  striking  fact  that  this  entire  group,  closely  allied  in 
all  its  three  parts  in  vocabulary  and  style,  presents,  as  a 
whole,  such  marked  variations  in  these  particulars  from  the 
accepted  Pauline  letters.  In  their  lexical  peculiarities  the 
Pastorals  form  a  class  by  themselves. 

One  who  is  thoroughly  steeped  in  Paulas  style  and  diction, 
and  who  reads  these  letters  out  of  hand,  is  at  once  impressed 
with  the  difference  from  Paul.  He  feels  that  he  is  in  a  strange 
rhetorical  atmosphere.  The  sentences  have  not  the  familiar 
ring.  The  thought  does  not  move  with  the  accustomed  rush. 
The  verve  of  Corinthians  and  Gralatians,  the  dialectic  vigour 
of  Romans,  the  majesty  of  Ephesians,  are  alike  wanting.  The 
association  of  ideas  is  loose,  the  construction  is  not  compact, 
the  movement  is  slow  and  clumsy.     We  miss  the  heavily- 

•  This  is  succinctly  shown  by  Edwin  Hatch,  in  his  article  **  Pastoral  Epis- 
tles," in  the  Encyclopaedia  Britannica  ;  and  more  in  detail  by  von  Soden,  in 
his  introduction  to  the  Pastorals  in  the  Hand-Cammentar.  The  most  recent 
defence  of  the  opposite  view  is  by  J.  Vernon  Bartlett,  The  Apostolic  Age^ 

lov9. 


190  INTBODUCTION  TO  THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES. 

freighted  utterance  of  Paul.  The  thought  is  scanty  in  pro- 
portion to  the  volume  of  words ;  as  Holtzmann  says :  ^^  We 
miss  those  characteristic  dam-ireakinffi  which  the  construction 
suffers  from  the  swelling  fulness  of  thought."  We  miss  the 
frequent  anacolutha,  the  unclosed  parentheses,  the  sudden 
digressions,  the  obscurities  arising  from  the  headlong  impe- 
tus of  thought  and  feeling.  The  construction  of  sentences 
is  simple,  the  thoughts  are  expressed  without  adornment, 
everything  is  according  to  rule  and  easy,  but  without  mo- 
mentiun  or  colour.  Strange  compounds,  great,  swelling 
words,  start  up  in  our  path:  a  Pauline  thought  appears 
in  a  strange  dress :  the  voice  is  the  voice  of  Jacob,  but  the 
hands  are  the  hands  of  Esau. 

Some  of  these  unusual  compounds,  for  which  the  writer  has 
a  great  liking,  occur  neither  in  the  N.  T.  nor  in  profane  Greek. 
High-sounding  words  are  chosen  where  simpler  terms  would 
have  suited  the  thought  better.  It  seems,  occcusionally,  as  if 
the  diction  were  being  employed  to  pad  the  meag^eness  of 
the  thought.  A  class  of  words  which  occur  principally  in  the 
Pauline  letters  is  wanting,  as  &8iko^,  uKaOapala^  aKpofivarla^ 
jvmpi^eiv,  Bui0iJK7ff  irepiirareiv^  Xp^onfe,  and  a&fia^  which,  in 
the  four  principal  Epistles  alone,  Paul  uses  71  times.  We 
miss  entire  families  of  Pauline  words,  as  ikevOepo^^  <^pov€lv^ 
irpdaaeiv^  r^Xeio^^  ivepyeiv^  Tre/Mcrcrrf?,  and  the  numerous  deriv- 
atives and  compounds  growing  out  of  these. 

Again,  we  look  in  vain  for  certain  expressions  most  charac- 
teristic of  the  Pauline  vocabulary,  as  inraKoveiv^  airoKaXihrTeiv^ 
KavxaaOcu^  and  their  kindred  words.  Still  more  significant  is 
the  fact  that  the  article,  which  is  freely  used  by  Paul  before 
entire  sentences,  adverbs,  interjections,  numerals,  and  espe- 
cially before  the  infinitive,  is  never  so  employed  in  the  Pastor- 
als. Tot)  with  the  infinitive  disappears.  The  prepositions, 
the  conjunctions,  and  especially  the  particles  are  quite  differ- 
ently handled.  The  lively  7^^  appears  oftener  in  the  Epistle 
to  the  Gralatians  than  in  all  the  three  Pastorals.  The  move- 
ment of  the  Pauline  thought  indicated  by  &pa  and  Spa  oiv  is 
lacking.  'AktI,  &XPh  ^1  Suhi^  SfAirpoa-Oep^  Ivacep^  hreira^  Ifrt, 
fSe,  liov^  fAiiirm,  tn-my  omhi^  otiro^y  o6t€^  irdXiv,  iraph  with  the 


DTTBODnCTION  TO  THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES.         191 

accusative,  iv  iravrC^  Trcfrc,  irov^  avv^  &<nrep — none  of  these 
appear.  There  is  no  trace  of  Paul's  habit  of  applying  differ- 
ent  prepositions  to  the  same  object  in  one  sentence,  for  the 
purpose  of  sharper  definition.     See  Gal.  i.  1 ;  Rom.  i.  17. 

Similar  ideas  are  differently  expressed  by  Paul  and  in  the 
Pastorals.  Comp.  1  Tim.  i.  8  and  2  Cor.  xi.  4 ;  Gal.  i.  6 : 
1  Tim.  i.  9  and  Gal.  v.  18,  28 ;  Rom.  vi.  14 :  1  Tim.  i.  12  and 
1  Cor.  xii.  28.  For  Paul's  hriOvfieiv  or  hniroBelv  the  Past- 
orals give  6p^€(r0cu,  For  Paul's  a/imfio^^  a/ieftwro^^  av^KXtf- 
T09,  the  Pastorals  give  hveirlXrifJuirro^  (not  elsewhere  in  N.  T.). 
For  hriirXiqaaio  (not  elsewhere  in  N.  T.)  Paul  has  ^^/x®, 
though  iKirfXio  occurs  several  times  in  the  Pastorals.  For 
iifAoifii^  (not  elsewhere  in  N.  T.)  Paul  has  avrifuaOla  or  hvrair' 
6ho<n^.  Paul  uses  6vTto^  only  adverbially  (see  1  Cor.  xiv. 
25 ;  Gal.  iii.  21) :  in  the  Pastorals  it  is  prefixed  to  a  substant- 
ive, and  converted  into  an  adjective  by  means  of  an  article, 
and  is  used  only  in  this  way,  a  construction  unknown  to  Paul 
(see  1  Tim.  v.  8,  6, 16 ;  vi.  19). 

To  these  should  be  added  expressions  in  all  the  three  Epis- 
tles which  indicate  a  peculiar  mode  of  thought  and  of  liter- 
ary expression  on  the  part  of  the  writer.  Such  are  evaefiw 
Qv  to  live  godly;  SuiHeeiv  Sucaioawrjv  to  pursue  righteou8ne$$ ; 
<f>v\da'a'€iv  rifv  irapaOi^Krfv  to  guard  the  deposit ;  irapcucoXovOeip 
r^  BiBaa-KoXif  to  follow  the  teaching ;  rov  KaXbv  ay&va  aycovi' 
l^EaOoA  to  fight  the  good  fight.  Also  designations  like  avOpanroi 
KaT€<l)0ap/JLdvoi  corrupt  men;  apOponro^  Oeov  man  of  God;  con- 
structions like  hutfieficuovaBax  irepi  tipo^  to  affirm  concerning 
something;  and  the  introduction  of  examples  by  &v  iarlv  of 
whom  are. 

Many  more  might  be  added  to  these,*  but  these  are  amply 
sufficient  to  show  the  wide  gulf  which  separates  the  vocabul- 
ary and  style  of  these  letters  from  those  of  Paul. 

By  way  of  explaining  away  these  facts  we  are  reminded 
that  these  are  private  letters ;  but  even  in  his  private  letters 
a  man  does  not  so  entirely  abjure  his  literary  peculiarities. 


•  Full  listB  of  peculiarities  of  style  and  dietiou  wiU  be  found  in  Holtzmann, 
Die  PastorMHife,  ch.  VIL 


192  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PASTORAL  EPI8TLBS. 

and  the  letter  to  Philemon  exhibits  no  lack  of  distinctive 
Pauline  characteristics. 

It  is  further  urged  that  Paul's  style  had  developed,  and 
that,  in  his  advanced  age,  he  had  lost  the  vivacity  once  pecul- 
iar to  him.  One  is  tempted  to  smile  at  the  suggestion  of  a 
development  of  style  in  the  easy  commonplaces  of  these  Epis- 
tles over  the  nervous  vigour  of  Romans,  the  racy  incisiveness 
of  Galatians  and  2d  Corinthians,  and  the  majestic  richness  of 
Ephesians.  As  to  a  decline  on  account  of  age,  Paul,  on  this 
showing,  must  have  aged  very  rapidly.  He  styles  himself 
"  the  aged  "  in  Philem.  9.  Colossians  was  written  at  the  same 
time  with  Philemon,  and  Philippians  and  Ephesians  shortly 
before  or  after.  The  Pastorals  (assuming  Paul's  authorship) 
cannot  have  been  written  more  than  three  or  four  years  later 
than  these ;  but  the  Epistles  of  the  Captivity  certainly  betray 
no  lack  of  vigour,  and  exhibit  no  signs  of  senility  ;  and  the 
differences  between  these  and  the  Pastorals  are  far  g^reater 
than  between  the  former  and  Paul's  earliest  letters,  written 
ten  years  before.  The  production  of  an  old  man  may  indeed 
exhibit  a  lack  of  energy  or  a  carelessness  of  style,  but  an  old 
writer  does  not  abandon  his  favorite  words  or  his  characteristic 
turns  of  expression.  After  following  Paul  for  a  dozen  years 
through  ten  Epistles,  all  marked  by  the  essential  features  of  his 
style,  one  finds  it  hard  to  believe  that  he  should  suddenly  be- 
come a  writer  of  an  entirely  different  type,  ignoring  his  own 
characteristic  and  favorite  modes  of  expression.  Surely  the 
themes  treated  in  the  Pastorals  would  have  furnished  abundant 
occasion  for  vm  Oeov^  aTrokvrpwn^^  vio0€<rla^  Sueaioavprj  deovy 
and  Bueaui(Oy  which  occurs  only  twice,  and  in  one  of  these 
instances  is  applied  to  Christ. 

VI.  As  to  the  character  of  the  teaching,  it  is  possible  that 
the  divergence  of  the  teaching  and  of  the  Christian  ideal  of 
the  Pastorals  from  those  of  the  Pauline  Epistles  may  have 
been  somewhat  exaggerated.  On  a  fair  construction,  the 
Pastorals  may  be  said  to  contain  the  essentials  of  the  Pauline 
teaching,  expressed  or  implied.  More  exaggerated,  however, 
is  the  claim  of  Godet  and  Findlay,  that  the  Pastorals  repre- 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES.  198 

sent  an  advanced  and  rounded  expression  of  Pauline  teach- 
ing, ^^  bringing  the  doctrines  of  grace  to  a  rounded  f uhiess 
and  chastened  ripeness  of  expression  that  warrants  us  in  see- 
ing in  them  the  authentic  conclusion  of  the  Pauline  gospel 
of  salvation  in  the  mind  which  first  conceived  if  (Findlay). 

No  special  pleading  can  get  round  the  clear  difference 
between  the  types  of  Christianity  and  of  Christian  teaching 
as  set  forth  in  the  Pastorals  and  in  the  Pauline  Epistles ; 
between  the  modes  of  presenting  the  doctrine  of  salvation 
and  the  relative  emphasis  on  its  great  factors. 

The  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ  are  matters  of  allusion 
rather  than  central  truths.  As  regards  resurrection,  the 
Pastoi*als  resemble  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  The  vital 
union  of  the  believer  with  Christ,  which  is  the  essence  of 
Paul's  Christian  ideal,  may  possibly  be  implied,  but  is  not 
emphasised,  and  certainly  does  not  underlie  the  Pastoral 
teaching.  The  conception  of  Justification  is  not  sharply 
defined.  Aucaiovv  occurs  but  twice,  and  in  one  of  the  cases  is 
predicated  of  Christ  (1  Tim.  iii.  16).  The  teaching  is  pre- 
dominantly ethical.  Its  two  key-notes  are  practical  piety 
and  sound  doctrine.  ^Evadfieia  piety  or  godline$8  plays  the 
part  which  is  borne  by  'irUm^  faith  in  the  Paulines.  TlUmji 
does  not  occupy  the  commanding  and  central  position  whiclf 
it  does  in  Paul's  teaching.  Only  in  1  Tim.  i.  16 ;  2  Tim. 
iii.  16,  does  faith  clearly  appear  as  the  means  of  the  subject- 
ive appropriation  of  salvation.  In  Tit.  iii.  5,  just  where  we 
should  expect  it,  we  do  not  find  faith  set  sharply  over  against 
righteousness  by  works.  Faith  is  emphasised  as  confiding 
acknowledgment  of  the  truth,  and  sometimes  as  the  virtue 
of  fidelity.  See  1  Tim.  v.  12  ;  Tit.  ii.  10.  It  appears  either 
as  one  of  the  cardinal  virtues  following  in  the  train  of  eva^ 
fieia^  or  as  the  acknowledgment  of  the  teaching  in  which 
€vaifi€ui  finds  expression. 

These  Epistles  deal  much  with  the  character  and  attributes 
of  God,  and  exhibit  them  in  terms  which  are  mostly  foreign 
to  Paul,  such  as  Q-od  our  Saviour.  This,  however,  may  have 
been  partly  due  to  the  false  representations  of  contemporary 
heresies.     I  cannot  but  feel  that  there  is  too  much  truth  in 

VOL.  IV. — 18 


194  Il^TBODUCTION   TO  THS  PA8TOBAL  EPISTLBS. 

the  remark  of  Schenkel,  that  ^^  the  image  of  Christ  presented 
in  the  Pastorals  is  indeed  composed  of  Pauline  formulas,  but 
is  lacking  in  the  Pauline  spirit  and  feeling,  in  the  mystic 
inwardness,  the  religious  depth  and  moral  force,  that  live  in 
the  Christ  of  Paul."  Still,  the  Pauline  conception  appears 
in  the  emphasis  upon  the  manhood  of  Christ  (1  Tim.  ii.  5 ; 
2  Tim.  ii.  8),  and  the  clear  implication  of  his  preexistence 
(1  Tim.  i.  15 ;  iii.  16 ;  2  Tim.  i.  10).  In  1  Tim.  iii.  16  the 
representation  is  nearer  to  that  of  John. 

VII.  The  Weitbb's  Allusions  to  himself  and  his 
Companions.  —  Grave  suspicions  as  to  the  Pauline  author- 
ship are  awakened  by  the  writer's  mode  of  speaking  of  him- 
self, and  to  intimate  and  trusted  companions  and  disciples 
like  Timothy  and  Titus.  We  know  how  near  these  two  were 
to  him,  and  how  he  confided  in  them  (see  Philip,  ii.  19-22). 
It  is  strange  that  in  writing  to  them  he  should  find  it  neces- 
sary to  announce  himself  formally  as  an  apostle  of  Jesus 
Christ  (comp.  Philemon,  BArfuo^  prisaner^^  just  as  to  the  Gala- 
tians,  who  had  impugned  his  apostolic  authority,  or  to  the 
Romans,  to  whom  he  was  personally  a  stranger.  Such  an 
announcement  is  singularly  out  of  place  in  a  private  letter, 
even  though  official.  Equally  strange  is  his  assuring  such 
friends  that  he  is  appointed  of  God  to  be  a  herald  of  the 
gospel ;  that  he  speaks  the  truth  and  does  not  lie ;  that  he 
has  served  God  from  his  fathers  with  a  pure  conscience.  One 
might  doubt  his  entire  confidence  in  these  trusted  ministerial 
helpers  and  personal  friends,  when  he  feels  it  incumbent  upon 
him  to  commend  to  them  the  most  elementary  and  self-evident 
duties,  as  abstinence  from  youthful  lusts.  It  is  singular  that 
he  should  exhort  Timothy  to  let  no  man  despise  his  youth, 
when  Timothy  had  attended  him  for  at  least  thirteen  years, 
and  must  have  been  a  mature  man.  And  if  Paul,  before 
writing  1st  Timothy  and  Titus,  had  recently  been  with  them 
both  (1  Tim.  i.  8  ;  Tit.  i.  5),  and  had  given  them  their  com- 
missions by  word  of  mouth,  why  does  he  do  the  same  thing 
so  soon  after,  especially  when  he  is  looking  forward  to  a 
speedy  reunion  (1  Tim.  iii.  14 ;   Tit.  iii.  12)  ?    Why  does 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES.  195 

he  picture  the  Cretans  in  such  detail  to  Titus,  who  was  in  ih» 
midst  of  them,  and  who  must  have  known  their  characteris- 
tics quite  as  well  as  himself  ? 

VIII.  The  Heresies.  —  Before  it  can  be  decisively 
asserted  that  the  heresies  treated  in  these  Epistles  are  later 
than  Paul's  time,  it  must  be  settled  what  these  heresies  were, 
and  this,  with  our  present  knowledge,  is  impossible.  There 
are  almost  as  many  different  views  as  there  are  critics.  In 
the  Epistles  themselves  the  statements  regarding  heresies  are 
general  and  sweeping,  and,  taken  together,  do  not  point  to 
any  particular  system.  It  would  seem  that  the  writer  was 
assailing,  not  a  particular  form  of  heresy,  but  a  tendency,  of 
which  he  does  not  discuss  the  details.  Indeed,  the  allusions 
to  heresies  appear  intended  principally  to  point  the  exhorta- 
tions to  hold  fast  sound  teaching  and  the  instructions  con- 
cerning church  polity,  as  safeguards  against  false  teaching 
and  immoral  practice.  The  moral  developments  of  the  her- 
esies, rather  than  their  doctrinal  errors,  are  treated.  Their 
representatives  are  wicked  men  and  impostors :  they  are 
deceiving  and  deceived :  they  are  of  corrupt  mind,  destitute 
of  truth,  with  their  consciences  seared:  they  lead  captive 
silly  women,  laden  with  sins,  led  away  by  divers  lusts :  they 
are  greedy  of  gain.  At  the  root  of  the  moral  errors  there 
seem  to  be  indicated  Gnostic  tendencies  and  Jewish  corrup- 
tions, and  traits  akin  to  those  which  appear  in  the  Colossian 
heresy.  All  of  the  writer's  theology  is  anti-Gnostic.  Indi- 
vidusd  features  of  Gnosticism  can  be  recognised,  but  a  con- 
sistent reference  throughout  to  Gnosticism  cannot  be  shown.* 
In  any  case,  it  is  noticeable  how  the  treatment  of  heresies  and 
false  teachers  differs  from  that  of  Paul.  The  treatment  in 
the  Pastorals  is  general,  sweeping,  vague,  and  mainly  denun- 
ciatory. No  vital  differences  between  the  forms  of  error  and 
between  their  teachers  are  defined,  but  all  are  indiscriminately 
denounced  as  concerned  with  foolish  and  ignorant  question- 

•  See  Pfleiderer,  Urehrittenthum,  p.  801  ff.,  and  Holtmuum,  Die  POMtaral- 
kri^e^  ch.  IX. 


196  INTBODUCTION   TO  THE  PASTORAL   EPISTLES. 

ing,  disputes  about  words,  strifes  about  the  law,  fables,  end- 
less genealogies,  and  profane  babblings.  This  is  quite  unlike 
the  controversial  method  of  Paul,  who  defines  what  he  assails, 
demonstrates  its  unsoundness,  and  shows  the  bearing  of  the 
gospel  upon  it. 

IX.  Church  Polity.  —  The  church  polity  of  the  Pastor- 
als is  of  a  later  date  than  Paul.  Within  the  circle  of  the 
Pauline  Epistles  there  is  no  trace  of  formally  constituted 
church  officers.  The  greeting  to  Bishops  and  Deacons  in 
Philippians  is  unique,  but  it  does  not  imply  a  polity  differing 
substantially  from  that  exhibited  in  1st  Corinthians  and  1st 
Thessalonians.  The  greeting  is  to  the  church  first,  and  the 
special  mention  of  Bishops  and  Deacons  by  way  of  appendage 
is  explained  by  the  fact  that  the  letter  was  called  out  by  the 
pecuniary  contribution  of  the  Philippian  church  to  Paul,  of 
the  collection  and  sending  of  which  these  functionaries  would 
naturally  have  charge.  The  names  Bishop  and  Deacon  des- 
ignate functions  and  not  official  titles.  In  the  formal  list,  in 
Eph.  iv.  11,  of  those  whom  God  has  set  in  the  church,  neither 
Bishops,  Elders,  nor  Deacons  occur;  and  yet  that  Epistle* 
was  written  within  a  short  time  of  the  writing  of  the  Philip- 
pian letter.  The  offices  in  the  Pauline  church  were  charis- 
matic The  warrant  of  leadership  was  a  divine,  spiritual 
endowment.  Paul  recognises  certain  function%  as  of  divine 
institution ;  and  those  functions  are  assumed  in  virtue  of  a 
special,  divine  gift  in  prophecy,  speaking  with  tongues,  teach- 
ing, healing,  or  helping,  as  the  case  may  be  (see  1  Cor.  xii). 
There  is  no  recognition  of  official  distinctions,  or  of  formal 
appointment  to  definite  offices,  in  the  Pauline  Epistles.  Apos- 
tles, prophets,  teachers,  powers,  helps,  healings,  kinds  of 
tongues,  do  not  represent  offices  resting  on  the  appointment 
of  the  church.  The  Pastorals  recognise  Bishops,  Deacons, 
and  Presbyters.  The  recognition  of  three  distinct  orders  is 
not  as  sharp  and  clear  as  in  the  Ignatian  Epistles  (100-118 
A.D.),  but  the  polity  is  in  advance  of  that  of  the  Pauline 
churches  as  set  forth  in  the  Epistles  of  Paul.  The  Pastorals 
seem  to  mark  a  transition  point  between  the  earlier  republican 


INTEODUCTION  TO  THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES.  197 

simplioity  and  the  later  monarchical  tendency.  If  these  let- 
ters are  the  work  of  Paul  before  his  first  imprisonment,  their 
notes  of  church  polity  do  not  consist  with  those  of  his  other 
letters  written  during  that  period.  If  they  were  composed 
by  Paul  a  few  years  after  his  first  imprisonment,  the  period 
is  too  early  for  the  change  in  polity  which  they  indicate. 

In  view  of  all  these  facts,  it  seems  unlikely  that  these  Epis- 
tles are  the  work  of  Paul.  The  writer  was  probably  a  Paul- 
ine Christian  in  the  early  part  of  the  second  century,  who,  in 
view  of  the  doctrinal  errors  and  moral  looseness  of  his  age, 
desired  to  emphasise  the  orthodox  doctrine  of  the  church,  to 
advocate  a  definite  ecclesiastical  polity  as  a  permanent  saf e- 
gruard  against  error,  and  to  enforce  practical  rides  of  conduct. 
These  counsels  and  warnings  he  issued  in  the  name  of  Paul, 
whose  letters  he  evidently  knew,  whose  character  he  revered, 
and  whose  language  he  tried  to  imitate.  To  this  he  was,  per- 
haps, moved  by  the  fact  that  contemporary  heretics,  in  some 
cases,  laid  claim  to  the  authority  of  Paul,  and  in  other  cases 
openly  repudiated  it.  It  is  probable  that  he  based  these  let- 
ters upon  genuine  Pauline  material — despatches,  or  fragments 
of  letters  to  Timothy  and  Titus,  which  had  fallen  into  his 
hands.  It  may  be  conceded  that  the  letters  have  a  Pauline 
nucleus.  The  writer  probably  assumed  that  the  addresses  of 
his  letters  to  Timothy  and  Titus  would  attract  attention  and 
carry  weight,  since  these  teachers  were  representatives  of 
churches. 

To  stigmatise  such  a  proceeding  as  forgery  is  to  treat  the 
conditions  of  that  early  time  from  the  point  of  view  of  our 
own  age.  No  literary  fraud  was  contemplated  by  the  writer 
or  ascribed  to  him.  The  practice  of  issuing  a  work  in  the 
name  of  some  distinguished  person  was  common,  and  was  rec- 
ognised as  legitimate.  A  whole  class  of  writings,  chiefly 
apocalyptic,  and  known  as  pseudepigraphic  or  pseudonymous, 
appeared  in  the  times  immediately  preceding  and  succeeding 
the  beginning  of  the  Christian  era.  Such  were  the  Book  of 
Enoch,  the  Sibylline  Oracles,  and  the  Psalter  of  Solomon. 
Precedent  was  furnished  by  the  Old  Testament  writings. 
The  Psalmists  adopted  the  names  of  David,  Asaph,  and  the 


198  INTBODUCnON  TO  THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES. 

Sons  of  Korah.  Neither  Samuel  nor  Ruth  nor  Esther  were 
supposed  to  be  the  authors  of  the  books  which  bore  their 
names.  Koheleth,  in  the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes,  impersonates 
Solomon,  and  the  Proverbs  and  the  Canticles  both  bear  hi^ 
name. 

The  church  of  the  second  century  thankfully  accepted  these 
three  Epistles,  and,  inferior  though  they  were  in  spiritual 
power  and  richness  of  idea  to  the  genuine  Pauline  letters  or 
the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  incorporated  them  with  these 
among  the  New  Testament  writings.  They  are  valuable  in 
exhibiting  to  us  certain  features  of  post-Pauline  Christianity. 
They  testify  to  the  energy  and  purity  of  the  church's  moral 
impulses  as  nourished  by  the  religious  principles  of  Christen- 
dom. They  show  us  the  causes  out  of  which  grew  the 
increased  emphasis  upon  authority  and  external  reg^en. 
By  their  strong  attestation  of  the  value  of  the  inheritance 
from  the  apostolic  age,  by  their  high  ethical  character,  based 
on  religion  and  exhibiting  the  moral  consequences  of  the 
Christian  faith,  by  their  emphasis  upon  the  practical  rather 
than  the  doctrinal  edification  of  the  church,  upon  the 
significance  of  the  church,  and  upon  the  representation  of 
Christianity  by  Christian  personality  —  they  justify  their 
canonisation. 


COMMENTARIES  AND  OTHER  LITERATURE. 


OPPOSERS  OF  THE  AUTHENTICITT. 

H.  J.  Holtzmann,  Die  Pastoralbriefe  krUisch  und  exegetUch  &a- 
kanddt,  1880. 

H.  von  Soden,  "  Introduction  to  Pastoral  Epistles,"  Hand-Comr 
mentar,  by  Holtzmanu,  Lipsius,  Schmiedel,  and  von  Soden,  1893. 

Samuel  Davidson,  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  the  New  TestOr 
ment. 

C.  von  Weizsacker,  Dds  apostolische  2kitcUter  der  chrisdidhen 
Kirche,  1891.    Transl.  by  Millar,  1894. 

0.  Pfleiderer,  Daa  Urchristenthum,  seine  Schrijten  und  Lehren^ 
1887.    Der  Paulinismus,  1890. 

A  Sabatier,  L'Apdtre  Paul.    Transl.  by  Hellier,  1890. 

Ad.  Jlilicher,  Eirdeitung  in  dcts  Neue  Testament^  1894. 

Edwin  Hatch,  art.  ''Pastoral  Epistles,"  Encyclopaedia  Briton- 
mica. 

A.  McGiffert,  The  Apostolic  Age,  1897. 

Lemme,  Das  echte  ErmaJinungschreiben  des  Apostds  Pauius  an 
Timotheus,  1882. 

F.  H.  Hesse,  Die  Entstehung  der  neutestamentlichen  Hirtenbriefe, 
1889. 

DEFENDERS  OF  TOE  AUTHENnCITY. 

B.  Weiss,  Einleitung  in  das  Neue  Testament.  Transl.  by  David- 
son, 1886. 

G.  Salmon,  A  Historical  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  the  New 
Testament. 

F.  Godet,  Introduction  au  Nouveau  Testament,  Pt  L  TransL 
by  AfSeck,  1893. 

W.  M.  Ramsay,  The  Church  in  the  Soman  Empire  before  A.D. 
170, 1893. 

J.  E.  Huther  in  Meyer's  Commentary,  1875. 

199 


200  C0MMKNTABIB8  AND  OTHEB  UTEBATXTBB. 

H.  Wace,  in  Speaker's  Commentary. 

O.  G.  Findlay,  Appendix  to  TransL  of  Sabatier's  UApdtrt 
Pavl,  1891. 

F.  W.  Farrar,  Life  and  Work  of  St.  Paulj  VoL  IL,  Exonrsus 
DL,  1879. 

P.  J.  Oloag,  Introduction  to  the  PtiuUne  EptsOeSj  1874. 

Theo.  Zahn,  Einleitung  in  daa  Neue  Testament,  1897. 

Bud.  Steinmetz,  Die  zweite  r&mieche  Oefangeneckcfi  dee  AfoMe 
Fauht^  1897. 

J.  Vernon  Bartlett^  The  ApoeMic  Age,  1899. 


COMMENTARIES. 

ENGLISH. 

J.  E.  Hnthery  in  Meyer's  Gommentaiy.    Tranal. 
C.  J.  EUioott,  A  Chitical  and  Orammaticdl  CkmrnmUairg  o»  tke 
Pastoral  Epistles,    • 
H.  Wace,  Speaker's  Commentary. 
P.  Fairbaim,  7%6  Pastoral  Epidles,  Greek  Text  and  TransL 

GERMAN. 

B.  Weiss,  Meyer's  Commentary,  1885.    Published  separately. 
H.  J.  Holtzmann,  Die  Pastorcdbriefe. 
H.  von  Soden,  HandrCommentary  Vol.  III. 
H.  Koelling,  Der  erste  Brief  Pauli  an  Timotheus. 
K.  Rnoke,  Praktischrtheologischer  Kommentar  zu  den  Pnutoral- 
brief  en  des  Apostels  P(itdus. 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


CHAPTER  I. 


1.  An  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ.  This  title  appears  in  the 
salutations  of  Romans,  1st  and  2d  Corinthians,  Galatians, 
Ephesians,  Colossians.  In  Philippians,  Paul  and  Timothy 
the  iervants  of  Jesus  Christ.  Philemon  a  prisoner.  This 
formal  announcement  of  apostleship  is  strange  in  a  private 
letter. 

By  the  commandment  of  God  (^Kar  hrirayifv  Oeov).  The 
phrase  in  Kom.  xvi.  26.  Kar  hnra^v  absolutely,  hy  com- 
mandment, 1  Cor.  vii.  6  ;  2  Cor,  viii.  8.  Paul  uses  hih  ^cXiJ- 
fiaT09  Oeov  hy  the  wUl  of  God.  See  1  Cor.  i.  1 ;  2  Cor.  i.  1 ; 
Eph.  i.  1 ;  Col.  i.  1.     Comp.  2  Tim.  i.  1. 

Our  Saviour  (crcoTQ/909  ^/i&v).  Comp.  L.  i.  47 ;  Jude  25. 
®P.  Six  times  in  the  Pastorals.  Used  of  both  God  and  Christ 
(see  Tit.  i.  8,  4 ;  ii.  10, 18 ;  iii.  4,  6).  The  saving  of  men 
appears  as  God's  direct  will  and  act,  1  Tim.  ii.  4 ;  Tit.  iii.  5 ; 
2  Tim.  i.  9 :  as  Christ's  work,  1  Tim.  i.  16,  comp.  2  Tim. 
ii.  10.  In  LXX  amrffp  occurs  twenty  times,  and  in  all  but 
two  instances,  of  God. 

Jesus  Christ  which  is  our  hope.  The  phrase  is  unique 
in  N.  T.  Comp.  Col.  i.  27,  where,  however,  the  construc- 
tion is  doubtful.  *E\7rU  hope  is  predicated  of  Christ  by 
Ignatius,  JEph.  xxi ;  PhUad.  v.  The  salutation  as  a  whole 
has  no  parallel  in  Paul. 

201 


202  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE   NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Gh.  I 

2.  My  own  son  in  the  faith  Q^vriaUp  riKVfp  iv  irUrrci). 
More  correctly,  *'*'my  true  child  in  faith,^^  Comp.  Tit.  i.  4. 
With  these  two  exceptions,  riKvov  or  vife  iv  irUrrei  does  not 
occur  in  N.  T.  *Ev  Trlarei  or  tJ  irUrrei  is  not  common  in 
Paul ;  see  1  Cor.  xvi.  18 ;  2  Cor.  viii.  7 ;  xiii.  6 ;  Gal.  ii. 
20 ;  2  Th.  ii.  18.  In  the  Pastorals,  nine  times.  In  Paul 
joined  with  ^v  to  live^  ehtu  to  be^  an^Keiv  to  standi  fteficuova" 
0ai  to  be  established.  For  yvi^aio^  true^  see  2  Cor.  viii.  8; 
Philip,  ii.  20;  iv.  8.  It  means  natural^  by  birth-relation^ 
therefore  trtu  or  genuine. 

Mercy  (IXeo?).  This  addition  to  the  usual  form  of  salu- 
tation is  peculiar  to  the  Pastorals. 

8.  Even  as  (^KaOot^^.  An  awkward  construction,  there 
bein<;  nothing  to  answer  to  KoSm. 

To  abide  Qn-poa^lvai).  To  continue  on.  The  compound 
does  not  occur  in  Paul,  but  is  found  in  Acts  xi.  28 ;  xiii.  48 ; 
xviii.  18. 

When  I  went  (iropevSfjLepo^^.  Better,  was  going ^  or  was  on 
my  way.     The  participle  cannot  refer  to  Timothy. 

Might'st  charge  (irapayjeCXry:^.  See  on  Acts  i.  4.  Very 
common  in  Luke  and  Acts,  but  not  in  Paul.  In  1st  Timo- 
thy alone  five  times. 

Some  (rurlv).  Note  the  indefinite  designation  of  the 
errorists,  and  comp.  ver.  6 ;  iv.  1 ;  v.  16,  24 ;  vi.  21.  The 
expression  is  contemptuous.  It  is  assumed  that  Timothy 
knows  who  they  are.  This  is  after  the  Pauline  manner. 
See  Gal.  i.  7 ;  ii.  12 ;  1  Cor.  iv.  18 ;  xv.  12 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  1  ; 
Col.  ii.  4,  8.  i 

That  they  teach  no  other  doctrine  (aa^  hepoSiiaaKaXeiv). 
Better,  not  to  teaeh  a  different  doctrine.  For  frepo^  different^ 
see  on  Gal.  i.  6.     The  verb  Past^.     ®LXX.   ^Class.     The 


Ch.  l]  the  first  epistle  to  timothy.  208 

charge  is  not  to  teach  anything  contrary  to  the  iound  teach^ 
ing  (ver.  10)  or  irreconcilable  with  it  Comp.  Gal.  i.  6 ;  2 
Cor.  xi.  4 ;  Rom.  xvi.  17. 

4.  Give  heed  (wpoadxeiv).  ^P.  Frequent  in  LXX  and 
Class.  Lit.  to  hold  to.  Often  with  rip  vow  the  mind^  which 
must  be  supplied  here.  It  means  here  not  merely  to  give  at* 
tention  to^  but  to  give  a$ient  to.  So  Acts  viii.  6 ;  xvi.  14 ; 
Heb.  ii.  1 ;  2  Pet.  i.  19. 

Fables  (^iivOoii).  Mu0o9,  in  its  widest  sense,  means  word^ 
ipeech^  conversation  or  its  subject.  Hence  the  talk  of  men^ 
rumour^  report^  a  saying^  a  story ^  true  or  false ;  later,  a  fiction 
as  ditttinguished  from  Xdyo^  a  historic  tale.  In  Attic  prose, 
commonly  a  legend  of  prehistoric  Greek  times.  Thus  Plato, 
Repub.  330  D,  oi  \ey6fiepoi  /jluOoi  irepl  r&v  iv  "Aibov  what  are 
called  myths  concerning  those  in  Hades.  Only  once  in  LXX, 
Sir.  XX.  19,  in  the  sense  of  a  saying  or  story.  In  N.  T.  only 
in  Pastorals,  and  2  Pet.  i.  16.  As  to  its  exact  reference 
here,  it  is  impossible  to  speak  with  certainty.  Expositors 
are  hopelessly  disagreed,  some  referring  it  to  Jewish,  others 
to  Gnostic  fancies.  It  is  explained  as  meaning  traditional 
supplements  to  the  law,  allegorical  interpretations,  Jewish 
stories  of  miracles.  Rabbinical  fabrications,  whether  in  his- 
tory or  doctrine,  false  doctrines  generally,  etc.  It  is  to  be 
observed  that  fivOoi  are  called  Jewish  in  Tit.  i.  14.  In 
1  Tim.  iv.  7,  they  are  described  b&  profane  and  characteristic 
of  old  wives.  In  2  Tim.  iv.  4,  the  word  is  used  absolutely, 
as  here. 

Endless  genealogies  (yafeaXoyCcw:  airepdvrov;).  Both 
words  Past^.  For  7€PeaXo7^  (^LXX)  comp.  Tit.  iii.  9. 
Tevea'Xjo'ieiaOai,  to  trace  ancestry^  only  Heb.  vii.  6;  comp.  1 
Chron.  v.  1,  the  only  instance  in  LXX.  ^kirdpavn^  endless^ 
N.  T.^.  Twice  in  LXX.  By  some  the  genealogies  are  re- 
ferred to  the  Gnostic  aeons  or  series  of  emanations  from  the 
divine  unity ;  by  others  to  the  O.  T.  genealogies  as  inter- 
preted allegorically  by  Philo,  aud  made  the  basis  of  a  psy« 


204  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Cr.  L 

chological  system,  or  O.  T.  genealogies  adorned  with  fables  : 
by  others  again  to  genealogical  registers  proper,  used  to 
foster  the  religious  and  national  pride  of  the  Jews  against 
Gentiles,  or  to  ascertain  the  descent  of  the  Messiah.  *Air4p- 
avTO^  from  a  noU  and  iripa^  limit  or  terminu9.  Hipa^  may 
be  taken  in  the  sense  of  ol^ect  or  aim^  so  that  the  adjective 
here  may  mean  without  olject^  uselesM.  (So  Chrysostom,  Holtz- 
mann,  and  von  Soden.)  Others  take  it  in  a  popular  sense, 
as  describing  the  tedious  length  of  the  genealogies  (Alford); 
and  others  that  these  matters  furnish  an  inexhaustible  sub- 
ject of  study  (Weiss).  "  Fables  and  endless  genealogies  " 
form  a  single  conception,  the  xal  and  being  explanatory,  that 
ii  to  «ay,  and  the  ^^  endless  genealogies ''  indicating  in  what 
the  peculiarity  of  the  fables  consists. 

Which  (arTii/c9).     Rather  the  which:  inawnueh  a$  they. 

Minister  (irapix^viriv).  Afford,  furnish,  give  occasion  for. 
Only  twice  in  Paul.     Elsewhere  mainly  in  Luke  and  Acts. 

Questions  (^/c^^i^rvTcrci?).  Better,  qmstioningi.  N.  T.^. 
^LXX.  ^Class.  The  simple  fiynjo-ci?  in  Pastorals,  John  and 
Acts.  The  preposition  ix  gives  the  sense  of  mbtUj  laboriatu 
investigation :  inquiring  out. 

Godly  edifying.  According  to  the  reading  oUohoiilav 
edification.  So  Vulg.  aedificatianem.  But  the  correct  read- 
ing is  oUovofjkUiv  ordering  or  diipemation :  the  scheme  or 
order  of  salvation  devised  and  administered  by  God  :  God's 
household  economy.  ^Oucovofjk(a  is  a  Pauline  word.  With 
the  exception  of  this  instance,  only  in  Paul  and  Luke.  See 
Eph.  VIO;  iu.  2,9;  Col.  i.  26. 

Which  is  in  faith  (r^y  ip  irlarti.).  See  on  yer.  2.  Faith 
b  the  sphere  or  element  of  its  operation. 

6.  The  end  of  the  commandment  (tAo9  t99  irapayytX- 
/ov).     The   article  with  ** commandment''  points  back  to 


Ch.  I.]  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  TZMOTHY.  206 

m%gh£9t  charge^  ver.  8.    Rend,  therefore,  of  the  charge.    T^Xo9 
end^  aim^  that  which  the  charge  contemplate$. 

Love  (aydiTf)^.  See  on  Gal.  v.  22.  The  que$tioning$^  on 
the  contrary,  engendered  $tr\fei  (2  Tim.  ii.  23).  Love  to 
men  is  meant,  as  commonly  in  N.  T.  when  the  word  is  used 
absolutely.     See  Rom.  xiii.  10. 

Out  of  a  pure  heart  (ix  KoOapS^  KapSCa^^.  Comp.  L.  x. 
27,  **  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  ovt  of  thy  whole 
heart  (i(  5X1/9  Kaphla^  iTov\  and  in  or  with  (hi)  thy  whole 
soul,''  etc.  For  a  pure  hearty  comp.  2  Tim.  ii.  22.  lHaOapdi 
pure  in  Paul  only  Rom.  xiv.  20.  The  phrase  a  pure  heart 
occurs,  outside  of  the  Pastorals  only  in  2  Pet.  i.  22.  For 
icaphla  heart  see  on  Rom.  i.  21. 

A  good  conscience  (aw€l^a&iK  ayaOrj^).  Comp.  2  Tim. 
i.  3.  'S.vvelSffa'i^  conscience  is  common  in  Paul.  See  on  1  Pet. 
iii.  16. 

Faith  unfeigned  (wtareaf^  hwiroKpCrov).  * kwirdicpirti^ 
unfeigned  twice  in  Paul,  Rom.  xii.  9 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  6,  both 
times  as  an  attribute  of  love.  In  Jas.  iii.  17,  it  is  an  attri- 
bute of  wisdom,  and  in  1  Pet.  i.  22,  of  brotherly  love. 
Notice  the  triad,  love^  conscience^  faith.  There  is  nothing 
un-Pauline  in  the  association  of  conscience  and  faith,  al- 
though, as  a  fact,  Paul  does  not  formally  associate  them. 
In  1  Cor.  viii.  7, 10, 12,  conscience  is  associated  with  knowl- 
edge. 

6.  Having  swerved  (^acroxvo^avre;).  Past^.  In  LXX, 
Sir.  vii.  19 ;  viii.  9.     It  means  to  miss  the  mark. 

Have  turned  aside  (Jtierpdmiirav).  ^P.  Comp.  1  Tim. 
V.  16;  vi.  20;  2  Tim.  iv.  4;  Heb.  xii.  18. 

Vain  Jangling  (^luvratoka^Cav).  N.  T.^.  <^LXX.  <<31a88. 
The  word  illustrates  the  writer's  fondness  for  unusual  com- 


206  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAICENT.         [Ck.  I. 

pounds.  Jangling  is  an  early  English  word  from  the  old 
French  jangler^  comp.  jongleur  a  teller  of  talee.  Hence 
jangling  is  empty  ehaUer.     So  Chaucer, 

«•  Them  that  jangle  of  love.** 

TrM.  and  Cre$e.  \L  SOO. 

«•  ThoB  Jfto^e  they  md  demen  and  deyyee.** 

Squir^U  T.  200. 

And  Piers  Ploughman, 

*'  And  al  day  to  diynken 
At  diverse  ta?emes 
And  there  to  jangle  and  jape.'* 

Vition,  Ptt»9.  VL  1009. 
Shakespeare, 

M  This  their  jangling  I  esteem  a  sport** 

Mid9.  NigMM  D.  iU.  2. 

Wiclif,  Ex.  xvii.  7  (earlier  version),  uses  jangling  for 
wrangling.  ^  And  he  depide  the  name  of  the  place  Tempt* 
ynge  for  the  jangling  of  the  sons  of  Israel.'* 

7.  Desiring  (d/Xoi^re?).  The  participle  is  explanatory  and 
confirmatory  of  the  preceding  statement :  einee  they  deeire. 

Teachers  of  the  law  (yofioSiSda-KaXoi).  ^P.  It  occurs  in 
L.  V.  17  and  Acts  v.  84.  NJfio?  is,  apparently,  the  Mosaic 
law.  These  teachers  may  have  been  arbitrary  interpreters 
of  that  law,  but  in  what  way,  cannot  be  shown. 

Understanding  (yoowm^.    Better,  though  they  underetand. 

What  they  say  —  whereof  they  affirm  (A  Xdyovaiv — irepl 
rlvfav  BiafieficuovPTeu).  The  latter  expression  is  an  advance  on 
the  former,  as  appears  not  only  from  the  verbs  themselves, 
but  from  the  different  pronominal  expressions.  They  know 
not  what  they  say,  nor  what  kind  of  things  they  are  tf  which 
they  speak  so  confidently.  The  compound  BiafiefiataMai  to 
affirm^  Past^.  Comp.  Tit.  iii.  8.  The  false  teaohezs  an* 
nounoe  their  errors  with  assurance. 


ch.  l]  the  fibst  epistlb  to  timothy.  207 

8.  Good  (KoKik).  Comp.  Rom.  vii.  16.  Morally  excellent 
and  salutary.  See  on  J.  x.  11.  This  is  the  only  instance  of 
XpaaOeu  to  use  with  vS/jlo^  law. 

Lawfully  (vo/iZ/iw).  Past®.  ®LXX.  The  nature  of  the 
proper  use  of  the  law  —  use  according  to  its  design — is  indi- 
cated by  the  next  clause. 

9.  Knowing  (c^Sck).  The  participle  is  connected  with  rk 
one^  a  man^  in  the  preceding  clause. 

Is  not  made  (ov  Keirai).  Lit.  is  not  laid  dcvm^  iet^  ap- 
pointed. Comp.  1  Th.  iii.  3.  This  is  the  only  instance  of 
its  use  with  v6fio^  law.  That  usage  is  frequent  in  Class.  See, 
for  instance,  Thucyd.  ii.  37. 

Righteous  {Sixaiqi).  Morally  upright.  Not  in  the  Pauline 
sense  of  justitied  by  faith.  Comp.  2  Tim.  ii.  22;  iii.  16. 
This  appears  from  the  way  in  which  the  opposite  of  righteoue 
is  described  in  the  next  clause. 

Lawless  (av6fAoi^^.  Recognising  no  law;  a  sense  which 
accords  better  with  the  following  context  than  not  having  a 
law^  as  1  Cor.  ix.  21. 

Disobedient  (avuirordicTovi).  Only  in  Pastorals  and  He- 
brews. Better  unruly.  Disobedient  is  too  specific.  It  means 
those  who  will  not  come  into  subjection.  It  is  closely  allied 
with  lawless.  In  the  one  case  no  legal  obligation  is  recognised; 
in  the  other,  subjection  to  law  is  refused. 

Ungodly  —  sinners  (aa-efi^ai^  a^fynoXoh).  The  same 
collocation  in  1  Pet.  iy.  18;  Jude  15.  See  on  godliness^ 
2  Pet.  i.  3. 

Unholy — profane  C^&voirlot^ — /Se^Si^Xoiv).  'Amntuk  unholy^ 
Past^.  See  on  holiness^  L.  i.  75.  B^fir/Xo^  profane^  comp. 
ch.  iv.  7;  vi.  20;  2  Tim.  ii.  16;  Heb.  xii.  16.     The  verb 


208  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Cr.  L 

ffefiriXovp  to  profane^  Matt.  xii.  5 ;  Acts  xziv.  6,  and  often  in 
LXX.  Derived  from  firf^ii  threshold  (comp.  fiaiveip  to  go'). 
Hence  the  primary  sense  is  that  may  he  trodden.  Comp.  Lat. 
prof  anus  before  the  temple^  on  the  ground  outside.  What  is 
permitted  to  be  trodden  by  people  at  large  is  unhallowed^  pro- 
fane.  Esau  is  called  fi^fitfXo^  in  Heb.  xii.  16,  as  one  who  did 
not  regard  his  birthright  as  sacred,  but  as  something  to  be 
sold  in  order  to  supply  a  common  need. 

Murderers  of  fathers — murderers  of  mothers  (warpoX^^ 
—  fifjTpo\(pa4^}.  Both  words  Past^.  and  ^LXX.  Both  in 
Class.  More  literally,  smiters  of  fathers  and  mothers,  though 
used  in  Class,  of  parricides  and  matricides.  Derived  from 
iXoav  to  smite  or  thresh.     The  simple  verb,  1  Cor.  ix.  9,  10. 

Manslayers  (ai^po^i^t?).  N.  T.^'.  Once  in  LXX,  2 
Mace.  ix.  28. 

10.  Them  that  defile  themselves  with  mankind  (ipaevo^ 
koItol^).     Only  here  and  1  Cor.  vi.  9.     ^LXX,  ^Class. 

Menstealers  (av^pairohurraTsi).  N.  T.^  ^LXX.  EUicott 
remarks  that  this  is  a  repulsive  and  exaggerated  violation  of 
the  eighth  commandment,  as  itpaevoKoireip  is  of  the  seventh. 
The  penalty  of  death  is  attached  to  it,  Ex.  xxi.  16. 

Perjured  persons  (hrulpKOi^).  N.  T.®.  Once  in  LXX^ 
Zech.  v.  3.     See  Lev.  xix.  12. 

Is  contrary  to  (SarrUeirai).  Lit.  lies  opposite  to.  Used  by 
Paul  and  Luke.     See  L.  xiii.  17 ;  Gal.  v.  17. 

The  sound  doctrine  (r^  vyuuvovcrj  hiZaaKaXla).  A  phrase 
peculiar  to  the  Pastorals.  'Tyiaiveiv  to  be  in  good  healthy  L.  v. 
31 ;  vii.  10 ;  3  J.  2.  ^P.  Quite  frequent  in  LXX,  and  in- 
variably  in  the  literal  sense.  Often  in  salutations  or  dismis*' 
sals.  See  2  Mace.  i.  10 ;  ix.  19 ;  2  Sam.  xiv.  8 ;  Ex.  iv.  18. 
In  the  Pastorals,  the  verb,  which  occurs  eight  times,  is  six 


Cte.  I.]  THE  FIB8T  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  209 

times  associated  with  SiSturKokla  tecu:hing^  or  \S^oi  toordiy  and 
twice  with  iv  tJ  wUrrei  or  t§  wiarei  in  the  faith.  The  sound 
teaching  (comp.  SiBaxfi  teaching^  2  Tim.  iv.  2;  Tit.  i.  9) 
which  is  thus  commended  is  Paul's,  who  teaches  in  Chri8t*8 
name  and  by  his  authority  (2  Tim.  i.  IS ;  ii.  2,  8).  In  all 
the  three  letters  it  is  called  a\ri0€Ui  or  ^  aXi^^cia  the  truths  the 
knowledge  (hrlrpwHrisi')  of  which  is  bound  up  with  salvation. 
See  1  Tim.  ii.  4;  2  Tim.  ii.  26;  iii.  7;  Tit.  i.  1.  As  truth 
it  is  eound  or  healthful.  It  is  the  object  ol  faith.  To  be 
sound  in  the  faith  is,  practically,  to  follow  (irapoKoXovOeiv) 
sound  teaching  or  the  truth.  The  subjective  characteristic 
of  Christians  is  euo-^/Seia  or  Oeoa^fieia  godlineit  or  piety  (1  Tim. 
ii.  2,  10;  iii.  16;  iv.  7,  8;  vi.  6,  11);  and  the  teaching  and 
knowledge  of  the  truth  are  represented  as  Kar  evcifieuiv  ao- 
cording  to  godlinese  (1  Tim.  vi.  3 ;  Tit.  i.  1).  Comp.  euo-e- 
fielv  to  $how  piety ^  1  Tim.  v.  4 ;  ewrefiw  ^^v  to  live  godly ^  2 
Tim.  iii.  12 ;  Tit.  ii.  12 ;  and  filov  Bidyeiv  iv  irdajf  ewrefieiif  to 
lead  a  l\fe  in  all  godlinea^  1  Tim.  ii.  2.  The  contents  of  this 
sound  teaching  which  is  according  to  godliness  are  not  theo- 
retical or  dogmatic  truth,  but  Christian  ethics,  with  faith  and 
love.  See  1  Tim.  i.  14 ;  ii.  15 ;  iv.  12 ;  vi.  11 ;  2  Tim.  i.  13 ; 
iii.  10;  Tit.  ii.  2.  'AXi^^cia  truth  is  used  of  moral  things, 
rather  than  in  the  high  religious  sense  of  Paul.  Comp.,  for 
instance,  Rom.  iii.  7;  ix.  1 ;  1  Cor.  v.  8 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  2 ;  xi.  10 ; 
Gal.  ii.  6 ;  Eph.  iv.  21,  24 ;  and  2  Tim.  ii.  25,  26 ;  iii.  7  (comp. 
w.  1-9) ;  iv.  3,  4 ;  Tit.  i.  12  (comp.  w.  11, 15) ;  Tit.  ii.  4 
(comp.  w.  1,  3)  ;  Tit.  iii.  1.  Whoever  grasps  the  truth  has 
faith  (2  Tim.  i.  13;  ii.  18 ;  iii.  8;  Tit.  i.  8  f.).  That  the 
ethical  character  of  faith  is  emphasised,  appears  from  the 
numerous  expressions  regarding  the  false  teachers,  as  1  Tim. 
i.  19 ;  iv.  1 ;  v.  8,  12 ;  vi.  10,  21.  There  is  a  tendency  to 
objectify  faith,  regarding  it  as  something  believed  rather  than 
as  the  act  of  believing.  See  1  Tim.  i.  19 ;  iv.  1 ;  vi.  10,  21 ; 
Tit.  i.  4.  In  comparing  the  ideal  of  righteousness  (ver.  9) 
with  that  of  Paul,  note  that  it  is  not  denied  that  Christ  is  the 
source  of  true  righteousness ;  but  according  to  Paul,  the  man 
who  is  not  under  the  law  is  the  man  who  lives  by  faith  in 
Christ.  Paul  emphasises  this.  It  is  faith  in  Christ  which 
vol.  IV.  — 14 


210  WOBD  STUDIES   IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  L 

sets  one  free  from  the  law.  Here,  the  man  for  whom  the  law 
is  not  made  (ver.  9)  is  the  man  who  is  ethically  conformed  to 
the  norm  of  sound  teaching.  The  two  conceptions  do  not 
exclude  each  other :  the  sound  teaching  is  according  to  the 
gospel  (ver.  11),  but  the  point  of  emphasis  is  shifted. 

11.  According  to.  The  connection  is  with  the  whole  fore- 
going statement  about  the  law  and  its  application,  ver.  9  S. 
The  writer  substantiates  what  he  has  just  said  about  the  law, 
by  a  reference  to  the  gospel.     Comp.  Rom.  ii.  16. 

The  glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  God  (jh  evayy^Xiov 
T^  Srff  179  Tov  iMLKaplov  0€ov).  Morc  correctly,  the  gospel  of  the 
glory ^  etc.  The  phrase  as  a  whole  has  no  parallel  in  N.  T. 
The  nearest  approach  to  it  is  2  Cor.  iv.  4.  Gospel  of  God  is 
a  Pauline  phrase  ;  but  ^MKcipio^  blessed  is  not  used  of  God  by 
Paul,  nor  elsewhere  outside  of  the  Pastorals,  where  it  occurs 
twice,  here  and  ch.  vi.  15.  For  blessed  see  on  Matt.  v.  3. 
The  appearing  of  the  glory  of  God  in  Jesus  Christ  is  the 
contents  of  the  gospel.     Comp.  Tit.  ii.  13. 

Which  was  committed  to  my  trust  (S  eirurrevOrfp  ^(o). 
Or,  with  which  I  was  intrusted.  Comp.  Tit.  i.  3;  Rom.  iii. 
2 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  17 ;  Gal.  ii.  7 ;  1  Th.  ii.  4.  The  €7©  I  em- 
phatically  asserts  the  authority  of  Paul  against  the  "  teachers 
of  the  law"  (ver.  7). 

12.  Hath  enabled  (^ivSwa/uiaaPTi).  An  unclassical  word, 
found  in  Paul  and  Acts.  See  Acts  ix.  22 ;  Philip,  iv.  13. 
Three  times  in  the  Pastorals. 

Counted  (^7^0-0x0).     A  common  Pauline  word. 

Putting  (^^ft€vo9).  Better,  appointing.  The  participle 
defines  counted  me  faitJful.  He  counted  me  faithful  in  that 
he  appointed,  etc. 

Into  the  ministry  (ek  Suucopiav).  Better,  appointing  me  to 
his  service.    The  conventional  phrase  ^'-the  ministry  "  gives  a 


Ch.  L]  the  FIB8T  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  211 

wrong  impression.  The  term  is  general,  covering  every  mode 
of  service,  either  to  God  or  to  men.  Auucovoi  ministert  is  used 
of  the  secular  ruler,  Rom.  xiii.  4.  See  also  1  Cor.  xii.  5  ;  xvi. 
15 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  7,  8 ;  Eph.  iv.  12,  and  on  minister^  Matt.  xx.  26. 

13.  Blasphemer  —  persecutor — injurious  {pkda4>fiiAov — 
BuaKTTjv — v^purrriv).  Neither  fiXMc^nffio^  nor  Siducrri^  is  used 
by  Paul.  BXcur^fio^  in  Acts  vii.  11 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  11  ;  BuHucrq^ 
N.  T.^.;  v^purrrfi  in  Rom.  i.  30  only;  often  in  LXX.  See 
on  blasphemy^  Mk.  vii.  22,  and  comp.  1  Cor.  x.  30.  'TjSpumi^ 
is  one  whose  insolence  and  contempt  of  others  break  forth  in 
wanton  and  outrageous  acts.  Paul  was  vfipurrrfi  when  he 
persecuted  the  church.  He  was  vfipurOek  %hamefvUy  entreated 
at  Philippi  (1  Th.  ii.  2).  Christ  prophesies  that  tlie  Son  of 
man  shall  be  shamefully  entreated  (yfipurdrfaerai^  L.  xviii.  32). 
Similar  regretful  references  of  Paul  to  his  former  career  ap- 
pear in  Acts  xxii.  4;  Gal.  i.  13,  23.  Such  a  passage  may 
have  occurred  in  some  Pauline  letters  to  which  this  writer 
had  access,  or  it  may  be  an  imitation. 

I  obtained  mercy  (rjXeijOriv^.  Comp.  ver.  16.  In  speaking 
of  his  conversion,  Paul  uses  x^P^^  grace.  See  ver.  14,  and 
comp.  1  Cor.  xv.  10  ;  Gal.  i.  15.  In  referring  to  his  call  to 
the  apostleship  he  speaks  of  himself  as  one  who  has  obtained 
mercy  (rjXerffUviK')  of  the  Lord  to  hefaitJ^td.  1  Cor.  vii.  25 ; 
comp.  2  Cor.  iv.  1. 

14.  Was  exceeding  abundant  (inrepe/rX&ivcurev).  Or 
abounded  exceedingly.  N.  T.^.  <>LXX.  <>Class.  Paul  is 
fond  of  compounds  with  inrip^  which,  with  a  few  excep- 
tions, are  found  only  in  his  writings.  In  the  Pastorals 
there  are  only  three.     See  1  Tim.  ii.  2 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  2. 

With  faith.  For  faith  as  treated  in  the  Pastorals,  see 
Introduction,  and  eound  doctrine^  ver.  10. 

15.  This  is  a  faithful  saying  (wurr^  6  X<Pyo9).  Better, 
faithful  i$  the  Maying.  A  favourite  phrase  in  these  Epistles. 
^P.     See  1  Tim.  iii.  1;  iv.  9;  2  Tim.  ii.  11 ;  Tit.  iii.  8. 


212  WORD  STUDIES   IK  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Ck.  I. 

Worthy  of  all  acceptation  (ircun^  airoBoxrri  afto9).  The 
phrase  only  here  and  ch.  iv.  9.  *AiroSoxv  Past^.  ^LXX. 
Comp.  Acts  ii.  41,  a'troSe^dfievoi  t6p  Xdyov  received  his  word. 
Hdaii^  all  or  every  describes  the  reception  of  which  the  saying 
is  worthy  as  complete  and  excluding  all  doubt. 

Came  into  the  world  (fjXOev  ek  rip  kAt/jlop).  The  phrase 
is  unique  in  the  Pastorals,  and  does  not  appear  in  Paul.  It 
is  Johannine.     See  J.  i.  9 ;  iii.  19 ;  xi.  27 ;  xii.  46. 

To  save  sinners  (^a^prf»\oi^  a&a-eu).  The  thought  is 
Pauline,  but  not  the  phrase.     See  L.  ix.  56 ;  xix.  10. 

Chief  (irpSrm).  Or  faremoit.  Comp.  1  Cor.  xv.  9,  and 
Eph.  iii.  8.     This  expression  is  an  advance  on  those. 

16.  First  (irpinr^').  Kot  the  chief  sinner,  but  the  repre- 
sentative instance  of  Grod's  longsuffering  applied  to  a  high- 
handed transgressor.     It  is  explained  by  pattern. 

All  longsuffering  (t^p  &wa4rap  fAaxpoOvfiiap).  More  cor- 
rectly, "all  his  longsuflFering."  The  A.  V.  misses  the  pos- 
sessive force  of  the  article.  For  longsuffering  see  on  be 
patient^  Jas.  v.  7.  The  form  &wa^  occurs  as  an  undisputed 
reading  only  once  in  Paul,  Eph.  vi.  13,  and  not  there  as  an 
adjective.  Often  in  Acts  and  Luke.  This  use  of  the  article 
with  the  adjective  irw;  or  iira^  is  without  parallel  in  Paul. 

Pattern  (Jnrvnnrfoaip').  Or,  ensample.  Only  here  and 
2  Tim.  i.  13.  ^LXX.  ^Class.  An  example  of  the  writer's 
fondness  for  high-sounding  compounds.     Paul  uses  tutto?. 

To  them.  The  A.  V.  conveys  the  sense  more  clearly  than 
Rev.  "  of  them,"  which  is  ambiguous.  The  genitive  has  a 
possessive  sense.  He  would  be  their  ensample,  or  an  ensam- 
ple for  their  benefit. 

Believe  (irumpeip^.  This  verb,  so  frequent  in  Paul,  occurs 
six  times  in  the  Pastorals.     In  two  instances,  1  Tim.  i.  11 ; 


ck.  l]  the  first  epistle  to  timothy.  218 

Tit.  i.  S,  it  is  passive,  in  the  sense  of  to  be  intruited  with. 
Here  in  the  Pauline  sense  of  believing  on  Cfhrist.  In  1  Tim. 
iii.  16,  passive,  of  Christ  believed  on  in  the  world.  In  2  Tim. 
i.  12,  of  God  the  Father,  in  whom  the  writer  confides  to  keep 
the  trust  committed  to  him.  In  Tit.  iii.  8,  of  belief  in  God. 
With  hrl  upon  and  the  dative,  Rom.  ix.  33  ;  x.  11 ;  1  Pet. 
ii.  6  (all  citations),  and  Rom.  iv.  18 ;  L.  xxiv.  25. 

Unto  life  everlasting  (cfc  (>^y  aUoviop).  Better,  eternal 
life.  See  additional  note  on  2  Th.  i.  9.  The  conception  of 
life  eternal  is  not  Limited  to  the  future  life  (as  von  Soden). 
Godliness  has  promise  of  the  life  which  now  i«,  as  well  as 
of  that  which  is  to  come  (1  Tim.  iv.  8).  The  promise  of 
eternal  life  (2  Tim.  i.  1)  and  the  words  who  brotight  life  and 
immortality  to  light  through  the  goepel  (2  Tim.  i.  10)  may 
fairly  be  taken  to  cover  the  present  life. 

17.  King  eternal  (^fiaa-iXei  r&v  auoiwv).  Lit.  the  king  of 
the  age$.  Only  here  and  Apoc.  xv.  3.  Comp.  Heb.  i.  2  ; 
xi.  3.  In  LXX,  Tob.  vi.  10.  For  kindred  expressions  in 
LXX,  see  Ex.  xv.  18 ;  1  Sam.  xui.  13 ;  Ps.  ix.  7 ;  xxviii.  10 ; 
Ixxiii.  12  ;  cxliv.  13 ;  cxlv.  10.  See  also  additional  note  on 
2  Th.  i.  9. 

Immortal  (o^^dpr^).  Lit.  incorruptible.  In  Paul,  applied 
to  God  only,  Rom.  i.  23. 

Invisible  {aopdr^^.   Applied  to  God,  Col.  i.  15 ;  Heb.  xi.  27. 

The  only  wise  God  (fulvip  Oe^).  Wiee  should  be  omitted. 
Rend,  the  only  Q-od.  2o^  wi$e  was  interpolated  from  Rom. 
xvi.  27 — the  only  instance  in  which  Paul  applies  the  term  to 
God.     Comp.  Jude  4,  25 ;  L.  v.  21 ;  J.  v.  44. 

Honor  ILnd  glory  (rifi^  ical  S6(a).  This  combination  in 
doxology  only  here  and  Apoc.  v.  12, 13.  Comp.  Apoc.  iv.  9. 
In  doxologies  Paul  uses  only  S6^a  glory ^  with  the  article,  th^ 
glory ^  and  with  to  whom  or  to  him  (be). 


214  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  L 

Forever  and  ever  (ek  rovt:  ai&vw;  r&v  aionvtov).  Lit.  unto 
the  aeons  of  the  aeons.  The  formula  in  Paul,  Rom.  xvi.  27  ; 
Gal.  i.  5 ;  Philip,  iv.  20.  Also  in  Hebrews  and  1st  Peter,  and 
often  in  Apoc.     The  doxology  as  a  whole  is  unique  in  N.  T. 

18.  This  charge  (ravTqv  rifv  wapayyek^v).  See  on  ver. 
5.     It  refers  to  what  follows,  that  thou  migkt'st  war^  etc. 

I  commit  (jraparCBe^MC).  The  verb  in  the  active  voice 
means  to  place  beside.  In  the  middle,  to  deposit  or  intrust. 
Only  once  in  Paul,  1  Cor.  x.  27.     Comp.  1  Pet.  iv.  19. 

According  to  the  prophecies  which  went  before  on  thee 

(/caTct  tA?  vpoayovca^  iwl  ae  irpo^T€la^^.  Const,  according 
to  with  /  commit :  which  went  before  is  to  be  taken  absolutely, 
and  not  with  on  thee :  const,  prophecies  with  on  thee.  On  thee 
means  concerning  thee.  The  sense  of  the  whole  passage  is  : 
"  I  commit  this  charge  unto  thee  in  accordance  with  prophetic 
intimations  which  I  formerly  received  concerning  thee." 
Prophecy  is  ranked  among  the  foremost  of  the  special  spirit- 
ual endowments  enumerated  by  Paul.  See  Rom.  xii.  6 ; 
1  Cor.  xii.  10 ;  xiii.  2,  8 ;  xiv.  6,  22.  In  1  Cor.  xii.  28 ; 
Eph.  iv.  11,  prophets  come  next  after  apostles  in  the  list  of 
those  whom  God  has  appointed  in  the  church.  In  Eph.  ii. 
20,  believers,  Jew  and  Gentile,  are  built  upon  the  foundation 
of  the  apostles  and  prophets.  According  to  1  Tim.  iv.  14, 
prophecy  has  previously  designated  Timothy  as  the  recipient 
of  a  special  spiritual  gift ;  and  the  prophecies  in  our  passage 
are  the  single  expressions  or  detailed  contents  of  the  prophecy 
mentioned  there.  Upoayelv  to  go  before  is  not  used  by  Paul. 
In  the  Pastorals  and  Hebrews  it  appears  only  as  an  intransit- 
ive verb,  and  so  in  the  only  instance  in  Luke,  xviii.  39.  In 
Acts  always  transitive,  to  bring  forth.  See  Acts  xii.  6 ;  xvi. 
30 ;  xvii.  6 ;  xxv.  26. 

That  by  them  (Xva  iv  axnaW).  "Iva  that  denoting  the  pur- 
port of  the  charge.  By  them  (iv)^  lit.  in  them;  in  tiieir 
sphere,  or,  possibly,  in  the  power  of  these. 


Ch.  I.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  216 

Thou  mightest  war  a  good  warfare  (^trrpaTevu — rifPKaXtfP 
arparelav).  More  correctly,  the  good  warfare.  ^rpareCa  war- 
fare once  by  Paul,  2  Cor.  x.  4.  'Sot  fight  QfJ^xv^^  but  cov- 
ering all  the  particulars  of  a  soldier's  service. 

19.  Holding  (^x®^)*  Not  merely  having^  but  holding /(ut^ 
as  in  2  Tim.  i.  13. 

Faith  and  a  good  conscience  (iritrrLv  koI  ayaOijv  awei- 
tri<Tiv).  The  phrase  ^o(>(i  conscience  is  not  in  Paul,  although 
avveiBija'^^  is  a  Pauline  word.  The  phrase  appears  once  in 
Acts  (xxiii.  1),  and  twice  in  1  Pet.  (iii.  16,  21).  In  Hebrews 
evil  (irovrjpwi)  conscience  and  fair  (/eaX^i/)  conscience ;  x.  22 ; 
xiii.  18.  The  combination /atYA  and  good  conscience  is  peculiar 
to  the  Pastorals.     Comp.  1  Tim.  iii.  9. 

Which  (jiv).     Referring  to  good  conscience. 

Having  put  away  (aTraxrafiepoi}.  The  A.  V.  is  not  strong 
enough.  Better,  fuiving  thrust  from  them.  It  implies  wilful 
'^.olence  against  conscience.  Twice  in  Paul,  Rom.  xi.  1,  2, 
and  three  times  in  Acts. 

Concerning  faith  have  made  shipwreck  (wepl  rifv  wlarip 
ivavdyrjaap).  Better,  "concerning  the  faith  made  shipwreck.'* 
For  a  similar  use  of  irepl  concerning^  see  Acts  xix.  25  ;  L.  x. 
40 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  21 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  18 ;  iii.  8.  It  is  noteworthy 
that  'trepl  with  the  accusative  occurs  only  once  in  Paul  (Philip, 
ii.  23).  Havayeiv  to  make  shipwreck  only  here  and  2  Cor. 
xi.  25.     Nautical  metaphors  are  rare  in  Paul's  writings. 

20.  Hymenaeus  and  Alexander.  Comp.  2  Tim.  ii.  17  ; 
iv.  14. 

I  have  delivered  unto  Satan  (irap&f»Ka  r^  Sarai/^).  See 
on  1  Cor.  v.  6. 

They  may  learn  (TroiScv^Acri).  Neither  A.  V.  nor  Rev. 
gives  the  true  force  of  the  word,  which  is,  may  he  taught  hy 
punishment  or  disciplined.     See  on  Eph.  vi.  4. 


216  WORD  STUDISS  IK  THE  NEW  TBSTAICENT.        [Ch.  JL 

CHAPTER  n. 

1.  I  exhort  Qirapa4ca\&).     See  on  conBolation^  L.  vi.  24. 

First  of  all  (irpSnov  irdvrwv).  Connect  with  I  exhort. 
The  only  instance  of  this  phrase  in  N.  T. 

Supplications  be  made  (iroUUrOeu  Seifo-civ).  The  phrase 
occurs  L.  V.  33 ;  PhUip.  i.  4.  ®LXX.  ^Class.  A V*^  is 
petitionary  prayer.  Ilpoa-eux^  prayer  is  limited  to  prayer 
to  God,  while  S^cri?  may  be  addressed  to  men.  The  two 
are  associated,  1  Tim.  y.  5 :  the  inverse  order,  Eph.  yi.  18 ; 
Philip,  iv.  6. 

Intercessions  (^vrev^?).  Only  here  and  ch.  iv.  5.  LXX, 
2  Mace.  iv.  8.  The  verb  hnvyxdveiPy  commonly  rendered  to 
make  intercession^  Rom.  viii.  27, 34 ;  xi.  2 ;  and  iirepanvyx^^''^ 
to  intercede  in  behalf  of^  Rom.  viii.  26.  The  verb  signifies  to 
faU  in  with  a  person;  to  draw  near  so  as  to  converse  familiarly. 
Hence,  Ivrev^i^  is  not  properly  intercession  in  the  accepted 
sense  of  that  term,  but  rather  approach  to  God  in  free  and 
familiar  prayer.  'EvruT^cfi/ciy  in  the  passages  cited  is  not  to 
make  intercession^  but  to  intervene^  interfere.  Thus  in  Rom. 
viii.  26,  it  is  not  that  the  Spirit  pleads  in  our  behalf,  but  that 
he  throws  himself  into  our  case  ;  takes  part  in  it.  So  Heb. 
vii.  25 :  not  that  Jesus  is  ever  interceding  for  us,  but  that  he 
is  eternally  meeting  us  at  every  point,  and  intervening  in 
all  our  affairs  for  our  benefit.  In  iprev^ei^  here  the  idea  of 
interposition  is  prominent :  making  prayers  a  factor  in  rela- 
tions with  secular  rulers. 

2.  Kings  (^fiaaiXduv).     In  Paul  only  2  Cor.  xi.  82. 

That  are  in  authority  (t&p  iv  inrepox^  Smwv).  ^Tirepoxfj 
authority  only  here  and  1  Cor.  ii.  1.  Several  times  in  LXX. 
Originally,  projection^  prominence :  metaphorically,  pre&min- 
enee^  superiority.     In  Byzantine  Greek,  a  little  like  our  ExeeU 


Ch.  a]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  217 

lencjf.  This  very  phrase  is  found  in  an  inscription  of  the 
early  Roman  period,  after  183  B.C.,  at  Pergamum.  Paul  has 
the  phrase  i^inrUu  inrepexova-cu  higher  poweri^  Rom.  xiii.  1 ; 
and  ol  inrep^oirre;  those  in  high  places  is  found  Wisd.  vi.  6. 

We  may  lead  (Swyto/iev).     Past^.     Comp.  Tit.  iii.  8. 

Quiet  and  peaceable  Cvp^fju^p  koI  fiavxiov).  "Upefju^^ 
N.  T.^.  In  Class,  only  the  adverb  ^p^fMi  quietly.  'Havx^o^ 
tranquil^  ^P.  Only  here  and  1  Pet.  iii.  4.  In  LXX  once, 
Isa.  Ixvi.  2.  "H/9€/xo9  denotes  quiet  arising  from  the  absence 
of  outward  disturbance :  1701^109  tranquillity  arising  from 
within.  Thus,  api^p  ^crvx*^  is  the  composed,  discreet,  self- 
contained  man,  who  keeps  himself  from  rash  doing :  iipefioq 
avrip  is  he  who  is  withdrawn  from  outward  disturbances. 
Hence,  fjpefio^  here  may  imply  keeping  aloof  from  political 
agitations  and  freedom  from  persecutions. 

Honesty  (aefAinhrtri).  Better,  gravity.  Hanesity^  accord- 
ing to  the  modem  acceptation,  is  an  unfortunate  rendering. 
In  earlier  English  it  signified  becoming  deportment^  decency^ 
decorum.  So  Shakespeare :  ^^  He  is  of  a  noble  strain,  of 
approved  valour  and  confirmed  honesty"  (3fuch  Ado^  ii.  1). 
This  noun  and  the  kindred  adjective  crc/Avd?  only  in  the  Past- 
orals, except  Philip,  iv.  8.  The  adjective  signifies  reverend 
or  venerable ;  exhibiting  a  dignity  which  arises  from  moral 
elevation,  and  thus  invites  reverence.  In  LXX  it  is  used  to 
characterise  the  name  of  God  (2  Mace.  viii.  15) ;  the  Sab- 
bath (2  Mace.  vi.  11)  ;  the  divine  laws  (2  Mace.  vi.  28)  ;  the 
words  of  wisdom  (Prov.  viii.  6) ;  the  words  of  the  pure 
(Prov.  XV.  26). 

Godliness  (AcefieUf).  See  on  1  Pet.  i.  8,  and  smmA  doc* 
trine,  1  Tim.  i.  10.     ^P.     Mostly  in  the  Pastorals. 

3.  Acceptable  {inniSeKrop).  Past^.  Compare  itiroSoxi 
acceptation,  ch.  i.  15,  and  Paulas  einrpdah&cro^  acceptable,  Rom. 
XV.  16,  81 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  2 ;  vii.  IJ. 


218  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  H. 

4.  Who  will  have  all  men  to  be  saved  (89  Travra^  avOpa^- 
irov^  OeXei  atoOijvcu}.  Lit.  who  willeth  all  men^  etc.  O9  trAo, 
or  seeing  that  Ae,  giving  the  ground  of  the  previous  statement. 
Prayer  to  God  for  all  is  acceptable  to  him,  because  he  wills 
the  salvation  of  all.  S^Xei  willeth^  marking  a  determinate 
purpose. 

Come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  (jeU  hrl/vwriv 
aXrfOeia^  iXdeip).  The  phrase  only  here  and  2  Tim.  iii.  7. 
*E7r^MkMj-t9  is  a  favorite  Pauline  word.  See  on  Rom.  iii.  20 ; 
Col.  i.  9 :  1  Tim.  ii.  4  ;  iv.  3.  It  signifies  advanced  or  full 
knowledge.  The  diflference  between  the  simple  yp&ai^  and 
the  compound  word  is  illustrated  in  Rom.  i.  21,  28,  and  1  Cor. 
xiii.  12.  In  N.  T.  always  of  the  knowledge  of  things  ethical 
or  divine,  and  never  ascribed  to  God.  For  aXrjB^ta  truths 
see  on  sound  doctrine^  ch.  i.  10.  It  appears  14  times  in  the 
Pastorals,  and  always  without  a  defining  genitive.  So,  often 
in  Paul,  but  several  times  with  a  defining  genitive,  as  truth 
of  Gody  of  Christy  of  the  gospel.  The  logical  relation  in  the 
writer's  mind  between  salvation  and  the  knowledge  of  the 
truth  is  not  quite  clear.  Knowledge  of  the  truth  may  be 
regarded  as  the  means  of  salvation,  or  it  may  be  the  ideal 
goal  of  the  whole  saving  work.  See  1  Cor.  xiii.  12 ;  Philip, 
iii.  8 ;  J.  xvii.  3.  The  latter  is  more  in  accord  with  the 
general  drift  of  teaching  in  these  Epistles. 

6.  For  (7^/)).  The  universality  of  the  grace  is  grounded 
in  the  unity  of  God.  Comp.  Rom.  iii.  30.  One  divine  pur- 
pose for  all  implies  one  God  who  purposes. 

One  Qod.  These  Epistles  deal  much  with  the  divine  at- 
tributes. See  1  Tim.  i.  17 ;  vi.  13,  15,  16 ;  iii.  16  ;  iv.  10 ; 
2  Tim.  ii.  13 ;  Tit.  i.  2. 

Mediator  (/xco-friy?).  See  on  Gal.  iii.  19.  The  word  twice 
in  Paul,  Gal.  iii.  19,  20,  once  of  Moses  and  once  generally. 
In  Hebrews  always  of  Christ ;  viii.  6  ;  ix.  15 ;  xii.  24.  This 
is  the  only  instance  in  the  Pastorals.     As  the  one  God,  so 


Ch.  n.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  219 

the  one  mediator  implies  the  extension  of  the  saving  pur- 
pose to  all. 

The  man  Christ  Jesus.    The  phrase  only  here. 

6.  Who  gave  himself  (o  Soi^  iaurop).  The  phrase  with 
the  simple  verb  only  here,  Gal.  i.  4,  and  Tit.  ii.  14.  Paul 
uses  the  compound  verb  irap<iSiS6vaij  Gral.  ii.  20 ;  Eph.  v.  2, 
25.     Comp.  Rom.  viii.  82. 

Ransom  (avrCTivrpov).  N.  T.^  ^LXX.  ^Class.  Avrpop 
ransom^  Matt.  xx.  28;  Mk.  x.  45,  applied  to  Christ's  life 
given  for  many.  But  neither  this  nor  any  of  its  kindred 
words  is  used  by  Paul.  He  uses  inroXvTpaM'i^^  but  that 
means  the  act  not  the  means  of  redemption. 

For  all  (inrip).  'Tirip  does  not  mean  instead  of  (ii/rl). 
See  on  Rom.  v.  6.  Any  idea  of  exchange  or  substitution 
which  may  be  implied,  resides  in  avrlXurpov ;  but  it  is  press- 
ing that  unique  word  too  far  to  find  in  it  the  announcement 
of  a  substitutional  atonement.* 

To  be  testified  in  due  time  (jh  fiaprvpiov  tccupoh  ISioi^^. 
Lit.  (gave  himself  a  ransom)  the  testimony  in  its  own  times. 
That  is,  the  gift  of  Christ  as  a  ransom  was  to  be  the  sub- 
stance or  import  of  the  testimony  which  was  to  be  set  forth 
in  its  proper  seasons.  Thus  fiaprvpiov  testimony  is  in  appos- 
ition with  the  whole  preceding  sentence,  and  not  with  ran- 
som  only.  Maprvpiov  is  used  sometimes  simply  as  mtness  or 
testimony  (Matt.  viii.  4 ;  Mk.  vi.  11)  :  sometimes  specially 
of  the  proclamation  of  the  gospel,  as  Matt.  xxiv.  14 ;  Acts 
iv.  33  ;  1  Th.  i.  10.  The  apostles  are  said  fxaprvpelv  to  bear 
tcitnessy  as  eye  or  ear  witnesses  of  the  sayings,  deeds,  and 
suflferings  of  Jesus  (1  Cor.  xv.  15).  In  1  Cor.  i.  6,  fxaprvpiov 
ToG  T^purrov  is  practically  =  the  gospel.  In  2  Th.  i.  10,  to 
fMipTvpiov  i^pAv  i<l>'  vfia^  our  testimony  among  you  is  our  public 
attestation  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel.     The  idea  of  witness 

•  See  Ellicott. 


220  WORD  STUDIES  IN  TH£  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  JL 

is  a  favorite  one  with  John.  See  J.  i.  7.  The  exact  phrase 
teaipoh  IBiot^  in  its  own  times^  only  in  the  Pastorals,  here, 
ch.  vi.  15 ;  Tit.  i.  3.  In  Gal.  yi.  9  iccup^  ihlip  in  due  time. 
Comp.  Gal.  iv.  4. 

7.  I  am  ordained  (irdOriv  irfim^.  Better,  I  was  appointed. 
See  on  J.  xv.  16. 

A  preacher  (jcrjpv^').  Lit.  a  herald.  See  on  2  Pet.  ii.  5. 
Paul  does  not  use  the  noun,  but  the  kindred  verb  Ktfpwra-eiv 
to  proclaim  or  preach  is  very  common  in  his  writings.  See 
Rom.  X.  8;  1  Cor.  i.  23;  2  Cor.  iv.  5;  Philip,  i.  15,  etc. 

I  speak  the  truth  in  Christ  and  lie  not.  Omit  in  Christ. 
A  strange  asseveration  to  an  intimate  and  trusted  friend. 
Apparently  an  imitation  of  Rom.  ix.  1. 


A  teacher  of  the  Gentiles  (hiZdaica'Kxif:  iOv&v).  Paul  does 
not  use  this  phrase.  He  expressly  distinguishes  between 
teacher  and  apostle.  See  1  Cor.  xii.  28;  Eph.  iv.  11.  He 
calls  himself  i6v&v  aTrJoroXo?  apostle  of  the  Q-entUes  (Rom. 
xi.  13) ;  XetTovfTfik  Xpiorov  *Irfo-ov  ek  rh  iOvq  minister  of  Christ 
Jesus  to  the  Gentiles  (Rom.  xv.  16);  and  hiaiuo^;  rov  Xpurrov 
*Irfaov  {rrrip  v/i&v  t&v  iOv&v  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ  for  you 
0-entiles  (Eph.  iii.  1). 

In  faith  and  verity  (^iv  irUrrei  Kal  aXijOeia).  Or  faith  and 
truth.  The  combination  only  here.  Paul  has  sincerity  and 
truth  (1  Cor.  v.  8),  and  sanctijication  of  the  Spirit  and  faith 
of  the  truth  (2  Th.  ii.  13).  The  phrase  must  not  be  ex- 
plained in  true  faith,  nor  faithfully  and  truly.  It  means  that 
faith  and  truth  are  the  element  or  sphere  in  which  the  apost- 
olic function  is  discharged :  that  he  preaches  with  a  sincere 
faith  in  the  gospel,  and  with  a  truthful  representation  of  the 
gospel  which  he  believes. 

8.  I  will  ()3oi;Xo/Mu).  Better,  I  desire.  See  on  Matt.  i. 
9,  and  comp.  Philip,  i.  12.  Paul's  word  is  64\a  I  will.  See 
Rom.  xvi.  19 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  32 ;  x.  20 ;  xiv.  6,  19,  etc. 


Cb.  n.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  221 

Everywhere  (iv  iravrX  T«fory).  Lit.  in  every  place.  Wher- 
ever Christian  oongregations  assemble.  Not  every  place 
indiscriminately. 

Lifting  up  holy  hands  (hraipovra^  oalov^  X^^pa?).  The 
phrase  is  unique  in  N.  T.  ®LXX.  Among  Orientals  the 
lifting  up  of  the  hands  accompanied  taking  an  oath,  blessing, 
and  prayer.  The  custom  passed  over  into  the  primitive 
church,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  mural  paintings  in  the  cata- 
combs.  See  Clement,  Ad  Corinth,  xxix,  which  may  possibly 
be  a  reminiscence  of  this  passage.  The  verb  hraipeiv  to  raise^ 
twice  in  Paul,  2  Cor.  x.  5 ;  xi.  20 ;  but  often  in  Luke. 
'Oo-Zow  holy,  ®P.     See  on  L.  i.  75. 

Without  wrath  and  doubting  (^x^P^  ^PTt^  ^^^  huLXo^ur- 
fi&v).  The  combination  only  here.  *Op7^  is  used  by  Paul 
mostly  of  the  righteous  anger  and  the  accompanying  judg- 
ment of  God  against  sin.  As  here,  only  in  Eph.  iv.  81 ;  Col. 
iii.  8.  ^ULko^uriuk  in  N.  T.  habitually  in  the  plural,  as  here. 
The  only  exception  is  L.  ix.  46,  47.  By  Paul  usually  in  the 
sense  of  dispvlatioue  re<uoning.  It  may  also  mean  sceptical 
questionings  or  criticisms^  as  Philip,  ii.  14.  So  probably  here. 
Prayer,  according  to  our  writer,  is  to  be  without  the  element 
of  sceptical  criticism,  whether  of  God's  character  and  deal- 
ings, or  of  the  character  and  behaviour  of  those  for  whom 
prayer  is  offered. 

9.  In  like  manner  (aKrai>no9).  The  writer's  thought  is 
still  running  upon  the  public  assemblies  for  worship. 

Adorn  themselves  (^tcoafieiv  iavrd^).  KoafAelv  adorn,  ^P. 
Of  female  adornment,  1  Pet.  iii.  5 ;  Apoc.  xxi.  2.  In  Matt. 
XXV.  7,  of  trimming  the  lamps.  From  teocrfuk  order,  so  that 
the  primary  meaning  is  to  arrange.  Often  in  LXX  and 
Class.  Prominent  in  the  writer's  mind  is  the  attire  of  women 
in  church  assemblies.    Paul  treats  this  subject  1  Cor.  xi.  5  ff , 

In  modest  apparel  (^  tearaaroX^  teoa-fiup).  KaraaroXri 
N.  T.^.     Once  in  LXX,  Isa.  Ixi.  3.     Opinions  differ  as  to 


222  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  IL 

the  meaning.  Some  apparel^  others  guise  or  deportment  ^ 
teardarqfia  demeanour^  Tit.  ii.  S«  There  seems,  on  the  whole, 
to  be  no  sufficient  reason  for  departing  from  the  rendering 
of  A.y.  and  Rev.*  Kocfit^  modesty  seemly^  Past^.  Note  the 
word-play,  KocfAelp  teocfil^. 

With  shamefacedness  and  sobriety  (/ler^  alBoth  Kal 
iTt&j>poawq^').  *Ai&&9,  N.  T.®.  (aliovf;  in  Heb.  xii.  28  is  an 
incorrect  reading).  In  earlier  Greek,  as  in  Homer,  it  some- 
times blends  with  the  sense  of  aUrxyvrj  shame^  though  used 
also  of  the  feeling  of  respectful  timidity  in  the  presence  of 
superiors,  or  of  penitent  respect  toward  one  who  has  been 
wronged  (see  Homer,  II.  i.  23).  Hence  it  is  connected  in 
Homer  with  military  discipline  (//.  v.  531).  It  is  the  feel- 
ing of  a  suppliant  or  an  unfortunate  in  the  presence  of  those 

*  It  is  difficult  to  determine  the  meaning  decisively.  The  kindred  yerb 
KaraariWeiv  means  (a)  to  put  in  order  or  arrange.  SrAXeir  is  to  put  orplacey 
and  xard  probably  has  its  distributiye  sense,  denoting  succession,  relation,  or 
proportion  of  i>arts.  (6)  To  let  dovon  or  lower^  jcard  having  its  primary  sense 
of  dovm.  (c)  Metaphorical,  derived  from  the  preceding,  to  check  or  repress. 
Thus  Acts  ziz.  25, 36.  See  also  2  Mace.  iv.  31 ;  3  Mace.  vi.  1.  Hence  6  Kare<r- 
raXfUpos  the  man  of  calm  or  sedate  character  (Diod.  L  76 ;  Arrian,  JS^ct.  ill 
23,  16).  From  these  data  two  possible  meanings  are  drawn:  (1)  dress^ 
attire.  So  Hesychius  (rtptfioMj  garment)  and  Suidas  {vroXii  raiment).  It  is 
used  in  Isa.  Ixi.  3  as  the  translation  of  r^grs  covering,  wrapping.  The  root 
ath,  in  every  case,  points  to  veiling.  Plutarch  (Pericles,  6)  has  jraraoroX^ 
repi/SoX^f  arrangement  of  dress ;  and  Josephus,  B.  J.  ii.  8,  4,  KaraaroMi  koL 
vx^V^  fff^fMTos  disposition  and  equipment  of  body,  which  phrase  is  explained 
by  the  following  reference  to  details  of  dress.  It  must  be  admitted,  how- 
ever, that,  with  the  exception  of  Isa.  bd.  3,  there  is  no  instance  of  the  abso- 
lute use  of  KtLTtLffTo\ii  in  the  sense  of  dress.  The  meaning  in  Plutarch  is 
clearly  arrangement,  and  in  Josephus,  o'x^A^  °^y  ^  rendered  dress,  while 
KaroffToXii  probably  means  the  general  arrangement  of  the  person.  It  is 
quite  possible  that  from  the  use  of  jcarcM-roX^  in  these  connections,  it  may 
have  come  to  mean  dress  by  itself.  A  possible  analogy  is  suggested  by  the 
English  attire,  from  the  old  French  atirier  or  atirer,  to  arrange,  equip,  decl\ 
dress,  cognate  with  Provencal  atierar  (d  tire),  to  bring  into  row  or  order. 
The  sense  ot  adjusting  or  regulating  runs  into  that  of  adorning.  The  context 
here,  which  refers  to  details  of  apparel,  the  fact  that  both  Paul  and  Peter 
specifically  deal  vnth  the  subject  of  female  attire,  the  clear  usage  in  Isaiah, 
the  association  of  jcarcMroXi^  with  dress,  and  the  definitions  of  the  old  lexi« 
cographers,  all  seem  to  point  to  the  meaning  apparel.  So  Holtzmamu 
Huther,  and  Weiss. 


Ch.  n.]  THE  FIB8T  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  228 

from  whom  he  seeks  aid ;  of  a  younger  man  toward  an  older 
and  wiser  one.  It  is  a  feeling  based  upon  the  sense  of  defic- 
iencj,  inferiority,  or  imworthiness.  On  the  other  hand,  it 
is  the  feeling  of  a  superior  in  position  or  fortune  which  goes 
out  to  an  unfortunate.  See  Homer,  Ih  xxiv.  208 ;  Od.  xiv. 
888;  Soph.  Oed.  CoL  247.  In  the  Attic  period,  a  distinc- 
tion was  recognised  between  alayyvq  and  alhm  :  alho»i  rep- 
resenting a  respectful  and  reverent  attitude  toward  another, 
while  alaxyvt)  was  the  sense  of  shame  on  account  of  wrong- 
doing. Thus,  ^*'  one  alSeircu  is  respectful  to  his  father,  but 
tUaxyvercu  is  ashamed  because  he  has  been  drunk.''  *  Trench 
(i\r.  T.  St/nan.  §  xix.)  remarks  that  ^^  a^&&9  is  the  nobler  word 
and  implies  the  nobler  motive.  In  it  is  involved  an  innate 
moral  repugnance  to  the  doing  of  the  dishonorable  act,  which 
moral  repugnance  scarcely  or  not  at  all  exists  in  the  alaxyprf. 
Let  the  man  who  is  restrained  by  aUrywri  alone  be  insured 
against  the  outward  disgrace  which  he  fears  his  act  will  en- 
tail, and  he  will  refrain  from  it  no  longer.*'  f  The  A. V. 
shamefaeedness  is  a  corruption  of  the  old  English  shamefas;^ 

ness.     So  Chaucer : 

^  Schamefast  chastite.'* 

KnigM'i  T.  2067. 

Shakespeare : 

**  *TiB  a  blushing  ahamefast  spirit  that  mutinies  in  a  man's  bosom.** 

Bichard  UI.  i.  4. 

It  is  one  of  a  large  class  of  words,  as  steadfast,  soothfast, 
rootfast,  masterfast,  handfast,  bedfast,  etc.  Shamefaced 
changes  and  destroys  the  original  force  of  the  word,  which 
was  bound  or  made  fast  by  an  honourable  shame.  ^{oj>fHHrwq 
sobriety^  ®P.  Once  in  Acts,  xxvi.  25.  The  kindred  verb 
o'aHl>poP€iv  to  be  of  sound  mind^  Rom.  xii.  8 ;  2  Cor.  v.  18 ; 

*  Ammonius  the  Grammarian,  fourth  century.  He  wrote  a  work  On  tkM 
Differences  of  Words  of  Idke  Signification^  wliich  was  appended  to  many  of 
the  older  lexicons. 

t  The  different  uses  of  alSiit  in  Homer  are  discussed  in  a  very  inteiestiDg 
way  in  Gladstone's  Homer  and  the  Homeric  Age^  VoL  II.,  p.  431  fl.  Hie 
best  discussion  of  the  word  is  by  Schmidt,  Sifnonifmik  der  griecMeckem 
Spraeke,  VoL  m.,  f  140. 


224  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  U 

Tit.  ii.  6.  Several  representatives  of  this  family  of  words 
appear  in  the  Pastorals,  and  with  the  exception  of  a(ii>^poa' 
wq  and  cwl>pov€iv^  nowhere  else  in  N.  T.  Such  are  aft^pov* 
O^eiv  to  he  soberminded  (Tit.  ii.  4);  awl>povurfjuk  discipline 
(2  Tim.  i.  7);  a<o<^p6v(oi^  soberly  (Tit.  ii.  12);  <nixf>poi>v  sober- 
minded  (1  Tim.  iii.  2).  The  word  is  compounded  of  0-009 
or  0*619  safe^  sounds  and  ^prjv  mind.  It  signifies  entire  com- 
mand of  the  passions  and  desires ;  a  self-control  which  holds 
the  rein  over  these.  So  Aristotle  (^Rhet.  i.  9) :  "  The  virtue 
by  which  we  hold  ourselves  toward  the  pleasures  of  the  body 
as  the  law  enjoins."  Comp.  4  Mace.  i.  31.  Euripides  calls 
it  "  the  fairest  gift  of  the  gods  "  ^Med.  632).  That  it  ap- 
pears so  rarely  in  N.  T.  is,  as  Trench  remarks,  ^'not  because 
more  value  was  attached  to  it  in  heathen  ethics  than  in 
Christian  morality,  but  because  it  is  taken  up  and  trans- 
formed into  a  condition  yet  higher  still,  in  which  a  man  does 
not  command  himself,  which  is  well,  but,  which  is  better 
still,  is  commanded  by  God."  The  words  mth  shamefastness 
and  sobriety  may  either  be  taken  directly  with  adorn  them- 
selves^ or  better  perhaps,  as  indicating  moral  qualities  aceom' 
panying  (^iierii  with)  the  modest  apparel.  Let  them  adorn 
themselves  in  modest  apparel,  having  along  with  this  shame- 
fastness  and  sobermindedness. 

With  broidered  hair  (iv  TrXiyfuunv).  Lit.  with  plaitings. 
N.  T.^.  Rend,  with  braided  hair.  Broidered  is  a  blunder 
owing  to  a  confusion  with  broided^  the  older  form  of  braided. 

So  Chaucer : 

**  Hir  yelow  heer  was  broyded  in  a  tresae, 
Bihinde  hir  bak,  a  yerde  long,  I  gesse.'* 

KnigKVs  T.  1049  i. 

Costly  array  (^Ifiaria-fA^  iroXvreXeT).  Neither  word  in  Paul. 
IfAaruTfMk  signifies  clothing  in  general.  IloXtn^Xi^  costly 
occurs  only  three  times  in  N.  T. 

10.  Professing  (hrayyeWofUvai^).  In  the  sense  of  pro* 
fessing  only  in  the  Pastorals.  In  Tit.  i.  2,  and  everywhere 
else  in  N.  T.  it  means  j>rom<fe.  See  Acts  vii.  6 ;  Rom.  iv.  21; 
Gal.  iii.  19,  etc. 


Cb.  n.]  THB  FIB8T  BPISTLB  TO  TIMOTHY.  225 

Godliness  (^deoaefieCav).  N.  T.®.  Several  times  in  LXX. 
The  adjective  Btoatfiiff;  worshipping  God^  J.  ix.  81.  It  is  = 
eia^fieia.  See  ver.  2.  Const,  by  good  works  witti  professing 
godliness:  omit  the  parenthesis  trAtcA — godliness;  take  which 
(2)  as  =  tffith  that  which  (^iv  Tovrtp  S)  and  construe  it  with 
adorn.  The  whole  will  then  read:  "That  women  adorn 
themselves  in  modest  apparel,  with  shamefastness  and  so- 
briety ;  not  with  braided  hair,  or  gold,  or  pearls,  or  costly 
array,  but  (adorn  themselves)  with  that  which  becometj) 
women  professing  godliness  through  good  works."* 

11.  Learn  (^fAavOav^coi).     Comp.  1  Cor.  xiv.  85. 

In  silence  {iv  tfovxia).  See  on  peaceable^  ver.  2.  Rev, 
renders  quietness;  but  the  admonition  concerns  the  behaviom 
of  women  in  religious  assemblies.  Comp.  1  Cor.  xiv.  84* 
The  word  is  used  in  the  sense  of  silence^  Acts  xxii.  2 :  with 
the  broader  meaning  quietness  in  2  Th.  iii.  12. 

12.  Suffer  (iirirp^w').  Lit.  turn  over  to;  thence^ permiL 
See  1  Cor.  xiv.  84. 

Usurp  authority  (av^€in-€ii/).  N.T.^  ^LXX,  oClass.  It 
occurs  in  late  ecclesiastical  writers.  The  kindred  noun  avOA^ 
TTi^  one  who  does  a  thing  with  his  own  hand^  Wisd.  xii.  6,  and 
also  in  Herodotus,  Euripides,  and  Thucydides.  ^AvOevrla 
rights  8  Mace.  ii.  29.  The  verb  means  to  do  a  thing  one^s  self; 
hence,  to  exercise  authority.  The  A.  V.  usurp  authority  is  a 
mistake.     Rend,  to  have  or  exercise  dominion  over. 

18.  Was  formed  (ArXAr^i;).  Comp.  Rom.  ix.  20.  Strictly 
of  one  working  in  soft  substances,  as  a  potter  in  clay;  mouUL" 
ing  or  shaping.     Often  in  Class,  and  LXX. 

*  Tbe  other  rendering  proposed  is  to  retain  the  parenthesis,  and  connect 
Si  $pyvw  dya0Qw  through  good  works  with  Koafutw  adorn.  Thus  it  will  read : 
^^Adom  tbemaelyes  with  good  works.**  The  objection  to  this  is  that  mvimbf 
is  previoosly  construed  with  49  (**  in  modest  appoxel,  not  in  braided  hafar,  gold, 
pearls,  etc.**),  and  we  should  therefore  eipect  H  instead  of  Si  with  good 
works.  Further,  it  would  be  unsuitable  to  describe  good  works  as  an  omi^ 
ment  when  he  is  speaking  of  the  demeanor  of  women  in  church  aasembliea. 

TOL.   !▼.  — 16 


226  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  U 

14.  Was  not  deceived  (pvie  rprarriOri).  Once  in  Paul,  Eph. 
V.  6.  Comp.  2  Cor.  xi.  3.  Rev.  beguiled.  As  it  is  evident 
that  Adam  was  beguiled,  the  interpreters  have  tried  many 
ways  of  explaining  the  expression,  either  by  supplying  irpSrrvi 
firsts  or  by  saying  (as  Bengel)  that  the  woman  did  not  deceive 
the  man,  but  persuaded  him  ;  or  by  supplying  by  the  serpent^ 
or  so  long  as  he  was  alone  ;  or  by  saying  that  Eve  was  directly 
and  Adam  indirectly  deceived.  ' 

Being  deceived  (i^airarffOeUra').  Completely  or  thoroughly 
beguiled. 

Was  in  the  transgression  {ip  irapaficurei  y^yovev).  A.  V. 
misses  the  force  of  ydyovev,  riveadai  iv  often  signifies  the 
coming  or  falling  into  a  condition,  as  Acts  xii.  11 ;  xxii.  17 ; 
Apoc.  i.  10 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  3 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  7 ;  1  Th.  ii.  5.  Rend. 
hath  fallen  into  transgression. 

15.  She  shall  be  saved  in  childbearing  (aot^ricerai  &&  r^ 
T€Kvoyovla^').  Better,  "through  the  childbearing."  (1)  Saved 
is  used  in  the  ordinary  N.  T.  sense.  (2)  She  shall  be  saved  is 
set  over  against  hath  fallen  into  transgression.  (3)  It  is  diffi- 
cult to  see  what  is  the  peculiar  saving  virtue  of  childbearing. 
(4)  The  subject  of  acodi^aeTai  shall  be  saved  is  the  same  as 
that  of  iv  irapaficurei  yiyovev  hath  fallen  into  transgression.  A 
common  explanation  is  that  yvvi^  is  to  be  taken  in  its  generic 
sense  as  referring  to  all  Christian  mothers,  who  will  be  saved 
in  fulfilling  their  proper  destiny  and  acquiescing  in  all  the 
conditions  of  a  Christian  woman's  life,  instead  of  attempting 
to  take  an  active  part  as  teachers  or  otherwise  in  public 
religious  assemblies.  On  the  other  hand,  the  woman^  Eve,  may 
be  regarded  as  including  all  the  Christian  mothers.  Notice 
the  change  to  the  plural,  "  if  they  continue."  She,  though  she 
fell  into  transgression,  shall  be  saved  "  by  the  childbearing  " 
(Gen.  iii.  15) ;  that  is,  by  the  relation  in  which  the  woman 
stood  to  the  Messiah.  This  seems  to  be  the  better  explana- 
tion. T&cvoyovCa  childbearing^  N.  T.^.  ^LXX,  ^Class.  Comp. 
r€Kvoyov€iv  to  bear  children^  1  Tim.  v.  14.  The  expression  is 
utterly  un-Pauline. 


Ch.  ra.]  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  227 

If  they  continue  (^ihv  fieivc/xriv).  They,  the  woman  re- 
garded collectively  or  as  including  her  descendants.  The 
promise  does  not  exempt  them  from  the  cultivation  of  Christ- 
ian virtues  and  the  discharge  of  Christian  duties. 

Sanctification  (^ayiaa-fi^y.  A  Pauline  word ;  but  the  triad, 
faith^  lave^  sanctificatiany  is  unique  in  N.  T. 


CHAPTER  m. 

1.  This  is  a  true  saying  (Trtoro?  6  Xcfyo?).  Better, /aftA- 
fid  is  the  saying.     See  on  ch.  i.  15. 

Desire  (ppdyerai).  Better,  seeketh.  Only  here,  ch.  vi.  10, 
and  Heb.  xi.  16.  Originally  to  stretch  forth,  to  reach  qfter. 
Here  it  implies  not  only  desiring  but  seeking  after.  Desire 
is  expressed  by  iiridv/jLel  immediately  following.  The  word 
implies  eagerness,  but  not  of  an  immoderate  or  imchristian 
character.  Comp.  the  kindred  word  Spe^i^  with  its  terrible 
meaning  in  Rom.  i.  27. 

The  office  of  a  bishop  (Arwr/ccwr^).  ®P.  ^Eiria-Koiro^ 
superintendent,  overseer,  by  Paul  only  in  Philip,  i.  1.  The 
fundamental  idea  of  the  word  is  overseeing.  The  term  hrCa-' 
Koiro^  was  not  furnished  by  the  gospel  tradition  :  it  did  not 
come  from  the  Jewish  synagogue,  and  it  does  not  appear  in 
Paul's  lists  of  those  whom  God  has  set  in  the  church  (1  Cor. 
xii.  28 ;  Eph.  iv.  11).  Its  adoption  came  about  in  a  natural 
way.  Just  as  senatys,  yepova^a  and  irpeafivrepo^  passed  into 
official  designations  through  the  natural  association  of  au- 
thority with  age,  so  iTrla-teowo^  would  be,  almost  inevitably, 
the  designation  of  a  superintendent.  This  process  of  natural 
selection  was  probably  aided  by  the  familiar  use  of  the  title 
in  the  clubs  and  guilds  to  designate  functions  analogous  to 
those  of  the  ecclesiastical  administrator.  The  title  can  hardly 
be  traced  to  the  O.  T.     There  are  but  two  passages  in  LXX 


228  WOBD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ch.  m. 

where  the  word  has  any  coimection  with  religious  worship, 
Num.  iv.  16 ;  2  K.  xi.  18-  It  is  applied  to  God  (Job  xx.  29), 
and  in  N.  T.  to  Christ  (1  Pet.  ii.  25).  It  is  used  of  officers 
in  the  army  and  of  overseers  of  workmen.  The  prevailing 
O.  T.  sense  of  hrurKoirii  is  vi$itation  for  punishment,  inquisi- 
tion, or  numbering.* 

He  desireth  (hrtBviuV).    See  on  1  Pet.  i.  12. 

2.  Blameless  {aven-tKfjfnrrov).  Or  mthottt  reproach :  one 
who  cannot  be  laid  hold  of  (Xafifidveiv) :  who  gives  no  ground 
for  accusation.     ®P.     Only  in  Ist  Timothy. 

The  husband  of  one  wife  (^fjua^  ywaucof;  dvSpa^.  Comp. 
ver.  12;  Tit.  i.  6.  Is  the  injunction  aimed  (a)  at  immor- 
alities respecting  marriage  —  concubinage,  etc.,  or  (b)  at 
polygamy,  or  (e)  at  remarriage  after  death  or  divorce  ?  The 
last  is  probably  meant.  Much  of  the  difficulty  arises  from 
the  assumption  that  the  Pastorals  were  written  by  Paul.  In 
that  case  his  views  seem  to  conflict.  See  Rom.  vii.  2,  3 ; 
1  Cor.  vii.  39 ;  viii.  8,  9,  where  Paul  declares  that  widows  are 
free  to  marry  again,  and  puts  widows  and  virgins  on  the  same 
level ;  and  comp.  1  Tim.  v.  9,  according  to  which  a  widow  is 
to  be  enrolled  only  on  the  condition  of  having  been  the  wife 
of  but  one  man.  The  Pauline  view  is  modified  in  detail  by 
the  writer  of  the  Pastorals.  Paul,  while  asserting  that 
marriage  is  right  and  honourable,  regards  celibacy  as  the 
higher  state  (1  Cor.  vii.  1,  7,  26,  34,  37,  38).  In  this  the 
Pastoral  writer  does  not  follow  him  (see  1  Tim.  ii.  15 ;  iii.  4, 
12 ;  iv.  3 ;  v.  10, 14).  The  motive  for  marriage,  namely,  pro- 
tection against  incontinency,  which  is  adduced  by  Paul  in 
1  Cor.  vii.  2,  9,  is  given  in  1  Tim.  v.  11-14.  As  in  Paul, 
the  married  state  is  honourable,  for  Bishops,  Deacons,  and 
Presbyters  are  married  (1  Tim.  iii.  2,  12;  Tit.  i.  6),  and 
the  honour  of  childbearing  conferred  upon  the  mother  of 

*  See  IntrodactioQ,  and  Excursus  on  **  Bishops  and  Deacons**  in  Inter' 
national  Commentary  on  FhUippianB  and  PhUemon. 


Ck  m.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  229 

our  Lord  is  reflected  in  the  Christian  woman  of  later  times 
(1  Tim.  ii.  15).  While  Paul  advises  against  second  marriages 
(1  Cor.  vii.  8,  9, 27, 89,  40),  in  the  Pastorals  emphasis  is  laid 
only  on  the  remarriage  of  church-officers  and  church-widows. 
In  the  Pastorals  we  see  a  reflection  of  the  conditions  of  the 
earlier  post-apostolic  age,  when  a  non-Pauline  asceticism  was 
showing  itself  (see  1  Tim.  iv.  8,  4,  8  ;  Tit.  i.  15).  The  op- 
position to  second  marriage  became  very  strong  in  the  latter 
part  of  the  second  century.  It  was  elevated  into  an  article 
of  faith  by  the  Montanists,  and  was  emphasised  by  TertuUian, 
and  by  Athenagoras,  who  called  second  marriage  **a  specious 
adultery"  (jevTrpeirffi  fMixiCa).* 

Vigilant  (yrf^dXiop).  Only  in  the  Pastorals.  See  ver.  11, 
and  Tit.  ii.  2.  ^LXX.  The  kindred  verb  yi^^y  means  to  be 
Mober  with  reference  to  drink,  and,  in  a  metaphorical  sense,  to 
be  sober  and  wary  ;  cool  and  unimpaseumed.  Thus  Epichar- 
mus,  va4>€  Kal  fidfivcur  airiarelv  be  wary  and  remember  not  to  be 
eredubue.  See  on  1  Th.  v.  6.  In  N.  T.  the  meaning  of  the 
verb  is  always  metaphorical,  to  be  calm^  diepaeeionate^  and  eir- 
eumspect.  The  A.  V.  vigilant  is  too  limited.  Wise  caution 
may  be  included;  but  it  is  better  to  render  sober,  as  A.V.  in 
ver.  11  and  Tit.  ii.  2,  in  the  metaphorical  sense  as  opposed 
to  youthful  levity. 

Of  good  behaviour  (^tcSafuov).  ^P.  Only  here  and  1  Tim. 
ii.  9,  see  note.     Rend,  orderly. 

Qiven  to  hospitality  (il>i'\jd^€Pov).  ^P.  Comp.  Tit.  i.  8; 
1  Pet.  iv.  9.     See  note  on  pursuing  hospitality^  Rom.  xii.  18. 

Apt  to  teach  (hiZatcrucSv).  ^P.  Only  here  and  2  Tim. 
ii.  24.  ^LXX,  <^Class.  In  the  Pastorals  the  function  of 
teaching  pertains  to  both  Bishops  and  Elders  (see  1  Tim. 
V.  17 ;  Tit.  i.  9).     It  is  at  this  point  that  the  tendency  to 

'  *  Tbe  reference  to  second  marriages  here  is  held  by  Holtzmann,  Ellicott, 
von  Soden,  Wace,  and  Pfleiderer.  Huther  and  Farrar  take  it  as  simply 
opposed  to  an  immoral  life,  especially  concabinago. 


230  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ch.  IH. 

confound  and  identify  the  two  reveals  itself.  Bishops  and 
Presbyters  are  not  identical.  Earlier,  the  teaching  function 
does  not  seem  to  have  attached  to  the  position  of  hrlaicoiro^. 
The  office  acquired  a  different  character  when  it  assumed  that 
function,  which  is  not  assigned  to  it  in  Clement's  Epistle  to 
the  Corinthians.  In  the  Didache  or  Teaching  of  the  Twelve 
Apostles  (about  100  a.d.)  the  ministry  of  teaching  is  to  be 
assumed  by  the  Bishops  only  in  the  absence  of  the  Prophets 
and  Teachers  (xiii.  xv). 

3.  Given  to  wine  Qirdpoivov).  Only  here  and  Tit.  i.  7. 
The  verb  irapoiveiv  to  behave  ill  at  wine^  to  treat  with  drunken 
violence^  is  found  in  Xenophon,  Aeschines,  Aristophanes,  and 
Aristotle.  Once  in  LXX,  Isa.  xli.  12.  Rev.  renders  brawler^ 
which  is  not  definite  enough.  Better,  quarrelsome  over  wine. 
See  Aristoph.  Acham.  981 :  irapoivio^  avtfp  ^^v,  which  Frere 
renders  "behaved  in  such  a  beastly  way."  Cicero^  ad  Att. 
X.  10,  uses  irapoiviKW  =  insolently. 

Striker  (irXi^Krrfv).  Only  here  and  Tit.  i.  7.  Some  soften 
down  the  meaning  into  a  pugnacious  or  combative  person.  In 
any  case,  it  is  a  peculiar  state  of  things  which  calls  out  such 
admonitions  to  Bishops. 

Not  greedy  of  filthy  lucre.    Omit. 

Patient  (c7rt€t#c^).  Better,  forbearing.  The  word  occurs 
Philip,  iv.  5,  and  hneiicla  forbearance  in  2  Cor.  x.  1,  where  it 
is  associated  with  irpairrfi  meekness.  From  elKik  reasonable. 
Hence,  not  unduly  rigorous ;  not  making  a  determined  stand 
for  one's  just  due.  In  1  Pet.  ii.  18  ;  Jas.  iii.  17,  it  is  associ- 
ated with  ayadoi  kindly^  and  einreiBij^  easy  to  be  entreated. 
It  occurs  in  LXX. 

Not  a  brawler  (afuixov)'     Better,  not  contentious. 

Not  covetous  (a<l>i\dpyvpov).  Only  here  and  Heb.  xiii.  5. 
^LXX,  ^Class.     ^iXapyvpof;  money-loving^  L.  xvi.  14 ;  2  Tim, 


Ch.  ra.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  281 

iii.  2.     Rend,  not  a  money-lover.     The  word  for  covetous  is 
irXeopAcrri^.     For  the  distinction  see  on  Rom.  i.  29. 

This  admonition  is  cited  by  some  writers  in  support  of  the 
view  that  the  original  hri(rKoiro^  was  simply  a  financial  officer. 
It  is  assumed  that  it  was  prompted  by  the  special  tempta- 
tions which  attached  to  the  financial  function.  Admitting 
that  the  episcopal  function  may  have  included  the  financial 
interests  of  the  church,  it  could  not  have  been  confined  to 
these.  It  can  hardly  be  supposed  that,  in  associations  dis- 
tinctively moral  and  religious,  one  who  bore  the  title  of 
overseer  should  have  been  concerned  only  with  the  material 
side  of  church  life.* 

4.  That  ruleth  (irpoiardfiepov).  Mostly  in  the  Pastorals, 
but  also  in  Rom.  xii.  8 ;  1  Th.  v.  12.  The  participle  means 
placed  in  front.  Here  in  a  general  sense,  but  in  1  Th.  i.  6 
of  church  authorities,  but  only  functionally,  not  as  a  title  of 
specially  appointed  officers.  It  is  characteristic  of  the  loose 
and  unsettled  ecclesiastical  nomenclature  of  the  apostolic  age. 

Having  in  subjection  (^exovra  ip  {nroray^}.  The  phrase 
is  unique  in  N.  T.  'Tirorayii  subjection  is  a  Pauline  word  : 
see  2  Cor.  ix.  13 ;  Gal.  ii.  5.     ^LXX. 

5.  Shall  he  take  care  of  (eTrifftcX^eroi).  Only  here  and 
L.  X.  34. 

6.  Novice  (y^xnov).  N.  T.®.  From  i^  new  and  ^tmfy 
a  plant.  Comp.  1  Cor.  iii.  6,  7;  Matt.  xv.  13.  Hence,  a 
new  convert^  a  neophyte.  Comp.  in  LXX  Job  xiv.  9 ;  Ps. 
cxxvii.  3 ;  cxliii.  12 ;  Isa.  v.  7.  Chrysostom  explains  it  as 
newly  catechised  (^veoKanf^vro^^  ;  but  a  neophyte  differed  from 
a  catechumen  in  having  received  baptism.  Better  the  ancient 
Greek  interpreters,  newly  baptized  (veofidirrurro^^.  After  the 
ceremony  of  baptism  the  neophytes  wore  white  garments  for 

•  See  Dr.  Sanday,  Expositor,  8d  aer.,  V.,  08,  and  R^viUe,  Les  Origines  ds 
VHpiBCopiU,  p.  153  f. 


232  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ch.  HL 

eight  days,  from  Easter  eve  until  the  Sunday  after  Easter, 
which  was  called  Dominica  in  oOm^  the  Sunday  in  white.  The 
Egyptian  archives  of  Berlin  give  vGhf>ino^  in  a  Fajiim  papyrus 
of  the  second  century  A.  d.  ,  of  newly-planted  palm  trees.  Comp. 
LXX,  Ps.  cxxvii.  8 :  *^Thy  sons  as  vei^xna  tXxu&v  new  plants 
of  olives  J*^ 

Being  lifted  up  with  pride  Qrv^MtO^l^^.  Only  in  the  Past- 
orals. See  ch.  vi.  4 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  4.  The  verb  means  prim- 
arily to  make  a  smoke:  hence,  metaphorically,  to  blind  with 
pride  or  conceit.  Neither  A.  V.  nor  Rev.  puffed  up^  preserves 
the  radical  sense,  which  is  the  sense  here  intended  —  a 
beclouded  and  stupid  state  of  mind  as  the  result  of  pride. 

Fall  into  condemnation  (m  Kptfjta  ifiir^arf).  Kp{fia  in 
N.  T.  usually  means  judgment.  The  word  for  condemnation 
is  KaroKpifia.  See  especially  Rom.  v.  16,  where  the  two  are 
sharply  distinguished.  Comp.  Matt.  vii.  2  ;  Acts  xxiv.  25 ; 
Rom.  ii.  2  ;  V.  18  ;  1  Cor.  vi.  7.  However,  icpifAa  occasion- 
ally shades  off  into  the  meaning  condemnation^  as  Rom.  iii.  8 ; 
Jas.  iii.  1.  See  on  go  to  law^  1  Cor.  vi.  7,  and  on  1  Cor.  xi.  29. 
Kpifia  is  a  Pauline  word ;  but  the  phrase  ifim-iirreiv  ek  icpifia 
to  fail  into  judgment  is  found  only  here. 

Of  the  devil  {tqv  Sia/SJkov).  See  on  Matt.  iv.  1,  and  on 
Satan^  1  Th.  ii.  18.  Paul  uses  SidfioXo^  only  twice,  Eph.  iv. 
27 ;  vi.  11.  Commonly  Satan.  The  use  of  hidfioXo^  as  an 
adjective  is  peculiar  to  the  Pastorals  (see  1  Tim.  iii.  11 ; 
2  Tim.  iii.  3 ;  Tit.  ii.  3),  and  occurs  nowhere  else  in  N.  T., 
and  not  in  LXX.  The  phrase  judgment  of  the  devil  probably 
means  the  accusing  judgment  of  the  devil,  and  not  the  judg- 
ment passed  upon  the  devil.  In  Apoc.  xii.  10  Satan  is  called 
the  accuser  of  the  brethren.  In  1  Cor.  v.  5 ;  1  Tim.  i.  20,  men 
are  given  over  to  Satan  for  judgment.  In  ver.  7  the  genitive 
hiafiSKov  is  clearly  subjective.  In  this  chapter  it  appears  that 
a  Christian  can  fall  into  the  reproach  of  the  devil  (comp.  Jude 
9 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  11),  the  mare  of  the  devil  (comp.  2  Tim.  ii.  26), 
and  ihQ  judgment  of  the  devil. 


Cta.  m.]  THB  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  288 

7.  A  good  report  (^fAoprvpCap  tcaX^p).  Comp.  Acts  vi.  8. 
Not  only  does  icaXtk  occur  in  the  Pastorals  nearly  twice  as 
many  times  as  in  Paul,  but  the  usage  is  different.  Out  of  16 
instances  in  Paul,  there  is  but  one  in  which  tcaXik  is  not  used 
substantively  (Rom.  vii.  16),  while  in  the  Pastorals  it  is, 
almost  without  exception,  used  adjectively.  MaprrvpCav^ 
better  testimony.  Comp.  Tit.  i.  18.  Not  in  Paul,  who  uses 
IMprrvpiov. 

Of  them  which  are  without  (hiro  r&v  if^o^eii).  "EfatOof 
only  once  in  Paul  (2  Cor.  vii.  5),  and  ol  i^to0€if  nowhere  in 
Paul,  and  only  here  in  Pastorals.  Paul's  phrase  is  6  i^ : 
see  1  Cor.  v.  12, 18 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  16 ;  1  Th.  iv.  12. 

Reproach  (pveihiapybv).  By  Paul  in  Rom.  xy.  8 :  only  here 
in  Pastorals  :  three  times  in  Hebrews. 

Snare  (iroffCba).  Comp.  ch.  vi.  9 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  26.  In 
Paul,  Rom.  xi.  9,  see  note.  Both  reproaeh  and  snare  govern 
SiafidXxiv. 

8.  Deacons.  The  office  of  Deacon  appears  in  the  Pastor- 
als, but  not  in  Paul's  letters,  with  the  single  exception  of 
Philip,  i.  1,  where  the  Deacons  do  not  represent  an  ecclesias- 
tical office,  though  they  mark  an  advance  toward  it.  Clem- 
ent of  Rome  (ad  CorirUh.  xlii,  xliv)  asserts  their  apostolic 
appointment.  But  the  evidence  at  our  command  does  not 
bear  out  the  view  that  the  institution  of  the  diaconate  is 
described  in  Acts  vi.  1-6.  The  terms  Biokovo^  and  huucovla 
are,  in  the  Pauline  writings,  common  expressions  of  servants 
and  service  either  to  Christ  or  to  others.  Paul  applies  these 
terms  to  his  own  ministry  and  to  that  of  his  associates. 
iiuucopCa  is  used  of  the  service  of  the  apostles.  Acts  i.  25 ; 
vi.  4.  liidKovo^  is  used  of  Paul  and  Apollos  (1  Cor.  iii.  5)  ; 
of  Christ  (Gral.  ii.  17;  Rom.  xv.  8)  ;  of  the  civil  ruler  (Rom. 
xiii.  4)  ;  of  ministers  of  Satan  (2  Cor.  xi.  15).  The  ap- 
pointment of  the  seven  grew  out  of  a  special  emergency,  and 
was  made  for  a  particular  service ;  and  the  resemblance  is 


234  WORD  STUDIES   IN  THE   NEW   TESTAMENT.      [Ch.  IIL 

not  close  between  the  duties  and  qualifications  of  deacons  in 
the  Pastorals  and  those  of  the  seven.  The  word  BuUovo^ 
does  not  appear  in  Acts;  and  when  Paul  and  Barnabas 
brought  to  Jerusalem  the  collection  for  the  poor  saints,  they 
handed  it  over  to  the  elders. 

In  like  manner  (cbo-atrrai?).  Rare  in  Paul  (Rom.  viii.  26; 
1  Cor.  xi.  25).     Frequent  in  Pastorals. 

Grave  (o-c/ivow).  In  Paul  only  Philip,  iv.  8.  See  on 
aefJLvdTfi^  gravity^  1  Tim.  ii.  2. 

Double-tongued  (StXiPyow).  N.  T.^  ^LXX,  ^Class.  Say- 
ing  one  thing  and  meaning  another,  and  making  different 
representations  to  different  people  about  the  same  thing. 

Qiven  to  much  wine  (oii/^  TroXX^Tr/Mxr^oi/ra?).  See  on 
1  Tim.  i.  4.  Total  abstinence  is  not  enjoined,  even  on  a 
deacon.     Corap.  1  Tim.  v.  23. 

Greedy  of  filthy  lucre  (owrxpo^cpSefc).  N.  T.^.  ^LXX. 
The  adverb  aiaxpoKephw  in  a  base,,  gain-greedy  way^  1  Pet. 
V.  2.  From  alaxfxk  disgraceful  and  K^pBo^  gain.  Comp. 
Hdt.  i.  187  :  el  fiif  a7r\r)<rm  re  ea9  ;^/oi7/iaTa>i/  xai  aUrxpoKepBr/^ 
if  thou  hadst  not  been  insatiable  of  wealth  and  ready  to  procure 
it  by  disgraceful  means.  Aristoph.  Peace^  622,  alludes  to  two 
vices  of  the  Spartans,  6vTei  aia'xpoKephm  Ka\  SieiprnvS^epoi  sor- 
didly greedy  ofgain^  and  treacherous  under  the  mask  of  hospit- 
ality.  Similarly  Eurip.  Androm.  461.  Comp.  turpilticricur 
pidus^  Plaut.  Trin.  1,  2,  63. 

9.  The  mystery  of  the  faith  (to  iivtrrripiov  rrfi  irCarem). 
The  phrase  N.  T.^.  In  the  Gospels  only,  mystery  or  myster- 
ies of  the  kingdom  of  God  or  of  heaven.  In  Paul,  mystery  or 
mysteries  of  Q-od^  of  his  unll^  of  Christy  of  the  gospel^  of  iniquity^ 
the  mystery  kept  secret  or  hidden  away.  Several  times  with- 
out qualification,  the  mystery  or  mysteries.  See  on  2  Th.  ii.  7. 
The  mystery  of  the  faith  is  the  subject-matter  of  the  faith ; 
the  truth  which  is  its  basis,  which  was  kept  hidden  from  the 


ch,  ui.]  the  first  epistle  to  timothy.  286 

world  until  revealed  at  the  appointed  time,  and  which  is  a 
secret  to  ordinary  eyes,  but  is  made  known  by  divine  revel- 
ation. Comp.  Rom.  xvi.  26  ;  Eph.  iii.  9 ;  Col.  i.  26 ;  1  Cor. 
ii.  7.  For  the  faith  see  on  Gal.  i.  23,  and  comp.  Introduction 
to  these  Epistles,  VI. 

In  a  pure  conscience  (jh  tcaOapa  avveiBiia-ei).  Comp. 
2  Tim.  i.  8,  6, 19.  Const,  with  holding.  The  emphasis  of 
the  passage  is  on  these  words.  They  express  conscientious 
purity  and  sincerity  in  contrast  with  those  who  are  described 
as  branded  in  their  aum  conscience^  and  thus  causing  their  fol- 
lowers to  fall  away  from  the  faith  (ch.  iv.  1,  2).  The  passage 
illustrates  the  peculiar  treatment  of  ^^  faith ''  in  these  Epis- 
tles, in  emphasising  its  ethical  aspect  and  its  ethical  environ- 
ment. This  is  not  contrary  to  Paul's  teaching,  nor  does  it 
go  to  the  extent  of  substituting  morals  for  faith  as  the  condi- 
tion of  salvation  and  eternal  life.  See  2  Tim.  i.  9 ;  ii.  1 ; 
Tit.  iii.  6.  None  the  less,  there  is  a  strong  and  habitual 
emphasis  on  good  works  (see  1  Tim.  ii.  10 ;  v.  10 ;  vi.  18 ; 
2  Tim.  ii.  21 ;  iii.  17 ;  Tit.  i.  16 ;  ii.  7,  14  ;  iii.  1,  8,  14), 
and  faith  is  placed  in  a  series  of  practical  duties  (see  1  Tim. 
i.  5,  14;  ii.  16;  iv.  12;  2  Tim.  i.  18;  1  Tim.  i.  19;  ii.  7; 
iii.  9;  vi.  11 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  22;  iii.  10).  "Holding  the  mys- 
tery of  the  faith  in  a  pure  conscience"  is  a  significant  associ- 
ation of  faith  with  ethics.  As  Weiss  puts  it :  '^  It  is  as  if  the 
pure  conscience  were  the  vessel  in  which  the  mystery  of  the 
faith  is  preserved."  The  idea  is  sound  and  valuable.  A 
merely  intellectual  attitude  toward  the  mystery  which,  in 
every  age,  attaches  to  the  faith,  will  result  in  doubt,  quest- 
ioning, and  wordy  strife  (see  1  Tim.  vi.  4 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  28 ; 
Tit.  iii.  9),  sometimes  in  moral  laxity,  sometimes  in  despair. 
Loyalty  and  duty  to  God  are  compatible  with  more  or  less 
ignorance  concerning  the  mystery.  An  intellect,  however 
powerful  and  active,  joined  with  an  impure  conscience,  cannot 
solve  but  only  aggravates  the  mystery  ;  whereas  a  pure  and 
loyal  conscience,  and  a  frank  acceptance  of  imposed  duty 
along  with  mystery,  puts  one  in  the  best  attitude  for  attain- 
ing whatever  solution  is  possible.     See  J.  vii.  17. 


286  WORD  STUDIBS  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ch.  UI 

10.  These  also  (^koI  ohvi  S^).  As  well  as  the  Bishops. 
No  mention  is  made  of  a  proving  of  the  Bishops,  but  this  may 
be  fairly  assumed.     Comp.  not  a  novice^  ver.  6. 

Be  proved  QBoKifia^^Oaxrav).  Common  in  Paul;  only 
here  in  Pastorals.  See  on  1  Pet.  i.  7.  Not  implying  a  formal 
examination,  but  a  reference  to  the  general  judgment  of  the 
Christian  community  as  to  whether  they  fulfil  the  conditions 
detailed  in  ver.  8.     Comp.  1  Tim.  v.  22 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  2. 

Let  them  use  the  office  of  a  deacon  (Suucoveirctxrap). 
Much  better,  let  them  serve  as  deacons.  In  this  sense  only  in 
the  Pastorals.  Comp.  ver.  18.*  The  verb  is  very  common 
in  N.  T. 

Being  blameless  (ai^/ir\i7ro»  Ji/re?).  Rs,ther^  unaccused : 
if  no  charge  be  preferred  against  them.  In  Paul,  1  Cor.  i.  8 ; 
Col.  i.  22.  Comp.  Tit.  i.  6,  7.  It  is  a  judicial  term.  The 
participle  Bvre^  signifies  provided  they  are. 

11.  Their  wives  (ywauca^}.  Probably  correct,  although 
some  find  a  reference  to  an  official  class  of  women  —  deacon- 
esses (so  Ellicott,  Holtzmann,  Alford).  But  the  injunction 
is  thrown  incidentally  into  the  admonition  concerning  Dea- 
cons, which  is  resumed  at  ver.  12 ;  and  if  an  official  class  were 
intended  we  should  expect  something  more  specific  than 
ywauca'i  women  or  wives  without  the  article.  A  Deacon 
whose  wife  is  wanting  in  the  qualities  required  in  him,  is 
not  to  be  chosen.  She  would  sustain  an  active  relation  to 
his  office,  and  by  her  ministries  would  increase  his  efficiency, 
and  by  frivolity,  slander,  or  intemperance,  would  bring  him 
and  his  office  into  disrepute. 

18.  Purchase  (irepiTroiovvTai).  Only  here,  L.  xvii.  88, 
and  Acts  xx.  28  on  which  see  note.  Purchase  is  unfortun- 
ate from  the  point  of  modern  usage  ;  but  it  is  employed  in 

•  Holtzmann  and  Hather  add  1  Pet  iv.  11 ;  bat  Hather  says  that  it  ia  not 
to  be  limited  to  the  official  ministry  of  the  Deacon.  It  may  fairly  be  taken 
in  the  general  aenwd  of  teroe.    So  von  Soden. 


Ch.  IU.]  the  FIB8T  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  237 

its  original  sense  of  to  win^  acquire^  without  any  idea  of  a 
bargain.  So  Bacon,  E%9.  iv.  14 :  ^^  There  is  no  man  doth  a 
wrong  for  the  wrong's  sake ;  but  therby  to  purchaie  him- 
self e  profit,  or  pleasure,  or  honour,  or  the  like."  And  Shake- 
speare: 

**  Then,  as  my  gift  and  thine  own  acquiflition 
Worthily  purchoBed^  take  my  daughter.*' 

Ttmp,  iT.  1, 14. 
Rend,  acquire  or  obtain  for  themselves. 

A  good  degree  (^fiaOpiav  ica\6v).  BaOfuk,  N.T.^  Prim- 
arily, a  step.  In  LXX,  1  Sam.  v.  5 ;  Sir.  vi.  86,  a  thresh- 
old: 2  K.  XX.  9,  a  degree  on  the  dial.  In  ecclesiastical 
writers,  order^  grade^  rank :  see,  for  instance,  Eusebius,  H.  E. 
vii.  16.  Also  degree  of  relationship  or  afl&nity.  Here  the 
word  apparently  means  a  position  of  trust  and  influence  in 
the  church ;  possibly  a  promotion  from  the  diaconate  to  the 
episcopate.  Others  (as  De  Wette,  Ellicott,  Pfleiderer)  refer 
it  to  a  high  grade  in  the  future  life,  which  Holtzmann  sar- 
castically describes  as  a  ladder-round  in  heaven  {eine  Staffel 
im  Himmel).  John  the  Scholar,  known  as  Climacus,  a  monk 
of  the  latter  half  of  the  sixth  century,  and  Abbot  of  the  Sinai 
Convent,  wrote  a  mystical  work  entitled  KX//Aa{  rov  Ila/Ki- 
heCaov  the  Ladder  of  Paradise.  The  ladder,  according  to 
him,  had  thirty  rounds. 

Boldness  (irappriaCav).  Primarily,  free  and  bold  speaking; 
speaking  out  every  word  Qirav^  fiVM^^'  I^s  dominant  idea  is 
boldness^  confidence^  as  opposed  to  fear^  ambiguity^  or  reserve. 
The  idea  oi  publicity  is  sometimes  attached  to  it,  but  as  second- 
ary. Only  here  in  the  Pastorals :  several  times  in  Paul,  as 
2  Cor.  iii.  12 ;  vii.  4 ;  Philip,  i.  20.  The  phrase  iroWi^  irap- 
ptfo-ia  much  boldness  is  also  Pauline.  An  assured  position 
and  blameless  reputation  in  the  church,  with  a  pure  con- 
science, would  assure  boldness  of  speech  and  of  attitude  in 
the  Christian  community  and  elsewhere. 

In  faith.  Connect  with  boldness  only.  It  designates  the 
boldness  as  distinctively  Christian,  founded  on  faith  in  Christ. 


238  WORD   STUDIES   IN  THE   NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ch.  ffl. 

14.  Shortly  (&  rdx^i).  The  adverbial  phrase  once  in 
Paul,  Rom.  xvi.  20  :  only  here  in  Pastorals.  Several  times 
in  Luke  and  Acts,  and  twice  in  Apocaljrpse.* 

15.  I  tarry  long  ()3/>aSiW).     Only  here  and  2  Pet.  iii.  9. 

Thou  oughtest  to  behave  thyself  (SeZ  avcurrp^a0<u). 
The  verb  avcurrpd^aOai  only  here  in  Pastorals.  In  Paul, 
2  Cor.  i.  12 ;  Eph.  ii.  8.  The  reference  is  not  to  Timothy's 
conduct  as  the  A.  V.  implies,  but  rather  to  the  instructions 
which  he  is  to  give  to  church  members.  Rend,  haw  men 
ought  to  behave.     See  on  conversation^  1  Pet.  i.  15. 

House  of  God  (pUip  Oeov).  An  O.  T.  phrase,  used  of  the 
temple.  More  frequently,  house  of  the  Lord  (Kvplov)\  see 
1  K.  iii.  1 ;  vi.  1 ;  1  Chron.  xxii.  2,  11 ;  xxix.  2,  etc.  Ap- 
plied to  the  church  only  here.  Paul  has  oUeiov^  tt^  irUrrem^ 
householders  of  the  faith  (Gal.  vi.  10),  and  olKeioi  tov  Oeov 
householders  of  Q-od  (Eph.  ii.  19),  signifying  members  of  the 
church.  Christians  are  called  1^009  Oeov  sanctuary  of  Q-od 
(1  Cor.  iii.  16,  17;  2  Cor.  vi.  16);  and  the  apostles  are 
oUovJfioi  household  stewards  (1  Cor.  iv.  1).  So  of  a  Bishop 
(Tit.  i.  7).     See  also  Heb.  iii.  6. 

Church  (iKK;\q<rUi).     See  on  1  Th.  i.  1. 

Pillar  and  ground  of  the  truth  (orvXo?  Ka\  iBpaltofut  r^ 
aXrjOeCa':).  ^tv\o^  pillar^  in  Paul  only  Gal.  ii.  9.  In  Apoc- 
alypse iii.  12 ;  x.  1.  'EBpaifOfia  stay^  prop^  better  than  ground. 
N.  T.^.  ^LXX,  ^Class.  The  kindred  adjective  iBpaio^  firm, 
stable^  1  Cor.  vii.  37  ;  xv.  68 ;  Col.  i.  23.  These  words  are 
in  apposition  with  church.j  The  idea  is  that  the  church  is 
the  pillar,  and,  as  such,  the  prop  or  support  of  the  truth.     It 

*  The  reading  rdxior  or  raxcibr  more  quickly,  is  preferred  by  Tiscbendorf 
and  Weiss.  The  comparative  would  signify  sooner  than  these  instructions 
presuppose. 

t  Holizmann  makes  an  ingenious  plea  for  apposition  with  $9oO  God,  though 
he  does  not  decisively  adopt  it.  Others  explain  as  beginning  the  following 
clause,  thus :  **  A  pillar  and  stay  of  the  truth,  and  confessedly  great,  is  the 
mystery  of  godliness.'*  This  is  quite  inadmissible,  as  is  the  xeference  of  the 
words  to  Timothy. 


Ch.  m.]  THE  FIB8T  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHT.  289 

is  quite  beside  the  mark  to  press  the  architectural  metaphor 
into  detail.  By  giving  to  iBpaioi>fia  the  sense  of  ttay  or  prop^ 
the  use  of  the  two  words  for  the  same  general  idea  is  readily 
explained.  The  church  is  the  pillar  of  the  truth,  and  the 
function  of  the  pillar  is  to  support.^ 

16.  Without  controversy  (ofioXoyov/jJpm^y.  Lit.  confess- 
edly.    N.  T.^. 

The  mystery  of  godliness  (t6  r^  evae/Seia^  iMnrrripiov). 
(a)  The  connection  of  thought  is  with  the  truth  (ver.  15), 
and  the  words  mystery  of  godliness  are  a  paraphrase  of  that 
word.  The  church  is  the  pillar  and  stay  of  the  truth,  and 
the  truth  constitutes  the  mystery  of  godliness.  (6)  The 
contents  of  this  truth  or  mystery  is  Christ,  revealed  in  the 
gospel  as  the  Saviour  from  ungodliness,  the  norm  and  inspir- 
ation of  godliness,  the  divine  life  in  man,  causing  him  to 
live  unto  God  as  Christ  did  and  does  (Rom.  vi.  10).  See 
ch.  i.  15 ;  ii.  5 ;  Col.  i.  26,  27.  According  to  the  Fourth 
Gospel,  Christ  is  himself  the  truth  (J.  xiv.  6).  The  mystery 
of  godliness  is  the  substance  of  piety  =  mystery  of  the  faith 
(ver.  9).  (c)  The  truth  is  called  a  mystery  because  it  was, 
historically,  bidden,  until  revealed  in  the  person  and  work  of 
Christ;  also  because  it  is  concealed  from  human  wisdom, 
and  apprehended  only  by  faith  in  the  revelation  of  God 
through  Christ,  (d)  The  genitive,  of  godliness^  is  possess- 
ive. The  mystery  of  godliness  is  the  truth  which  pertains 
or  belongs  to  godliness.  It  is  not  the  property  of  worldly 
wisdom.  Cheat  Qfidya^  means  important,  weighty^  as  Eph. 
V.  32. 

God  (^6^).     But  the  correct  reading  is  d?  who.f    The 

•  Dr.  BriggB,  Messiah  of  the  Apostles^  p.  229,  thinks  that  the  whole  church 
is  conceived  as  a  pillar  uplifting  a  platform  or  basis  {Hpalufta)  on  which  the 
truth  rests.  Besides  being  contrary  to  the  true  sense  of  HpaUafta^  this  explan- 
ation compels  a  yery  awkward  metaphor. 

t  Those  who  are  interested  in  the  details  of  the  controyersy  oyer  this  read- 
ing, may  consult  8.  P.  Tregelles,  An  Account  of  the  PrinUd  Text  of  the 
Oreek  Niew  Testament,  p.  165 ;  and  F.  H.  A.  Scrivener,  IntroducHon  to  the 
Criticism  of  the  New  Testament,  4th  ed.  Vol  IL  890-896. 


240  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ch.  m. 

antecedent  of  this  relative  is  not  myBtery^  as  if  Christ  were 
styled  "  the  mystery,"  but  the  relative  refers  to  Christ  as  an 
antecedent ;  and  the  abruptness  of  its  introduction  may  be 
explained  by  the  fact  that  it  and  the  words  which  follow 
were  probably  taken  from  an  ancient  credal  hymn.  In  the 
earlier  Christian  ages  it  was  not  unusual  to  employ  verse  or 
rhythm  for  theological  teaching  or  statement.  The  heretics 
propounded  their  peculiar  doctrines  in  psalms.  Clement  of 
Alexandria  wrote  a  hymn  in  honour  of  Christ  for  the  use  of 
catechumens,  and  Arius  embodied  his  heresy  in  his  ThcUi(ij 
which  was  sung  in  the  streets  and  taverns  of  Alexandria. 
The  Muratorian  Canon  was  probably  composed  in  verse.  In 
the  last  quarter  of  the  fourth  century,  there  are  two  metrical 
lists  of  Scripture  by  Amphilochius  and  Gregory  Nazianzen.* 

Was  manifest  (J^av€p&0fji).  More  correctly,  was  manu 
fested.  The  verb  is  used  J.  i.  2 ;  Heb.  ix.  26 ;  1  Pet.  i.  20 ; 
1  J.  iii.  5,  8,  of  the  historical  manifestation  of  Christ ;  and 
of  the  future  coming  of  Christ  in  Col.  iii.  4 ;  1  Pet.  v.  4 ; 
1  J.  iii.  2. 

In  the  flesh  (iv  aapicC).    Comp.  J.  i.  14 ;  IJ.  iv.  2 ;  2  J.  7; 

Rom.  i.  3;  viii.  3;  ix.  6.    ^dp^  flesh  only  here  in  Pastorals. 

Justified  in  the  Spirit  (jthKcudiSri  iv  irveiiuarC).  The  verb 
BiKaiovp^  so  familiar  in  Paul's  writings,  is  found  in  the  Past- 
orals only  here  and  Tit.  iii.  7.  Its  application  to  Christ  as 
the  subject  of  justification  does  not  appear  in  Paul.  Its 
meaning  here  is  vindicated^  indorsed^  as  Matt.  xi.  19  ;  L.  x.  29. 
Concerning  the  whole  phrase  it  is  to  be  said  :  (a)  That  the 
two  clauses,  man\fested  in  the  fleshy  justified  in  the  Spirit^ 
exhibit  a  contrast  between  two  aspects  of  the  life  of  Christ. 
(h)  That  iv  in  must  have  the  same  meaning  in  both  clauses. 
(<?)  That  meaning  is  not  instrumental,  6y,  nor  purely  modal^ 
expressing  the  kind  and  manner  of  Christ's  justification,  but 
rather  local  with  a  shade  of  modality.     It  expresses  in  each 

•  See  J.  B.  Lightfoot,  8.  Clement  of  Borne,  VoL  IL,  p.  405  fl. 


Cb.  m.]  THE  FIB8T  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  241 

case  a  peculiar  condition  which  accompanied  the  justification ; 
a  sphere  of  life  in  which  it  was  exhibited  and  which  gave 
character  to  it.  In  the  one  condition  or  sphere  (the  flesh) 
he  was  hated,  persecuted,  and  murdered.  In  the  other  (the 
Spirit)  he  was  triumphantly  vindicated.  See  further  the 
additional  note  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. 

Seen  of  angels  (&^0fi  077^X0^9).  Better,  appeared  unto 
or  showed  himself  to^  as  Matt.  xvii.  3  ;  L.  i.  11 ;  Acts  vii.  2 ; 
Heb.  ix.  28.  The  same  verb  is  used  of  the  appearance  of 
the  risen  Christ  to  different  persons  or  parties  (1  Cor.  xv. 
5-8).  The  reference  of  the  words  cannot  be  determined 
with  certainty.  They  seem  to  imply  some  great,  majestic 
occasion,  rather  than  the  angelic  manifestations  during 
Jesus'  earthly  life.  Besides,  on  these  occasions,  the  angels 
appeared  to  him,  not  he  to  them.  The  reference  is  probably 
to  his  appearance  in  the  heavenly  world  after  his  ascension, 
when  the  glorified  Christ,  having  been  triumphantly  vindi- 
cated in  his  messianic  work  and  trial,  presented  himself  to 
the  heavenly  hosts.  Comp.  Philip,  ii.  10 ;  Eph.  iii.  10,  and, 
in  the  latter  passage,  note  the  connection  with  ^^the  mys- 
tery," ver.  9. 

Was  preached  unto  the  Gentiles  (i/cfjpvxdv  ^  lOv&rtv). 
Better,  among  the  nations.  There  is  no  intention  of  emphas- 
ising the  distinction  between  the  Jews  and  other  nations. 

Was  believed  on  in  the  world  (hrurrevOt)  h  Kia^up).  For 
a  similar  construction  see  2  Th.  i.  10.  With  Christ  as  sub- 
ject this  use  of  hrurrevOr)  is  unique. 

Was  received  up  into  glory  (^av€\iifuf>0rf  iv  B6fy^.  Better, 
received  or  taken  up  in  glory.  *AvaXafifidveiv  is  the  formal 
term  to  describe  the  ascension  of  Christ  (see  Acts  i.  2,  22), 
and  the  reference  is  most  probably  to  that  event.  Comp. 
LXX,  2  K.  ii.  11,  of  Elijah,  and  Sir.  xlix.  14,  of  Enoch. 
*Ey  B6fy  in  glory :  with  attendant  circumstances  of  pomp  or 
majesty,  as  we  say  of  a  victorious  general,  ^^  he  entered  the 

VOL.  IT.  — 10 


242  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ch.  m. 

city  in  triumph.'*  This  usage  is  common  in  N.  T.  See 
Matt.  xvi.  27 ;  xxv.  81 ;  Mk.  viii.  88 ;  L.  ix.  81 ;  xii.  27 ; 
1  Cor.  XV.  48 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  7,  8, 11.* 


Additional  Note  on  III.  16. 

Christ's  existence  before  his  incarnation  was  purely  spiritual  (iv  i 
ftan).  He  was  in  the  form  of  God  (Philip.  iL  6)  :  He  was  the  effulgence 
of  God's  glory  and  the  express  image  of  his  substance  (Heb.  i.  8),  and 
God  is  spirit  (J.  iy.  24). 

From  this  condition  he  came  into  manifestation  in  the  flesh  (h  oopict ). 
He  became  man  and  entered  into  human  conditions  (Philip,  ii.  7,  8). 
Under  these  human  conditions  the  attributes  of  his  essential  spiritual  per- 
sonality were  yelled.  He  did  not  appear  to  men  what  he  really  was.  He 
was  not  recognised  by  them  as  he  who  '*  was  in  the  beginning  with  God  " 
(J.  i.  1,  2) ;  as  **  the  image  of  the  inyisible  God  "  (Col.  i.  15) ;  as  one  with 
God  (J.  X.  30 ;  xiy.  9) ;  as  he  who  had  all  power  in  heaven  and  earth 
(Matt,  xxviii.  18) ;  who  was  **  before  all  things  and  by  whom  all  things 
consist "  (Col.  i.  17) ;  who  was  "  the  king  of  the  ages  "  (1  Tim.  i.  17).  On 
the  contrary,  he  was  regarded  as  an  impostor,  a  usurper,  and  a  blasphemer. 
He  was  hated,  persecuted,  and  finally  murdered.  He  was  poor,  tempts**!, 
and  tried,  a  man  of  sorrows. 

The  justification  or  vindication  of  what  he  really  was  did  not  therefoie 
come  out  of  the  fleshly  sphere.  He  was  not  justified  in  the  ffesh.  It  came 
out  of  the  sphere  of  his  spiritual  being.  Glimpses  of  this  pneumatic  life 
(iv  ifKCv/iari)  flashed  out  during  his  life  in  the  flesh.  By  his  exalted  and 
spotless  character,  by  his  works  of  love  and  power,  by  his  words  of  au- 
thority, in  his  baptism  and  transfiguration,  he  was  vindicated  as  being 
what  he  essentially  was  and  what  he  openly  claimed  to  be.  These  justifi- 
cations were  revelations,  expressions,  and  witnesses  of  his  original,  essential 
spiritual  and  divine  quality ;  of  the  native  glory  which  he  had  with  the 
Father  before  the  world  was.    It  was  the  Spirit  that  publicly  indorsed  him 

*  This  explanation  destroys  the  chronological  order,  since  the  appearing 
to  angels,  the  preaching  among  the  nations,  and  the  being  believed  on  in  the 
world,  followed  the  ascension.  But  I  am  not  sure  that  the  preservation  of 
the  chronological  order  is  absolutely  essential,  or  that  it  might  not  have  been 
violated  in  the  credal  hymn.  The  fact  of  the  formal  use  of  dpaXafifidpeiv  by 
Luke  to  describe  the  ascension  seems  to  me  to  be  significant,  especially  in 
view  of  the  nimierous  and  striking  affinities  of  vocabulary  in  Luke,  Acts,  and 
the  Pastorals.  Besides,  there  is  absolutely  nothing  else  to  which  the  word 
can  naturally  be  referred  here.  The  explanation  to  which  von  Soden  in- 
clines, that  Christ  was  taken  up  in  glory  by  Christians,  either  in  the  ascrip- 
tion of  glory  to  him  or  in  the  glory  thereby  imparted  to  men,  seems  most 
unnatural  and  forced. 


Ch.  IV.]  the  first  epistle  to  TDfOTHT.  248 

(J.  i.  32,  33) :  the  words  which  he  spake  were  spirit  and  life  (J.  yi.  63) : 
he  cast  oat  demons  in  the  Spirit  of  God  (Matt.  xii.  28) :  his  whole  earthly 
manifestation  was  in  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  These  Tarious  demon- 
strations decisiyely  justified  his  claims  in  the  eyes  of  many.  His  disciples 
confessed  him  as  the  Christ  of  Grod  (L.  ix.  20)  :  some  of  the  people  said 
**  this  is  the  Christ "  (J.  vii.  41) :  others  suspected  that  he  was  such 
(J.  iv.  29).  Whether  or  not  men  acknowledged  his  claims,  they  felt  the 
power  of  his  unique  personality.  They  were  astonished  at  his  teaching, 
for  he  taught  them  as  one  haying  authority  (Matt.  yii.  28,  29). 

Then  followed  the  more  decisiye  yindication  in  his  resurrection  from 
the  dead.  Here  the  work  of  the  Spirit  is  distinctly  recognised  by  Paul, 
Rom.  i.  4.  See  also  Rom.  yiii.  11.  In  the  period  between  his  resurrection 
and  ascension  his  pneumatic  life  came  into  clearer  manifestation,  and 
added  to  the  yindication  furnished  in  his  life  and  resurrection.  He 
seemed  to  liye  on  the  border-line  between  the  natural  and  the  spiritual 
world,  and  the  powers  of  the  spiritual  world  were  continually  crossing  the 
line  and  reyealing  themselves  in  him. 

In  the  apostolic  preaching,  the  appeal  to  the  yindication  of  Christ  by 
the  Spirit  is  clear  and  unequivocal.  The  spiritual  nourishment  of  be- 
lievers is  '*  the  supply  of  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ "  (Philip,  i.  19) :  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  called  ''the  Spirit  of  Christ"  (Rom.  yiiL  9;  GaL  iv.  6) : 
Paul  identifies  Christ  personally  with  the  Spirit  (2  Cor.  iiL  17) ;  and  in 
Rom.  yiii  9,  10,  «« Spirit  of  God,"  "Spirit  of  Christ,"  and  "Christ"  are 
used  as  convertible  terms.  The  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ  is  the 
test  and  yindication  of  belonging  to  Christ  (Rom.  yiii.  9).  Thus,  though 
put  to  death  in  the  flesh,  in  the  Spirit  Christ  is  vindioa^  as  the  Son  of 
Ood,  the  Christ  of  God,  the  manifestation  of  God. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

1.  Now  (Sd).  Better  hvt,  since  there  is  a  contrast  with 
the  preceding  confession  of  the  norm  of  faith. 

Expressly  (JniTm).    N.  T.^    ®LXX.    In  express  words. 

In  the  latter  times  (iv  vardpov;  Kcupoisi).  The  phrase  only 
here.  For  iccupo^  particular  seoMon  or  junetur^^  see  on  Matt, 
xii.  1 ;  Acts  i.  7.  Not  the  same  as  iv  iax^Tcui^  ^fjJpoi^  in  the 
Uut  days^  2  Tim.  iii.  1,  which  denotes  the  period  closing  the 
present  aeon,  and  immediately  preceding  the  parousia ;  while 
this  signifies  merely  a  time  that  is  future  to  the  writer.    There 


244  WORD  STUDIES   IN   THE   NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ch.  IV. 

is  not  the  intense  sense  of  the  nearness  of  Christ's  coming 
which  characterises  Paul.  The  writer  does  not  think  of  hU 
present  as  ^^  the  latter  days." 

Some  (rti^).  Not,  as  ch.  i.  8,  the  heretical  teachers,  but 
those  whom  they  mislead. 

Shall  depart  from  the  faith  (airoar^ovrai  rrj^  irUrr^s^^. 
The  phrase  only  here.  The  verb  in  Paul  only  2  Cor.  xii.  8. 
Quite  frequent  in  Luke  and  Acts.  The  kindred  noun  airoa^ 
TcurCa  (Acts  xxi.  21 ;  2  Th.  ii.  3)  is  almost  literally  tran- 
scribed in  our  apostesy. 

Seducing  (irXdvoti^').  Primarily,  wandering^  roving.  'O 
irXdvo^  a  vagabond^  hence  deceiver  or  seducer.  See  2  J.  7, 
and  comp.  6  irXap&p  the  deceiver^  used  of  Satan,  Apoc.  xii.  9  ; 
XX.  10 ;  TO  TTveufia  rrj^  irXdprj^  the  spirit  of  error^  1  J.  iv.  6. 
Once  in  Paul,  2  Cor.  vi.  8,  and  in  LXX,  Job  xix.  4 ;  Jer. 
xxiii.  82.    Evil  spirits  animating  the  false  teachers  are  meant. 

Doctrines  of  devils  (SiBcLaKaXCcu^  hcuyLovUov).  Better, 
teachings  of  demons.  (>omp.  Jas.  iii.  15.  At&ur/iraX^  teach' 
ing  often  in  Pastorals.  A  few  times  in  Paul.  See  on  1  Tim. 
i.  10.  liaifiSpiov  demon  only  here  in  Pastorals.  Very  fre- 
quent in  Luke :  in  Paul  only  1  Cor.  x.  20,  21.  Teachings 
proceeding  from  or  inspired  by  demons.  The  working  of 
these  evil  spirits  is  here  specially  concerned  with  striking  at 
the  true  teaching  which  underlies  godliness.  It  is  impossible 
to  say  what  particular  form  of  false  teaching  is  alluded  to. 

2.  Speaking  lies  in  hypocrisy  (iv  tnro/epla-ei  y^Bo\6yo>v). 
Wrong.  Rend.,  through  the  hypocrisy  of  men  that  speak  lies. 
^TiroKplai^  hypocrisy  once  in  Paul,  Gal.  ii.  18,  see  note.  See 
also  on  Matt,  xxiii.  13.  The  phrase  hf  {nro/cpCa-ei  only  here. 
"itevBoXiyo^  speaking  lies^  N.  T.®.     ^LXX.     Rare  in  Class. 

Having  their  conscience  seared  with  a  hot  iron  (/cacava- 
TffpiaafAdiwv  riiv  IhCav  avv^lhfi<nv).     Better,  branded  in  theif 


Ch.  IV.]  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  246 

own  conscience.  With  a  hot  iron  is  superfluous.  The  verb 
N.  T.^.  ^LXX,  ^Class.  The  metaphor  is  from  the  practice 
of  branding  slaves  or  criminals,  the  latter  on  the  brow.  These 
deceivers  are  not  acting  under  delusion,  but  deliberately,  and 
against  their  conscience.  They  wear  the  form  of  godliness, 
and  contradict  their  profession  by  their  crooked  conduct 
(2  Tim.  iii.  5).  The  brand  is  not  on  their  brow,  but  on  their 
conscience.     Comp.  Tit.  i.  15;  iii.  11. 

3.  Forbidding  to  marry  and  commanding  to  abstain 
from  meats  (^K<xikv6vT(ov  yafxeip^  air^ea-Oai  fipfOfidrwp). 
KooXtkiP^  properly  to  hinder  or  check.  *Airix^a-0ai  to  hold  one's 
self  off.  In  Paul,  1  Th.  iv.  8  ;  v.  22  ;  Philem.  15.  Com- 
manding  is  not  expressed,  but  is  implied  in  forbidding. 
^^  Bidding  not  to  marry  and  (bidding)  to  abstain  from  meats.'* 
The  ascetic  tendencies  indicated  by  these  prohibitions  devel- 
oped earlier  than  these  Epistles  among  the  Essenes,  an  ascetic 
Jewish  brotherhood  on  the  shores  of  the  Dead  Sea,  who  repud- 
iated marriage  except  as  a  necessity  for  preserving  the  race, 
and  allowed  it  only  under  protest  and  under  stringent  regu- 
lations. They  also  abstained  strictly  from  wine  and  animal 
food.  This  sect  was  in  existence  in  the  lifetime  of  our  Lord. 
Strong  traces  of  its  influence  appear  in  the  heresy  assailed  in 
Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Colossians.  The  Christian  body  received 
large  accessions  from  it  after  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem 
(70  A.D.).  The  prohibitions  above  named  were  imposed  by 
the  later  Gnosticism  of  the  second  century. 

Hath  created  (iicrurtv).  A  common  Pauline  word.  Only 
here  in  the  Pastorals. 

To  be  received  (cfe  fieraXiy/i^v).  lAt.  for  participation. 
N.  T.^.     ^LXX.     It  occurs  in  Plato  and  Aristotle. 

Of  them  which  believe  and  know  the  truth  (T0Z9  irur- 
rok  Ka\  hreiVfOKiai  rr^v  aXrjdeuiv^.  The  dative  depends  on 
created  for  participation^  and  should  be  rendered  ^^for  them 
which  believe,"  etc.,  marking  those  for  whom  the  food  was 


246  WORD  STUDIBS  IN  THB  KEW  TESTAMENT.      [C&  IV. 

created.  The  A.  V.  misses  this  by  the  rendering  to  he  receited 
of  (iy).  Hurrah  and  hreiKvmKiai  do  not  denote  two  classes, 
but  one.  Those  who  believe  are  described  as  those  who  have 
full  knowledge  of  the  truth. 

4.  Creature  (jcrCaiud).  Not  in  Paul.  See  Jas.  i.  18; 
Apoc.  V.  13  ;  viii.  9.  A  created  thing.  For  icrlav;  creation  or 
creature^  frequent  in  Paul,  see  on  Rom.  viii.  19 ;  2  Cor.  v.  17 ; 
Col.  i.  15.  Kr^/Aa  in  LXX,  Wisd.  ix.  2 ;  xiii.  5 ;  xiv.  11 ; 
Sir.  xxxviii.  34 ;  3  Mace.  v.  11 . 

Refused  {hir6fikfirov).  Lit.  ihroum  away.  N.  T.^.  In 
ecclesiastical  writings,  excommunicated.  On  the  whole  verse, 
comp.  Acts  X.  15 ;  Rom.  xi.  15 ;  1  Cor.  x.  25,  26,  30,  31. 

5.  It  is  sanctified  (ariid^ercu).  Not  declared  holy,  but 
made  holy.  The  declaration  confirms  the  last  clause  of  ver.  4. 
Thanksgiving  to  God  has  a  sanctifying  effect.  The  food 
in  itself  has  no  moral  quality  (Rom.  xiv.  14),  but  acquires  a 
holy  quality  by  its  consecration  to  God ;  by  being  acknowl- 
edged as  God's  gift,  and  partaken  of  as  nourishing  the  life 
for  God's  service.  Comp.  Paul's  treatment  of  the  unbeliev- 
ing husband  and  the  believing  wife,  1  Cor.  vii.  14. 

By  the  word  of  God  (&^  Xo7ot)  0€ov).  That  is,  by  the 
word  of  God  as  used  in  the  prayer.  Scripture  is  not  called 
"  the  Word  of  God."  The  Word  of  God  includes  much  more 
than  Scripture :  but  Scripture  contains  the  Word  of  God,  and 
the  thanksgiving  at  table  was  in  the  words  of  Scripture.  See 
Ps.  cxlv.  15, 16.  The  custom  of  grace  at  meat  appears  1  Sam. 
ix.  13.  Christ  blessed  the  loaves  and  fishes  (Matt.  xiv.  19 ; 
XV.  36)  :  Paul  on  the  ship  gave  thanks  for  the  meal  which 
the  seamen  ate  (Acts  xxvii.  85).  'EwciJfew  prayer^  see  on 
eh.  ii.  1. 

6.  if  thou  put  the  brethren  in  remembrance  of  these 
things  (jaxha  {nroriO^/Aevo^  roU  aSeX^ofe).  The  verb  only 
Jiere  and  Rom.  xvi.  4.     Lit.  to  put  under;  so  almost  without 


CH.  IV.]  THE  FI&8T  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  241 

exception  in  LXX.  See,  for  instance,  Gen.  xxviii.  18 ;  xlvii. 
29 ;  Ex.  xvii.  12.  So  Rom.  xvi.  4.  Hence,  metaphorically, 
to  suffffeatt  which  is,  literally,  to  carry  or  lay  under.  Tavra 
these  things  are  those  mentioned  vv.  4, 5.  In  the  Pastorals  it 
is  only  here  that  aBeX^i  brethren  means  the  members  of  the 
church  to  whose  superintendent  the  letter  is  addressed.  In 
2  Tim.  iv.  21,  they  are  the  Christians  of  the  church  from 
which  the  letter  comes ;  in  1  Tim.  vi.  2,  Christians  in  gen- 
eral ;  and  in  1  Tim.  v.  1,  without  any  ecclesiastical  sense. 

Minister  of  Jesus  Christ  (Biokovo^  Xpurrov  ^Itfo-ov).  Rend- 
ering Christ  himself  a  service  by  setting  himself  against 
ascetic  errors.  For  Suucovo^  minister  see  on  ch.  iii.  8.  Here 
in  the  general  sense  of  servant^  without  any  official  meaning. 
Paul's  more  usual  phrase  is  servant  of  Ood:  servant  (^Buiscovo^^ 
of  Christ  twice,  and  BidKovo^  'Ii/o-oO  Xpurrov  not  at  i^.  Paid 
uses  S0SX09  bondservant  with  Jestis  Christ.  See  2  Cor.  xi.  23 ; 
Col.  i.  7 ;  and  comp.  Rom.  i.  1;  Gal.  i.  10 ;  Philip,  i.  1. 

Nourished  up  (ivrp^iievosi).  Better,  nourishing  thyself. 
N.  T.^.  ^LXX.  The  participle  indicates  the  means  by 
which  Timothy  may  become  a  good  minister.  Comp.  Heb. 
V.  12-14. 

In  the  words  of  faith.  The  words  in  which  the  faith  — 
the  contents  of  belief — finds  expression.  Comp.  ch.  vi.  8; 
2  Tim.  i.  18.  The  phrase  only  here.  Paul  has  tA  (irjiua  t^ 
irUrreoB^  the  word  of  the  faiths  Rom.  x.  8. 

Whereunto  thou  hast  attained  (^  iraptj/eoXovOrfKa^i). 
Wrong.  Rend.,  which  thou  hast  closely  followed.  Comp. 
2  Tim.  iii.  10.  The  verb  means,  primarily,  to  follow  beside^ 
to  attend  closely.  In  this  literal  sense  not  in  N.  T.  To  attend 
to  or  follow  up^  as  a  disease.  So  Plato,  Rep.  406  B,  irapoKoX- 
OV0&P  r^  vo<ri^fiaTi  Bava^lfup  perpetually  tending  a  mortal  dis- 
ease. To  follow  up  a  history  or  a  succession  of  incidents,  as 
L.  i.  8.  ^P.  The  writer  means  that  Timothy,  as  a  disciple, 
has  closely  attended  to  his  course  of  Christian  instruction. 


248  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NEW  TBBTAMENT.      [Ch.  IV 

7.  Shun  (irafHUTov).  Comp.  1  Tim.  v.  11 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  23 ; 
Tit.  iii.  10.  ^P.  The  primary  meaning  is  to  ask  as  a  favour 
(Mk.  XV.  6 ;  Heb.  xii.  19).  Mostly  in  this  sense  in  LXX, 
as  1  Sam.  xx.  6,  28.  To  deprecate ;  to  prevent  the  conse- 
quences of  an  act  by  protesting  against  and  disavowing  it,  as 
S  Mace.  vi.  27.  To  heg  off^  get  excused^  as  L.  xiv.  18,  19 ; 
4  Mace.  xi.  2.  To  decline^  refv^e^  avoids  as  here,  Acts  xxv.  11 ; 
Heb.  xii.  25. 

Profane.  See  on  ch.  i.  9,  and  comp.  ch.  vi.  20 ;  2  Tim. 
ii.  16;  Heb.  xii.  16. 

Old  wives'  (7/wk»&i9).  N.  T.^  <>LXX.  From  Ypaw 
an  old  woman^  and  elBo^form. 

Fables  (/ivdoi;?).  See  on  ch.  i.  4,  and  comp.  2  Tim.  iv.  4 ; 
Tit.  i.  14  ;  2  Pet.  1.  16. 

Exercise  (yvfiva^e).  ^P.  Only  here  in  Pastorals.  Heb. 
V.  14 ;  xii.  11 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  14.  From  yvfiink  naked.  In  Class, 
of  training  naked  in  gymnastic  exercises ;  also,  metaphoric- 
ally, of  training  for  or  practising  an  art  or  profession. 

8.  Bodily  exercise  (Ji  a-m/jLaTitcif  yvfivaa-U).  With  yvfi- 
vaaia  comp.  yvfiva^e^  ver.  7.  N.  T.^.  l,wfAaTix<k  bodily  only 
here  and  L.  iii.  22.  ^LXX.  The  adverb  atofiariKW  bodily^ 
cm«.  Col.  ii.  9.  The  words  are  to  be  taken  in  their  literal 
sense  as  referring  to  physical  training  in  the  palaestra — box- 
ing, racing,  etc.  Comp.  1  Cor.  ix.  24-27.  Some,  however, 
find  in  them  an  allusion  to  current  ascetic  practices ;  against 
which  is  the  statement  that  such  exercise  is  profitable^  though 
only  for  a  little. 

Proflteth  little  (wpoi  oX^oi/  iarlv  i^Tuyuoii).  Lit.  u  profit" 
able  for  a  little.  The  phrase  irpo^  oXlyov  only  here  and  Jas. 
V.  14.  In  the  latter  passage  it  means  for  a  litUe  while. 
Comp.  Heb.  xii.  10,  irpii  oKiya^  4iijdpa^  for  a  few  days. 
According  to  some,  this  is  the  meaning  here;   but  against 


Ch.  IV  ]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  249 

this  is  the  antithesis  irpo^  irdvra  unto  all  things.  The  mean- 
ing is  rather,  the  use  of  the  athlete's  training  extends  to  only 
a  few  things.  'ft^Ai/i09  tM^tU  or  profibahle^  only  in  Pastor- 
als.    Comp.  2  Tim.  iii.  16 ;  Tit.  iii.  8.     ^LXX. 

Godliness  (evaifieid).  See  on  ch.  ii.  2,  and  Introduction, 
VI. 

Having  promise  (iirayyeXiap  ^x^vaa).  The  exact  phrase 
only  here.  Comp.  2  Cor.  vii.  1 ;  Heb.  vii.  6.  The  partici- 
ple is  explanatory,  since  it  has  promise.  For  iirayyeXla  prom- 
ise see  on  Acts  i.  4. 

The  life  that  now  is  (?a)^  T179  iw).  According  to  the 
strict  Greek  idiom,  life  the  now.  This  idiom  and  the  follow- 
ing, T^  fieWowTTf^  N.  T.9.  The  phrase  6  vvp  omv  the  present 
aeon,  1  Tim.  vi.  17;  2  Tim.  iv.  10 ;  Tit.  ii.  12.  'O  amv  ofriw 
this  aeon,  a  few  times  in  the  Gospels,  often  in  Paul,  nowhere 
else.  We  have  o  aimv  6  iUWmv  the  aeon  which  is  to  be,  and 
6  aUiv  6  ify)(6yi£uo^  or  iwepxf^fji^vo^  the  aeon  which  is  coming  on, 
in  the  Gospels,  once  in  Paul  (Eph.  ii.  7),  and  in  Hebrews 
once,  lUWoav  amv  without  the  article.  'Ev  r^  Ka4,p^  rovrip  in 
this  time,  of  the  present  as  contrasted  with  the  future  life, 
Mk.  X.  30;  L.  xviii.  30.  'O  vuv  xaipik  the  now  time,  in  the 
same  relation,  Rom.  viii.  18.  For  fo>^  life  see  on  J.  i.  4. 
The  force  of  the  genitive  with  iirayyeXCa  promise  may  be  ex- 
pressed by  for.  Godliness  involves  a  promise  for  this  life 
and  for  the  next ;  but  for  this  life  as  it  reflects  the  heavenly 
life,  is  shaped  and  controlled  by  it,  and  bears  its  impress. 
Godliness  has  promise  for  the  present  life  becatise  it  has 
promise  for  the  life  which  is  to  come.  Only  the  life  which 
is  in  Christ  Jesus  (2  Tim.  i.  1)  is  life  indeed,  1  Tim.  vi.  19. 
Comp.  1  Pet.  iii.  10 ;  1  Cor.  iii.  21-23. 

10.  Therefore  (cfc  tovto^.  More  correctly,  to  this  end;  or 
with  a  view  to  this. 

We  labour  and  strive  (/coiri&fiev  ical  ay<»vii6fie0a}.  Both 
Pauline  words.     See  on  Col.  i.  29,  where  the  two  are  found 


250  WOBD  8TUDIEB  IK  THE  KEW  TESTAMENT.      [Cb   IV. 

together  as  here.  Also  on  tahrov  labour^  1  Th.  i.  3,  and 
K<yin&vT(K  labouring^  1  Th.  v.  12.  Comp.  ch.  v.  17,  and 
2  Tim.  ii.  6.  Both  words  denote  strenuous  and  painful 
effort.*  The  teal  has  an  ascensive  force :  ^^we  labour,  yea 
struggle." 

We  trust  in  (rfXirUafiep  hrl).  Better,  have  set  our  hope  an. 
The  verb  with  M  upon  in  Pastorals,  in  Paul,  Rom.  xv.  12, 
a  citation,  and  in  1  Pet.  i.  IS. 

12.  Youth  (v&hrrm^.  ^P.  See  L.  xviii.  21.  Acts  xxvi.  4. 
See  Introduction,  VII.  Timothy  was  probably  from  88  to  40 
years  old  at  this  time. 

In  word  (^i^  Xcfy^i).  Including  teaching  and  verbal  inter- 
course of  every  kind. 

Conversation  (avaarpo^').  Comp.  Gal.  i.  18 ;  Eph.  iv.  22 ; 
Jas.  iii.  13.  A  favourite  word  with  Peter.   See  on  1  Pet.  i.  15. 

in  spirit.    Omit. 

Purity  (jatpfUf).     Only  here  and  ch.  v.  2.    'AT^fe  pure^ 

1  Tim.  V.  22 ;  Tit.  ii.  6.  In  Paul,  2  Cor.  viii.  11 ;  xi.  2 ;  Philip, 
iv.  8.     Also  in  James,  Peter,  and  Ist  John.     'Ayvdrrf^  purity^ 

2  Cor.  vi.  6 ;  xi.  8.  ^LXX,  ^Class.  'Ayink  always  with  a 
moral  sense ;  not  limited  to  sins  of  the  flesh,  but  covering 
purity  in  motives  as  well  as  in  acts.  In  1  J.  iii.  8,  of  Christ. 
In  2  Cor.  xi.  2,  of  virgin  purity.  In  Jas.  iii.  17,  as  a  char- 
acteristic of  heavenly  wisdom.  'Ayi/w  purely  (Philip,  i.  17), 
of  preaching  the  gospel  with  unmixed  motives.  The  verb 
ayvlfyiv  to  purify^  which  in  LXX  is  used  only  of  ceremonial 
purification,  has  that  meaning  in  four  of  the  seven  instances 
in  N.  T.  (J.  xi.  56 ;  Acts  xxi.  24,  26 ;  xxiv.  18).  In  the 
others  (Jas.  iv.  8 ;  1  Pet.  i.  22 ;  1  J.  iii.  8)  it  is  used  of 
purifying  the  heart  and  soul. 

*  Holtzmann,  von  Soden,  WeLas,  and  Ellicott,  instead  of  d7WFi^/iff^  im 
9triv€<,  read  ivtilii^imBa  im  tuffer  reproach. 


Cb.  IV.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLB  TO  TIMOTHY.  251 

18.  To  reading  (^ItvayvAaei).  Three  times  in  N.  T.  See 
Acts  xiii.  15 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  14.  The  verb  avayivwrxeiv  usually 
of  public  reading.  See  on  L.  iv.  16.  So  in  LXX.  In  post- 
classical  Greek,  sometimes  of  reading  aloud  with  comments. 
See  Epictetus,  Diss.  8,  23,  20.  Dr.  Hatch  says  :  ^^  It  is  prob- 
able that  this  practice  of  reading  with  comments  .  .  .  may 
account  for  the  coordination  of  ^  reading '  with  ^  exhortation ' 
and  ^teaching'  in  1  Tim.  iv.  18." 

Exhortation  (rg  irapoicXiTcrei).  Often  in  Paul.  See  on 
eansolatian^  L.  vi.  24,  eofitfoft,  Acts  ix.  81,  and  amforUr^ 
J.  xiv.  16. 

14.  Neglect  {kiUUC).  Rare  in  N.  T.  Only  Matt.  xxii. 
5 ;  Heb.  ii.  8 ;  viii.  9. 

The  gift  that  is  in  thee  (^vhaoix^^V^'^^^'  Comp. 
2  Tim.  i.  6.  Xdpiafia  gift  is  a  distinctively  Pauline  word, 
being  found  only  three  times  outside  of  Paul's  Epistles,  and 
^LXX,  ^Class.  See  on  Rom.  i.  11.  That  is  in  thee^  comp. 
r^  ip  col  irCareto^  the  faith  that  is  in  thee^  2  Tim.  i.  5.  The 
meaning  is  the  special  inward  endowment  which  qualified 
Timothy  for  exhortation  and  teaching,  and  which  was  directly 
imparted  by  the  Holy  Spirit.* 

By  prophecy  (Si^  irpoi^relai).  See  on  1  Tim.  i.  18. 
npo^T6^9  is  genitive,  not  accusative.  The  meaning  is  hy 
the  medium  of  prophecy.  The  reference  is  to  prophetic  intim- 
ation given  to  Paul  concerning  the  selection  of  Timothy  for 
the  ministerial  office.  These  prophecies  were  given  by  the 
Holy  Spirit  who  bestowed  the  "gift";  so  that  the  gift  itself 

*  After  carefully  atndying  Holtzmann's  elaborate  attempt  to  prove  that 
xifMiiA  means  office  conferred  hy  ordination^  I  am  unable  to  see  in  it  any- 
thing but  a  most  ingenious  piece  of  special  pleading.  There  is  absolutely  no 
instance  of  the  use  of  the  word  in  that  sense.  The  meaning  given  above  is 
confirmed  by  Paulas  usage  as  well  as  by  that  of  Justin  Biartyr,  Clement  of 
Alexandria,  TertuUian,  Origen,  and  Eusebios.  *Br^o2  in  thee  cannot  be 
wrenched  into  thy  by  references  to  2  Tim.  L  6  and  Biatt.  vi.  23.  ''ibe 
office  that  is  in  thee  '*  is  quite  inadmiaalble. 


252  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THB  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ch.  IV. 

and  the  prophecy  concurred  in  attesting  the  candidate  for 
ordination. 

With  the  laying  on  of  the  hands  (fierit  iTnOda&o^  r&v 
X€ip&v).  Merit  with  implies  that  the  prophetic  intimations 
were  in  some  way  repeated  or  emphasised  in  connection  with 
the  ceremony  of  ordination.  We  note  the  association  of 
prophecy  with  ordination  in  the  setting  apart  of  Paul  and 
Barnabas  (Acts  xiii.  2,  3) ;  so  that  the  case  of  Timothy  has 
an  analogue  in  that  of  Paul  himself.*  ^EiriOecK  laying  on^ 
impontioit,  also  Acts  viii.  18 ;  2  Tim.  i.  6 ;  Heb.  vi.  2,  in  each 
case  with  of  hands.  ^^  The  custom/'  says  Lange,  ^^  is  as  old 
as  the  race.''  The  Biblical  custom  rests  on  the  conception  of 
the  hand  as  the  organ  of  mediation  and  transference.  The 
priest  laid  his  hand  on  the  head  of  the  bullock  or  goat  (Lev. 
i.  4)  to  show  that  the  guilt  of  the  people  was  transferred. 
The  hand  was  laid  on  the  head  of  a  son,  to  indicate  the  trans- 
mission of  the  hereditary  blessing  (Gen.  xlviii.  14) ;  upon 
one  appointed  to  a  position  of  authority,  as  Joshua  (Num. 
xxvii.  18-23)  ;  upon  the  sick  or  dead  in  token  of  miraculous 
power  to  heal  or  to  restore  to  life  (2  K.  iv.  34).  So  Christ 
(Mk.  vi.  6;  L.  iv.  40).  In  the  primitive  Christian  church 
the  laying  on  of  hands  signified  the  imparting  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  the  newly-baptized  (Acts  viii.  17 ;  xix.  6 ;  comp. 
Heb.  vi.  2).  Hands  were  laid  upon  the  seven  (Acts  vi.  6). 
But  the  form  of  consecration  in  ordination  varied.  No  one 
mode  has  been  universal  in  the  church,  and  no  authoritative 
written  formula  exists.  In  the  Alexandrian  and  Abyssinian 
churches  it  was  by  breathing :  in  the  Eastern  church  gener- 
ally, by  lifting  up  the  hands  in  benediction :  in  the  Armenian 
church,  by  touching  the  dead  hand  of  the  predecessor :  in  the 
early  Celtic  church,  by  the  transmission  of  relics  or  pastoral 
staff :  in  the  Latin  church,  by  touching  the  head. 

Of  the  presbytery  (rov  Trpea-fivrepCov).  The  word  is  found 
in  L.  xxii.  66,  where  it  denotes  the  body  of  representative 

*  Holtzmann  says  that  this  passage  in  Acts  is  the  basis  of  the  ordinatioiv- 
picture  presented  here. 


Ch.  IV.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  258 

elders  of  the  people  in  the  Sanhedrim,  as  distinguished  from 
the  two  other  constituents  of  that  body — the  chief  priests  and 
scribes.  Similarly  Acts  xxii.  5.  Here  of  the  college  or  fra- 
ternity of  Christian  elders  in  the  place  where  Timothy  was 
ordained.  The  word  is  frequent  in  the  Epistles  of  Ignatius.* 
According  to  this,  Timothy  was  not  ordained  by  a  Bishop. 
Bishop  and  Presbyter  are  not  identical.  In  2  Tim.  i.  6  we 
read,  ^^by  the  laying  on  of  my  hands."  The  inconsistency  is 
usually  explained  by  saying  that  Paul  was  associated  with  the 
Presbyters  in  the  laying  on  of  hands. 

15.  Meditate  (/i€\^a).  Only  here  and  Acts  iv.  25  (cita- 
tion). Often  in  Class,  and  LXX.  Most  translators  reject 
the  A.  V.  Tneditate^  and  substitute  be  diligent  in,  or  practi%e^  or 
take  care  for.  Meditate^  however,  is  legitimate,  although  in 
Class,  the  word  commonly  appears  in  one  of  the  other  senses. 
The  connection  between  the  different  meanings  is  apparent. 
Uxercise  or  practice  applied  to  the  mind  becomes  thinking  or 
meditation.  In  LXX  it  represents  seven  Hebrew  equivalents, 
and  signifies  to  meditate^  talk  of  murmur^  delight  one^%  %e1f  tn, 
attend  to.  Often  to  meditate^  Josh.  i.  8 ;  Ps.  i.  2 ;  ii.  1 ; 
xxxvii.  12;  Ixxii.  6;  Sir.  vi.  7.  Meditation  is  a  talking 
within  the  mind,  and  issues  in  speech:  hence  to  speaks  as 
Ps.  xxxiv.  28 ;  xxxvi.  30 ;  Isa.  Ixix.  3.  Similarly,  Xdyo^ 
sig^nifies  both  reason  and  discourse.  In  Lat.  meditarij  ^^to 
reflect,"  is  also  "to  exercise  in,"  "to  practise,"  as  Virgil,  JEel. 
i.  2.  In  the  Vulg.  meditabor  is  the  translation  of  murmur  or 
mourn  in  Isa.  xxxviii.  14.  The  Heb.  rxfj  means  to  murmur^ 
whisper ;  hence  the  inner  whispering  of  the  heart ;  hence  to 
thinks  meditate^  consider^  as  Ps.  Ixiii.  7 ;  Ixxviii.  13. 

Give  thyself  wholly  to  them  (^i^  rovrot?  XaOC).  Lit.  be  in 
these  things.  The  phrase  N.  T.^.  The  only  parallel  in  LXX 
is  Prov.  xxiii.  17.  The  meaning  is  that  he  is  to  throw  him- 
self  wholly  into  his  ministry.  Comp.  "  totus  in  illis,"  Horace, 
Sat.  i.  9,  2. 

« JE^.  U ;  Magnts.  U,  ziii ;  Trail  ii,  vii ;  Pkilad.  iv,  v,  yii ;  Smfm.  Tiii,  xu. 


254  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  V. 

Profiting  (wpoxoir^^.  Better,  advance  or  progre%%.  Only 
here  and  Philip,  i.  12.  The  verb  wpotahrreiv  in  2  Tim.  ii.  16 ; 
iii.  9,  13.  In  LXX,  see  Sir.  li.  17 ;  2  Mace.  viii.  8.  The 
figure  in  the  word  is  uncertain,  but  is  supposed  to  be  that  of 
pioneers  cutting  (^xdirm)  a  way  before  Qn-po)  an  army,  and  so 
furthering  its  advance.  The  opposite  is  iytahrreip  to  cut  into^ 
throw  obstacles  in  the  way^  and  so  hinder.  See  Gral.  v.  7 ;  1 
Th.  ii.  18 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  7. 

16.  Take  heed  (hrex^)-  Only  here  in  Pastorals,  and  once 
in  Paul,  Philip,  ii.  16.  Quite  frequent  in  LXX.  Lit.  hold 
upon^  fasten  thy  attention  on,  as  L.  xiv.  7 ;  Acts  iii.  5 ;  xix. 
22.  In  LXX,  in  the  sense  of  apply^  as  Job  xviii.  2 ;  xxx.  26 ; 
or  forbear^  refrain^  as  1  K.  xxii.  6,  15.  In  Philip,  ii.  16,  to 
hold  out  or  presenJb^  a  sense  which  is  found  only  in  Class. 

Unto  thyself  and  unto  the  doctrine  (aeavr^  xal  rg  &&ur- 
icaXiif).  Better,  to  thyself  and  to  thy  teaching.  The  order  is 
significant.     Personality  goes  before  teaching. 

Continue  in  them  (ivifieve  avrot?).  See  on  Rom.  yi.  1. 
In  LXX  only  Ex.  xii.  89.  'Avrofc  is  neuter,  referring  to  these 
things^  ver.  15.  A.  V.  in  them  is  indefinite  and  ambiguous. 
Better,  eontintte  in  these  things. 


CHAPTER   r. 

1.  Rebulce  not  an  elder  (irpea/Svr^p^  f»^  hmrX'fi^^. 
The  verb  N.  T.^.  ^LXX.  Originally  to  lay  on  blows; 
hence  to  castigate  with  words.  Tlpeafivrepo^  elder ^  ^P., 
but  frequent  in  Gospels,  Acts,  and  Apocalypse.  Modem  crit- 
ical opinion  has  largely  abandoned  the  view  that  the  original 
Christian  polity  was  an  imitation  of  that  of  the  Synagogue. 
The  secular  and  religiQus  authorities  of  the  Jewish  commim- 
ities,  at  least  in  purely  Jewish  localities,  were  the  same ;  a 
fact  which  is  against  the  probability  that  the  polity  was 
directly  transferred  to  the  Christian  church.     The  preroga- 


ch.v.]  the  first  epistle  to  timothy.  256 

tives  of  the  Jewish  elders  have  nothing  corresponding  with 
them  in  extent  in  the  Christian  community.  Functions 
which  emerge  later  in  the  Jewish-Christian  communities  of 
Palestine  do  not  exist  in  the  first  Palestinian-Christian  soci- 
ety. At  the  most,  as  Weizsacker  observes,  it  could  only  be 
a  question  of  borrowing  a  current  name.* 

Modern  criticism  compels  us,  I  think,  to  abandon  the 
view  of  the  identity  of  Bishop  and  Presbyter  which  has 
obtained  such  wide  acceptance,  especially  among  English 
scholars,  through  the  discussions  of  Lightfoot  and  Hatch,  f 
The  testimony  of  Clement  of  Rome  (^JEp.  ad  Corinth.}  goes 
to  show  that  the  Bishops  (jf^yovfAevoi  or  irpotfyovfjievoi)  are  dis- 
tinguished from  the  Presbyters,  and  that  if  the  Bishops  are 
apparently  designated  as  Presbyters,  it  is  because  they  have 
been  chosen  from  the  body  of  Presbyters,  and  have  retained 
the  name  even  when  they  have  ceased  to  hold  office.  For 
this  reason  deceased  Bishops  are  called  Presbyters.  In  Clem- 
ent, Presbyters  signify  a  class  or  estate  —  members  of  long 
standing  and  approved  character,  and  not  office-bearers 
regularly  appointed.  Among  these  the  Bishops  are  to  be 
sought.  Bishops  are  reckoned  as  Presbyters,  not  because 
the  Presbyter  as  such  is  a  Bishop,  but  because  the  Bishop  as 
such  is  a  Presbyter.  In  the  Pastorals,  Bishops  and  Deacons 
are  associated  without  mention  of  Presbyters  (1  Tim.  iii. 
1-18).  Presbyters  are  referred  to  in  1  Tim.  v.  17-19,  but  in 
an  entirely  different  connection.  The  qualifications  of  Bish- 
ops and  Deacons  are  detailed  in  the  former  passage,  and  the 
list  of  qualifications  concludes  with  the  statement  that  this 
is  the  ordering  of  the  church  as  the  house  of  God  (vv.  14, 
15).     The  offices  are  exhausted  in  the  description  of  Bishops 

*  The  view  that  the  original  Christian  polity  was  drawn  from  that  of  the 
Synagogue  was  maintained  by  Rothe,  Baur,  Lightfoot,  Hatch,  and  others. 
The  development  of  the  view  given  above  is  largely  due  to  Schttrer,  Oesehichte 
de$  jMischen  Volkes  im  ZeUaU  tr  Jesu  Christi,  2  Aufl. ,  Bd.  IL  English  trans. 
A  History  of  the  JeuHsh  People  in  the  Time  of  Jesus  Christ,  2d  divis.,  Vol.  II. , 
p.  56  fl.    Also,  Die  Oemeindeverfassung  der  Juden  in  Bom  in  der  KaiserzeiL 

t  For  a  more  detailed  examination  of  this  subject  I  must  refer  the  reader 
to  my  Excursus  on  **  Bishops  and  Deacons  "  in  the  IntemationaH  CommefUar^ 
on  PhUippians  and  PhUemon, 


256  WORD  8TUDIB8  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  V. 

and  Deacons.  Nothing  is  said  of  Presbyters  until  ch.  v, 
where  Timothy's  relations  to  individual  church-members  are 
prescribed ;  and  in  Tit.  ii.  2  ff.  these  members  are  classified 
as  old  men  (irpea-fivra^^^  old  womeit,  young  men^  and  %ervant$. 
Ill  1  Tim.  V.  17  are  mentioned  elderi  who  rule  well  (oi  KaXSk 
Trpo€aT&T€9  wpeafivrepoi^.  Assuming  that  Presbyters  and 
Bishops  were  identical,  a  distinction  would  thus  be  implied 
between  two  classes  of  Bishops  —  those  who  rule  well  and 
those  who  do  not :  whereas  the  distinction  is  obviously  be- 
tween old  and  honored  church-members,  collectively  consid- 
ered, forming  the  presbyterial  body,  and  certain  of  their 
number  who  show  their  qualifications  for  appointment  as 
overseers.  Presbyters  as  such  are  not  invested  with  office. 
There  is  no  formsd  act  constituting  a  Presbyter.  The  Bish- 
ops are  reckoned  among  the  Elders,  but  the  Elders  as  such 
are  not  officers. 

Thus  are  to  be  explained  the  allusions  to  appointed  Elders, 
Tit.  i.  5 ;  Acts  xiv.  23.  Elders  are  to  be  appointed  as  over- 
seers or  Bishops^  for  the  overseers  must  have  the  qualifica- 
tions of  approved  Presbyters.  The  ordination  of  Presbyters 
is  the  setting  apart  of  Elders  to  the  position  of  Superintend- 
ents. The  Presbyterate  denotes  an  honorable  and  influential 
estate  in  the  church  on  the  ground  of  age,  duration  of  church 
membership,  and  approved  character.  Only  Bishops  are 
appointed.  There  is  no  appointment  to  the  Presbyterate. 
At  the  close  of  Clement^s  letter  to  the  Corinthians,  the  qual- 
ifications of  a  Presbyter  are  indicated  in  the  description  of 
the  three  commissioners  from  the  Roman  church  who  are  the 
bearers  of  the  letter,  and  to  whom  no  official  title  is  given. 
They  are  old,  members  of  the  Roman  church  from  youth, 
blameless  in  life,  believing,  and  sober.* 


•  The  late  Dr.  Hort,  in  hU  Eedesia,  holds  that  ** Bishop**  was  not  the 
designation  of  an  office^  but  of  &  function.  It  was  a  description  of  the  Elder's 
fonction.  He  says:  **It  is  now  pretty  generally  recognised  .  .  .  that  we 
haye  not  here  (in  the  word  iwiexovot)  a  different  office,  held  by  one  person 
iu  contrast  to  the  plural  i^dert."  And  he  adds:  **  It  is  hardly  less  erroneous 
to  take  iwl^KQvat  as  merely  a  second  title,  capable  of  being  used  oonrertibJIj 
with  wp€^fi6r€fioi  "  (p.  190). 


cr.v.]  thb  first  epistle  to  timothy.  267 

2.  The  elder  women  (TrpeajSvr^pa/i).  N.  T.^.  Comp. 
irpeafivTiBa^  aged  wamen^  Tit.  ii.  3.  The  word  indicates  dis- 
tinction in  age  merely,  although  some  think  that  it  points  to 
an  official  position  which  is  further  referred  to  in  the  follow- 
ing directions  concerning  widows.* 

3.  Honour  (jlfui).  Not  only  by  respectful  treatment  but 
by  financial  support.  Comp.  rifujo'ei^  Matt.  xv.  5,  and  ttoX- 
Xai^  TLfJuu^  M/JLtfo-av^  Acts  xxviii.  10;  and  &7rX^  Tifati^^ 
1  Tim.  V.  17.  Comp.  Sir.  xxxviii.  1.  The  verb  only  once 
in  Paul  (Eph.  vi.  2,  citation),  and  only  here  in  Pastorals. 

Widows  (x^/Ns?).  Paul  alludes  to  widows  in  1  Cor.  vii.  8 
only,  where  he  advises  them  against  remarrying.  They  are 
mentioned  as  a  class  in  Acts  vi.  1,  in  connection  with  the  ap- 
pointment of  the  seven.  Also  Acts  ix.  39,  41.  In  the  Past- 
orals they  receive  special  notice,  indicating  their  advance 
from  the  position  of  mere  beneficiaries  to  a  quasi-official  posi- 
tion in  the  church.  From  the  very  first,  the  church  recog- 
nised its  obligation  to  care  for  their  support.  A  widow,  in 
the  East,  was  peculiarly  desolate  and  helpless,  f  In  return 
for  their  maintenance  certain  duties  were  required  of  them, 
such  as  the  care  of  orphans,  sick  and  prisoners,  and  they 
were  enrolled  in  an  order,  which,  however,  did  not  include 
all  of  their  number  who  received  alms  of  the  church.  In 
Polycarp's  JEpisUe  to  the  PhilippianM^  they  are  styled  **the 
altar  of  God.''  To  such  an  order  the  references  in  the  Past- 
orals point.  The  Fathers,  from  the  end  of  the  second  cent- 
ury to  the  fourth,  recognised  a  class  known  as  TrpeafivriBe^ 
aged  women  (Tit.  iL  3),  who  had  oversight  of  the  female 
church-members  and  a  separate  seat  in  the  congregation. 
The  council  of  Laodicaea  abolished  this  institution,  or  so 
modified  it  that  widows  no  longer  held  an  official  relation  to 
the  church.^ 

•  So  Holtzmftnn,  who  finds  in  it  a  trace  of  **  the  Mothers  of  the  Sjmagogae  ** 
In  the  synagogues  of  the  Jewish  dispersion.    See  PattoralhriefBt  p.  341. 
t  See  Ignatius,  JEjp.  to  Poluearp^  TV.    Polyearp,  JEjp.  to  FhUippiatu^  VL 
I  On  the  enrolment  of  Tiigins  in  this  oxdar  see  Lightfoot,  Ignatius 
Vol  n.,  p.  S22iL  (2d  ed.). 

▼OL.  IT.  — 17 


268  WOKD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  V. 

Who  are  widows  indeed  (r^  Svrm  XVP^^)-  Comp.  w. 
5,  16.  "OvTw?  verilif^  truly ^  twice  in  Paul,  1  Cor.  xiv.  25 ; 
Gal.  iii.  21.  See  on  2  Pet.  ii.  18.  Wherever  6vtci^  is  used 
by  Paul  or  by  any  other  N.  T.  writer,  it  is  used  purely  as  an 
adverb  (see  L.  xxiii.  47;  xxiv.  84):  but  in  all  the  four 
instances  in  the  Pastorals,  it  is  preceded  by  the  article  and 
converted  into  an  adjective.  The  meaning  is,  who  are  ah^ol- 
uUly  bereaved,  without  children  or  relations  (comp.  ver.  4), 
and  have  been  but  once  married.  There  is  probably  also  an 
implied  contrast  with  those  described  in  vv.  6, 11-13. 

4.  Nephews  (bcyova).  N.  T.^.  Often  in  LXX.  JTeph- 
#v«,  in  the  now  obsolete  sense  of  grandsons  or  other  lineal 
descendants.  Derived  from  Lat.  nepos.  Trench  (^Select 
Qlossary)  remarks  that  nephew  has  undergone  exactly  the 
same  change  of  meaning  that  nepos  underwent,  which,  in  the 
Augustan  age,  meaning  grandson^  in  the  post- Augustan  age 
acquired  the  signification  of  nephew  in  our  present  accepta- 
tion of  that  word.     Chaucer  : 

**  How  that  my  nevew  shall  my  bane  be.** 

Legend  of  Good  Women^  2660. 

*  His  (Jove's)  blind  nevew  Cupido." 

Houee  of  Fame^  67. 

Jeremy  Taylor :   "  Nephews  are  very  often  liker  to  their 
grandfathers  than  to  their  fathers." 

Let  them  learn.  The  subject  is  the  children  and  grand- 
children. Holtzmann  thinks  the  subject  is  any  widow^  used 
collectively.  But  the  writer  is  treating  of  what  should  be 
done  to  the  widow,  not  of  what  she  is  to  do.  The  admoni- 
tion is  connected  with  widows  indeed.  They^  as  being  utterly 
bereft,  and  without  natural  supporters,  are  to  be  cared  for  by 
the  church ;  but  if  they  have  children  or  grandchildren,  these 
should  assume  their  maintenance. 

.   First  (wp&rrov).    In  the  first  place :  as  their  first  and  nat- 
ural obligation. 


CW.  v.]  THB  FIB8T  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  269 

To  show  piety  at  home  (rbv  IBiov  olcov  eiKrefieiv).  More 
correctly,  to  $haw  piety  toward  their  own  family.  Piety  in 
the  sense  of  filial  respect,  though  not  to  the  exclusion  of  the 
religious  sense.  The  Lat.  pietas  includes  alike  love  and  duty 
to  the  gods  and  to  parents.  Thus  Virgil's  familiar  designa- 
tion of  Aeneas,  ^*'piu%  Aeneas,*'  as  describing  at  once  his  rev- 
erence for  the  gods  and  his  filial  devotion.  The  verb  evo-e/ScAV 
(only  here  and  Acts  xvii.  28)  represents  filial  respect  as  an 
element  of  godliness  (ewrd field).  For  rhv  Ihwv  their  own^  see 
on  Acts  i.  7.  It  emphasises  their  private,  personal  belonging, 
and  contrasts  the  assistance  given  by  them  with  that  furn- 
ished by  the  church.  It  has  been  suggested  that  ohcop  house- 
hold  OT  family  may  mark  the  duty  as  an  act  of  family  feeling 
and  honour. 

To  requite  (aiAOifihn  &7roiiS6pat).  An  entirely  unique 
expression.  ^AfAoifii^  requital^  recompense  is  a  familiar  classical 
word,  used  with  BiSdvai  to  give^  anronOivcLi  to  lay  down,  rivets 
to  pay^  TToieiaOa^  to  make.  N.  T.^.  Paul  uses  instead  apn- 
luaOla  (Rom.  i.  27  ;  2  Cor.  vi.  IS),  or  avramiSofAa  (Rom.  xi. 
9),  or  &PTair6io4rt^  (Col.  iii.  24).  The  last  two  are  LXX 
words. 

Their  parents  (rok  irpoy6vovi).  N.  T.^.  Parents  is  too 
limited.  The  word  comprehends  mothers  and  grandmothers 
and  living  ancestors  generally.  The  word  ioT  parents  is 
Toi^i?,  see  2  Tim.  iii.  2 ;  Rom.  i.  30 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  14 ;  Eph. 
vi.  1 ;  Col.  iii.  20.  H/nlyovoi  for  living  ancestors  is  contrary 
to  usage.  One  instance  is  cited  from  Plato,  Laws^  xi.  982. 
The  word  is  probably  selected  to  correspond  in  form  with 
hcffova  children. 

Qood  and  acceptable  (icaX^y  ical  htroh&crhv).  Omit 
iMkhv  Ka\  good  and.  *A7r6S€scro9  aeeeptable  only  here  and 
1  Tim.  ii.  8.     See  note. 

Before  (ivwiriov).  Frequent  in  N.  T.,  especially  Luke  and 
Apocalypse.     It  occurs  31  times  in  the  phrases  Mnriov  rofi 


260  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  V. 

0€ov  in  the  fight  of  0-gd^  and  ivwnnov  tcvplov  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord.  ^LXX.  Comp.  i/jLTrpoa-Oev  rov  Oeov  before  Q-od^  Acte 
X.  4 ;  1  Th.  i.  3 ;  ii.  19 ;  iii.  9, 13.  Not  in  Pastorals,  and  by 
Paul  only  1  Th.  The  difference  is  trifling.  Comp.  1  J.  iu. 
19  and  22. 

5.  And  desolate  (jcal  fie/jLovufAAnf^.  N.  T.^.  From  fuivo^ 
alone.   Explanatory  of  a  widow  indeed.    One  entirely  bereaved. 

Trusteth  in  Qod  (fiXTrueev  iirl  rov  O^v).  Strictly,  hath 
directed  her  hope  at  Q-od.  Rev.  hath  her  hope  set  on  Q-od 
implies  hrl  with  the  dative,  as  1  J.  iii.  3. 

6.  Liveth  in  pleasure  (jnrara\&aa).  Only  here  and  Jas. 
V.  5.    See  note.    Twice  in  LXX,  Sir.  xxi.  15  ;  Ezek.  xvi.  49. 

Is  dead  while  she  liveth  (X&&a  rSvriteev}.  Comp.  Apoc. 
iii.  1 ;  Eph.  iv.  18.  '-  Life  in  worldly  pleasure  is  only  life 
in  appearance''  (Holtzmann). 

8.    Provide  ^irpovoeV).     See  on  Rom.  xii.  17. 

His  own  —  those  of  his  own  house  (r&v  ihlmv — oUtCmv). 
His  own  relations,  see  on  J.  i.  11.  Those  who  form  part  of 
his  family,  see  on  Gal.  vi.  10. 

He  hath  denied  the  faith  (j^v  ttCotiv  ffpvryrai).  The  verb 
not  in  Paul,  but  quite  often  in  Pastorals.  The  phrase  only 
here  and  Apoc.  ii.  13.  Faith  demands  works  and  fruits. 
By  refusing  the  natural  duties  which  Christian  faith  implies, 
one  practically  denies  his  possession  of  faith.  ^^  Faith  does 
not  abolish  natural  duties,  but  perfects  and  strengthens 
them"  (Bengel).      Comp.  Jas.  ii.  14-17. 

Infidel  (inrlarov).  Better,  unbeliever.  One  who  is  not  a 
Christian,  as  1  Cor.  vi.  6 ;  vii.  12,  13,  etc.  Even  an  unbe- 
liever  will  perform  these  duties  from  natural  promptings. 


CH.V.]  THE  FIRST   EPISTLB  TO  TIMOTHY.  261 

9.  Be  taken  into  the  number  (jcaraXeyiaOai).  Better, 
enrolled  (as  a  widow).  N.  T.^.  Very  rare  in  LXX.  Com- 
mon in  Class.  Originally,  to  pick  out,  as  soldiers.  Hence,  to 
enroll  enlist.  Here,  to  be  enrolled  in  the  body  of  widows  who 
are  to  receive  church  support.     See  on  ver.  8. 

10.  Well  reported  of  (^tAaprrvpovtUuri).  Lit.  borne  witneu 
to  or  attested^  as  Acts  vi.  8 ;  x.  22 ;  Heb.  xi.  2.  Comp. 
IMpTvplav  KoKiiv  ix^^  ^  ^^^  9^^^  testimony^  ch.  iii.  7. 

For  good  works  (h  !pyat^  scaXoii).  Lit.  in  good  works ; 
in  the  matter  of.  Comp.  1  Tim.  vi.  18 ;  Tit.  ii.  7 ;  iii.  8, 14. 
In  the  Gospels,  !pyov  work  appears  with  tedXM  and  never  with 
ayaO^.  In  Paul,  always  with  aya0i<:  and  never  with  tcaXo^. 
In  the  Pastorals,  with  both.  The  phrase  includes  good  deeds 
of  all  kinds,  and  not  merely  special  works  of  beneficence. 
Comp.  Acts  ix.  86. 

If  (el).  Introducing  the  details  of  the  general  expression 
good  works. 

Have  brought  up  children  (ireKvorpdilnfaev).  N.  T.^. 
®LXX  ;  very  rare  in  Class.  The  children  may  have  been 
her  own  or  others*. 

Lodged  strangers  (i^evoi&xjl^^^y  ^-  ^'^'  ^LXX.  On 
the  duty  of  hospitality  comp.  ch.  iii.  2 ;  Matt.  xxv.  35 ;  Rom. 
xii.  18;  Heb.  xiii.  2;  1  Pet.  iv.  9;  8  J.  6. 

Washed  the  feet.  A  mark  of  Oriental  hospitality  bestowed 
on  the  stranger  arriving  from  a  journey,  and  therefore  closely 
associated  with  lodged  strangers. 

Of  the  saints  (i'^Uov).  "Kyio^  is  rare  in  Class.  In  LXX, 
the  standard  word  for  holy.  Its  fundamental  idea  is  setting 
apartt  as  in  Class.,  devoted  to  the  gods.  In  O.  T.,  set  apart  to 
Q-od^  as  priests ;  as  the  Israelites  consecrated  to  God.  In 
N.  T.,  applied  to  Christians.  Ideally,  it  implies  personal 
holiness.     It  is  used  of  God,  Christ,  John  the  Baptist,  God's 


282  WORD  HTUDIM  IK  THS  HSW  TBBTAMKErT.        [OlLy. 

law,  the  spirit  of  Crod.  Paul  often  uses  oi  irfun  as  a  common 
designation  of  Christians  belonging  to  a  certain  region  or 
commnnitj,  as  Philip,  i.  1 ;  2  Cor.  i.  1 ;  Col.  i.  2.  In  such 
cases  it  does  not  implj  actnal  holiness,  bnt  holiness  obligatory 
upon  those  addressed,  as  consecrated  persons,  and  appropriate 
to  them.  What  ought  to  be  b  assumed  as  being.  In  this 
sense  not  in  the  Gospels  (unless,  possibly.  Matt,  xxyii.  52) 
or  in  the  Epistles  of  Peter  and  John*     Bare  in  Acts. 

Relieved  (hnipx^ai).  Only  here  and  yer.  16.  Comp. 
1  Mace.  viii.  26 ;  xi.  35.  Common  in  Class.  Originally,  to 
$iffiee  fcTy  to  be  $trang  enough  foTj  as  in  Homer,  where  it  is 
always  used  in  connection  with  danger  or  injury.  See  2Z.  ii. 
878 ;   Od.  xvii.  568.     Hence,  to  ward  aff^  hdp^  aeeiet. 

The  afflicted  iSlufioiUvovT).  See  on  tribulation^  Matt, 
xiii.  21,  and  comp.  2  Cor.  L  6 ;  iy.  8 ;  2  Th.  i.  6,  7  ;  Heb. 
xi.  87. 

Diligently  followed  (iwaxo  ovOriaep).  Comp.  yer.  24. 
'E^rl  (rfter  or  do9e  upon.  ^P.  Once  in  the  disputed  verses 
at  the  end  of  Mk.  (xvi.  20),  and  1  Pet.  ii.  21.  Comp.  the 
use  of  ti&Keiv  pureue^  Rom.  ix.  30 ;  xii.  13 ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  1 ; 
1  Th.  V.  16. 

11.  Younger  (vmvt^/mi?).  Almost  in  a  positiye  sense, 
yowng.      Not,  under  sixty  years  of  age. 

Have  begun  to  wax  wanton  (^tearatrrpi^vuia'wriv).  Not, 
have  hegun^  but  rather,  whenever  they  ehall  eome  to  wax  wan- 
ton. Comp.  2  Th.  i.  10.  The  compound  verb,  signifying  to 
feel  the  eexual  impulse^  only  here,  and  not  in  LXX  or  Class. 
The  simple  verb,  arpi^vtav  to  run  riot^  Apoc.  xviii.  7,  9 ;  and 
the  kindred  arpfjvo^  luxury^  Apoc.  xviii.  8.     See  note. 

Against  Christ  (rov  Xpurrov^.  Their  unruly  desire  with- 
draws them  from  serving  Christ  in  his  church,  and  is,  there- 
fore, agaimt  him.* 

•  Weizfttcker  baa  it :  toenn  sU  trotz  Christua  in  Begierde  fatten. 


Ch.V.]  THE  FIRST  BPISTLB  TO  TIMOTHY.  268 

This  is  the  only  instance  in  the  Pastorals  in  which  the 
Chrut  is  used  without  Jeius  either  before  or  after.  In  Paul 
this  is  common,  both  with  and  without  the  article. 

They  will  marry  Qya^ieiv  O^Xovaiv).  Better,  they  are  bent 
an  marrying,  or  determined  to  marry.  The  strong  expression 
wax  wanton  makes  it  probable  that  BfKeiv  expresses  more  than 
a  desire^  as  Rev.  See  on  Matt.  i.  19.  Fafidv  to  marry^  in 
the  active  voice,  of  the  wife,  as  everywhere  in  N.  T.  except 
1  Cor.  vU.  89.* 

12.  Having  damnation  (ixowrtu  lepifui).  The  phrase  only 
here.  See  on  1  Tim.  iii.  6.  Damnation  is  an  unfortunate 
rendering  in  the  light  of  the  present  common  understanding 
of  the  word,  as  it  is  also  in  1  Cor.  xi.  29.  Better,  judgment 
or  condemnation^  as  Rom.  iii.  8  ;  xiii.  2.  The  meaning  is  that 
they  carry  about  with  them  in  their  new,  married  life  a  con- 
demnation, a  continuous  reproach.  Comp.  ch.  iv.  2 ;  Gral.  v. 
10.  It  should  be  said  for  the  translators  of  1611  that  they 
used  damnation  in  this  sense  of  Judgment  or  condemnation^  as 
is  shown  by  the  present  participle  hatnng.  In  its  earlier  usage 
the  word  implied  no  allusion  to  a  future  punishment.     Thus 

Chaucer : 

**  For  wel  thou  wooet  (knowest)  thyaelven  yenmily 
That  thou  and  I  be  dampned  to  posoun.'* 

Knight'M  T.  1176. 

Wiclif :  ^*'  Nethir  thou  dredist  God,  that  thou  art  in  the  same 
dampnaeiounf^^  L.  xxiii.  40.  Laud.:  ^^Pope  Alexander 
III.  condemned  Peter  Lombard  of  heresy,  and  he  lay  under 
that  damnation  for  thirty  and  six  years."  "A  legacy  by 
damnation"  was  one  in  which  the  testator  imposed  on  his 
heir  an  obligation  to  give  the  legatee  the  thing  bequeathed, 
and  which  afforded  the  legatee  a  personal  claim  against  the 
heir. 


•  Holtzmann  adds  Mk.  x.  12,  after  the  reading  of  T.  R.  7«Mif^  AXXy  be 
married  to  another.  But  the  correct  reading  there  la  ya/A^jc^  dXXor  katft  mar- 
rttd  another. 


264  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  V. 

They  have  cast  off  their  first  faith  (rifv  TrpArtfv  irlartw 
rfihrffTav).  *A0€T€ip  is  to  %et  aside^  do  away  with^  r^eet  or 
nlighb.  See  Mk.  vi.  26 ;  L.  x.  16 ;  Heb.  x.  28.  Often  in 
LXX.  JUtmv  is  pledge :  so  frequently  in  Class,  with  give 
and  receive.  See,  for  instance,  Plato,  Phaedr.  256  D.  In 
LXX,  8  Mace.  iu.  10.  The  phrase  irUmv  iOerdv  N.  T.®. 
®LXX.  There  are,  however,  a  number  of  expressions  closely 
akin  to  it,  as  Gkd.  iii.  15,  Siadijtcf)v  iOerelv  to  render  a  covenant 
void.  In  LXX  with  oatJi,  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  13.  Ps.  xiv.  4  : 
"  He  that  sweareth  to  his  neighbour  teal  am  aderfiv."  Ps. 
Ixxxviii.  34 ;  cxxxi.  11 ;  1  Mace.  vi.  62.  The  meaning  here 
is,  having  broken  their  first  pledge  ;  and  this  may  refer  to  a 
pledge  to  devote  themselves,  after  they  became  widows,  to 
the  service  of  Christ  and  the  church.  The  whole  matter  is 
obscure. 

13.  They  learn  (^fAavOdvova-ip).  To  be  taken  absolutely, 
as  1  Cor.  xiv.  31 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  7.  They  go  about  under  the 
influence  of  an  insatiable  curiosity,  and  meet  those  who 
"creep  into  houses  and  take  captive  silly  women"  (2  Tim. 
iii.  7),  and  learn  all  manner  of  nonsense  and  error. 

Qoing  about  (jrepiepxofJ^^^'    ^P-    Comp.  Acts  xix.  13. 

Tattlers  Q(l>\vapoi).  N.  T.^.  Comp.  4  Mace.  v.  10.  The 
v^erb  {pXvapeiP  to  prate^  3  J.  10. 

Busybodies  (TrepUpyoi).  In  this  sense  only  here.  Comp. 
tA  Trepiepya  curious  arts^  Acts  xix.  19.  The  participle  Trepiep- 
ya^ofiAfoi  busybodies^  2  Th.  iii.  11.  See  note.  Rend,  the 
whole  passage :  "  And  withal,  being  also  idle,  they  learn, 
gadding  about  from  house  to  house ;  and  not  only  (are  they) 
idle,  but  tattlers  also,  and  busybodies,  speaking  things  which 
they  ought  not."* 

*  The  coDStraction  is  awkward  at  best.  The  most  common  explanation  is 
to  make  dp7a2  idle  depend  upon  futpOdpotwiw  they  learrij  understanding  efvai  to 
be :  they  learn  to  he  idle.  Others  take  wtpupx^fupai  with  fiapBdwowiw ;  they 
learn  to  go  about,  which  is  not  Greek,  yon  Soden  makes  rd  fi^  Biorra  what 
they  ought  not  the  object  of  both  fULwOdwovaiw  and  XaXoOo-cu  spedking,  which  is 
clearly  inadmissible. 


CH.V.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLB  TO  TIMOTHY.  265 

14.  That  the  younger  women  marry  (vewr^poj^  ya/jLetv). 
Better,  the  younger  widaw9.  This  seems  to  be  required  by 
ody  therrfore^  connecting  the  subject  of  the  verb  with  the  class 
just  described.  They  are  enjoined  to  marry,  rather  than  to 
assume  a  position  in  the  church  which  they  might  disgrace  by 
the  conduct  described  in  w.  11-18.     Comp.  1  Cor.  vii.  8,  9. 

Bear  children  (recwyoi^ii/).  N.  T.®.  ^LXX,  ^Class. 
Comp.  T€Kvoyov(a  ehildhearing^  1  Tim.  ii.  15. 

Quide  the  house  (^oUoBeairorelv).  Better,  rtUe  the  house. 
N.  T.^.  ^LXX,  ^Class.  'OiKoBeairdrry;  moiter  of  the  home  is 
quite  common  in  the  Synoptic  Gospels. 

Occasion  (a4>opii^v).     See  on  Rom.  vii.  8. 

To  the  adversary  (t^  avrucei/xdv^^.    The  one  who  is  eet  over 

against.  Not  Satan,  but  the  human  enemy  of  Christianity. 
Comp.  Philip,  i.  28,  and  6  i(  ivavricK  he  that  is  of  the  contrary 
part^  Tit.  ii.  8. 

To  speak  reproachfully  (XoiBopla^  x^^^^'  ^^^'  *^  ^^ 
interest  of  reviling.  Const,  with  give  no  occasion.  AoiSopla 
reviling  only  here  and  1  Pet.  iii.  9.  For  the  verb  XoiBopelv  to 
revile  see  J.  ix.  28 ;  Acts  xxiii.  4 ;  1  Cor.  iv.  12 ;  and  note 
on  J.  ix.  28. 

16.  Man  or  woman  that  believeth  (^rurr^  4j  irurrii).  Lit. 
believing  man  or  woman.  But  Trurroi  4j  should  be  omitted. 
Read,  \f  any  woman  that  believeth. 

Have  widows  (l^^ci  XVP^^}^  ^^  ^^7  Christian  woman  have 
relatives  or  persons  attached  to  her  household  who  are  widows 

The  church  be  charged.  Holtzmann  quotes  an  inscription 
in  the  chapel  of  the  Villa  Albani  at  Rome :  **  To  the  good 
Regiua  her  daughter  has  erected  this  memorial :  to  the  good 
Regina  her  widowed  mother,  who  waaa  widow  for  sixty  years 


266  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  V 

and  never  burdened  the  church  after  she  was  the  wife  of  one 
husband.     She  lived  80  years,  5  months,  and  26  days."' 

17.  The  elders  that  rule  well  (oi  teaTiw  Trpoear&ref  irp&r- 
fivrepoi).  For  tJuU  rule  wellj  see  on  teaXik  Trpoiardfiepov  ruling 
welU  1  Tim.  iii.  4.  The  phrase  is  peculiar  to  the  Pastorals. 
See  on  ver.  1. 

Double  honour  (St^rXi}?  Ti/b^).  This  at  least  includes  pe- 
cuniary remuneration  for  services,  if  it  is  not  limited  to  that. 
The  use  of  r^y^  as  pay  or  price  appears  Matt,  xxvii.  6,  9 ; 
Acts  iv.  84 ;  vii.  16 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  20.  Double^  not  in  a  strictly 
literal  sense,  but  as  irKelova  rif^ifv  more  honour^  Heb.  iii.  8. 
The  comparison  is  with  those  Elders  who  do  not  exhibit  equal 
capacity  or  efficiency  in  ruling.  The  passage  lends  no  support 
to  the  Reformed  theory  of  two  classes  of  Elders  —  ruling  and 
teaching.  The  special  honour  or  emolument  is  assigned  to 
those  who  combine  qualifications  for  both. 

Those  who  labour  (oi  Ktm^&vrei).  See  on  ch.  iv.  10.  No 
special  emphasis  attaches  to  the  word  —  hard  toiling  in  com- 
parison with  those  who  do  not  toil.  The  meaning  is,  those 
who  faithfully  discharge  the  arduous  duty  of  teaching.  Comp. 
Heb.  xiii.  7. 

In  word  and  doctrine  (^i^  \i^<p  leal  BiSaa-teaXla).  Better, 
word  and  teaching.  Ward  is  general,  teaching  special.  In 
word  signifies,  in  that  class  of  functions  where  speech  is  con- 
cerned. The  special  emphasis  QfJuiXurra  eepedaUy^  shows  the 
importance  which  was  attached  to  teaching  as  an  antidote  of 
heresy. 

18.  The  Scripture  (^  7/>a^).  Comp.  2  Tim.  iii.  16.  To 
the  Jews  ^  ypaifyi^  signified  the  O.  T.  canon  of  Scripture ;  but 
in  most  cases  ^  ypa^  is  used  of  a  particular  passage  of  Scrip- 
ture which  is  indicated  in  the  context.  See  J.  vii.  88,  42 ; 
Acts  i.  16 ;  viii.  82,  86 ;  Rom.  iv.  8 ;  ix.  17 ;  x.  11 ;  Gal. 
iii.  8.     Where  the  reference  is  to  the  sacred  writings  as  a 


Ch.  v.]  the  first  epistle  to  timothy.  267 

whole,  the  plural  ypoffHil  or  al  ypa<f>al  is  used,  as  Matt,  xxi* 
42 ;  L.  xxiv.  32 ;  J.  v.  89  ;  Rom.  xv.  4.  Once  ypail>al  iyiai 
holy  Scriptures,  Rom.  i.  2.  'Erepa  ypa<l>)f  another  or  a  different 
Scripture^  J.  xix.  37;  ^  ypo^  avnj  this  Scripture^  L.  iv.  21 : 
TToaa  ypa4>ff  every  Scripture^  2  Tim.  iii.  16.  See  on  writings^ 
J.  ii.  22.  The  passage  cited  here  is  Deut.  xxv.  4,  also  by 
Paul,  1  Cor.  ix.  9. 

Thou  Shalt  not  muzzle  (ov  (fufiAaei^).  In  N.  T.  mostly  in 
the  metaphorical  sense  of  putting  to  silence.  See  on  epeechlesi^ 
Matt.  xxii.  12,  and  put  to  sUence^  Matt.  xxii.  34.  Also  on 
Mk.  iv.  39.     On  the  whole  passage  see  note  on  1  Cor.  ix.  9. 

That  treadeth  out  (aXo&vrd).  More  correctly,  while  he  is 
treading  out.  The  verb  only  here  and  1  Cor.  ix.  9, 10.  Comp. 
SXjcov  a  threshing-floor^  Matt.  iii.  12 ;  L.  iii.  17.  An  analogy 
to  the  O.  T.  injunction  may  be  found  in  the  laws  given  to  the 
Athenians  by  the  mythical  Triptolemus,  one  of  which  was, 
^^  Hurt  not  the  labouring  beast."  Some  one  having  violated 
this  command  by  slaying  a  steer  which  was  eating  the  sacred 
cake  that  lay  upon  the  altar,  — an  expiation-feast,  Bouphonia 
or  Diipolia  was  instituted  for  the  purpose  of  atoning  for  this 
offence,  and  continued  to  be  celebrated  in  Athens.  Aris- 
tophanes refers  to  it  (^Clouds,  985).  A  labouring  ox  was  led 
to  the  altar  of  Zeus  on  the  Acropolis,  which  was  strewn  with 
wheat  and  barley.  As  soon  as  the  ox  touched  the  gprain,  he 
was  killed  by  a  blow  from  an  axe.  The  priest  who  struck  the 
blow  threw  away  the  axe  and  fled.  The  flesh  of  the  ox  was 
then  eaten,  and  the  hide  was  stuffed  and  set  before  the  plough. 
Then  began  the  steer-trial  before  a  judicial  assembly  in  the 
Prytaneum,  by  which  the  axe  was  formally  condemned  to  be 
thrown  into  the  sea. 

The  labourer  is  worthyi  etc«  A  second  scriptural  quota- 
tion would  seem  to  be  indicated,  but  there  is  no  corresponding 
passage  in  the  O.  T.  The  words  are  found  L.  x.  7,  and,  with 
a  slight  variation.  Matt.  x.  10.  Some  hold  that  the  writer 
adds  to  the  O.  T.  citation  a  popular  proverb,  and  that  Christ 


268  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Gh.  V. 

himself  used  the  words  in  this  way.  But  while  different 
passages  of  Scripture  are  often  connected  in  citation  by  tcal^ 
it  is  not  according  to  N.  T.  usage  thus  to  connect  Scripture 
and  proverb.  Moreover,  in  such  series  of  citations  it  is 
customary  to  use  seal  TrdXiv  and  again^  or  irdTav  simply.  See 
Matt.  iv.  7 ;  V.  38 ;  J.  xu.  89 ;  Rom.  xv.  9-12 ;  1  Cor.  iii. 
20  ;  Heb.  i.  5 ;  ii.  18.  According  to  others,  the  writer  here 
cites  an  utterance  of  Christ  from  oral  tradition,  coordinately 
with  the  O.  T.  citation,  as  Scripture.  Paul,  in  1  Th.  iv.  16  ; 
1  Cor.  vii.  10,  appeals  to  a  word  of  the  Lord;  and  in  Acts 
XX.  85  he  is  represented  as  quoting  ^^  it  is  more  blessed  to 
give  than  to  receive  "  as  the  words  of  Jesus.  In  1  Cor.  ix, 
in  the  discussion  of  this  passage  from  Deuteronomy,  Paul 
adds  (ver.  14)  "  even  so  hath  the  Lord  ordained  that  they 
which  preach  the  gospel  should  live  of  the  gospel,'*  which 
resembles  the  combination  here.  This  last  is  the  more  prob- 
able explanation. 

19.  Receive  not  an  accusation  (learrfyopiap  fj^  irapaB^ov). 
Neither  word  in  Paul.  For  accu9ation  see  on  J.  v.  45.  It 
means  a  formal  accusation  before  a  tribunal.  The  compound 
verb  with  wapi^  emphasises  the  giver  or  transmittsr  of  the 
thing  received  :  to  receive /rom  another. 

But  (iicm  €i  lA^i).  Except.  A  pleonastic  formula,  eoceept 
in  ease.     The  formula  in  1  Cor.  xiv.  5 ;  xv.  2. 

Before  (^l)*  Or  on  the  atUhority  of.  On  condition  that 
two  witnesses  testify.  The  O.  T.  law  on  this  point  in  Deut. 
xix.  15.     Comp.  Matt,  xviii.  16 ;  J.  viii.  17 ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  1. 

20.  Them  that  sin  (rot)?  afAafrrdvovra^^.  Referring  to 
Elders,  who,  by  reason  of  their  public  position  (TrpoeaT&re^)^ 
should  receive  public  rebuke. 

Rebuke  CSkeyxO-  Comp.  2  Tim.  iv.  2 ;  Tit.  L  9, 18 ;  iL 
15.     See  on  reproved,  J.  iii.  20. 

Others  (pi  Xoiwol).  More  correctly,  H0  rmt.  His  £ellow« 
Elders. 


Ch.  v.]  THE  FIB8T  BPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  269 

May  fear  Q^fiov  Ix^aiv).  May  have  fear,  which  is  stronger 
than  A.  V. 

21.  I  charge  (JkatAafrripofiai).  In  Paul  1  Th.  iv.  6  only. 
See  on  testifying ^  1  Th.  ii.  12.  For  this  sense,  adjure^  see 
L.  xvi.  28  ;  Acts  ii.  40 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  14. 

Elect  angels  (AkK^ktAv  ayy^Xtov).  The  phrase  N.  T.®. 
The  triad,  God,  Christ,  the  angels,  only  L.  ix.  26.  It  is 
not  necessary ^to  suppose  that  a  class  of  angels  distinguished 
from  the  rest  is  meant.  It  may  refer  to  all  angels,  as  special 
objects  of  divine  complacency.  Comp.  Tob.  viii.  15 ;  Acts 
X.  22 ;  Apoc.  xiv.  10. 

Observe  (^t/Xo^).  Lit.  guard.  In  the  Pauline  sense  of 
keeping  the  law,  Rom.  ii.  26 ;  Gal.  vi.  18. 

Without  preferring  one  before  another  (x^P^  irpoxpifAa- 
T09).  A  unique  expression.  UpStepifAa  preQudgment.  N.  T.^. 
^LXX,  ^Class.     Rend,  without  prejudice. 

By  partiality  (jcarh  irpdaKkuriv).  N.  T.^  ®LXX.  Ac- 
cording to  its  etymology,  inclining  toward.  In  later  Greek  of 
joining  one  party  in  preference  to  another.  In  Clement  (ad 
Corinth,  xli,  xlvii,  1)  in  the  sense  of  factious  preferences. 

22.  Lay  hands  on.  Probably  with  reference  to  that  rite 
in  the  formal  restoration  of  those  who  had  been  expelled  from 
the  church  for  gross  sins.* 

Suddenly  (raxlm)^     Better,  hastily. 

Neither  be  partaker  of  other  men's  sins  (ii'qii  scoivAvei 
ifMLfnUwi  aXXor/9^9).  Better,  make  common  cause  with.  See 
on  communicating^  Rom.  xii.  IS.     Comp.  Rom.  xv.  27;  1  Pet. 

*  Variously  explained,  of  ordination ;  of  reception  into  the  communion  d 
the  church ;  of  the  reception  of  heretics  who,  having  been  excluded  from  on« 
congregation,  should  present  themselves  to  another  as  candidates  for  mem* 
bership. 


270  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  V. 

iv.  13 ;  Eph.  v.  11.  By  a  too  hasty  and  inconsiderate  res- 
toration, he  would  condone  the  sins  of  the  offenders,  and 
would  thus  make  common  cause  with  them. 

Keep  thyself  pure  (aeavriv  a/fvhv  n^pei).  Comp.  ch.  vi. 
14.  Enjoining  positively  what  was  enjoined  negatively  in 
the  preceding  clause.  For  pure  see  on  1  J.  iii.  3.  For 
keep  see  on  re$ervedy  1  Pet.  i.  4.  The  phrase  iatnov  rrfpeiv  to 
keep  (me'9  9e{fy  in  Jas.  i.  27  ;  2  Cor.  xi.  9. 

28.  Drink  no  longer  water  (^fjLrjtedri  vBpomiTei).  The 
verb  N.  T.^.  ^LXX.  Rend,  be  no  longer  a  drinker  of  water. 
Timothy  is  not  enjoined  to  abstain  from  water,  but  is  bidden 
not  to  be  a  water-drinker^  entirely  abstaining  from  wine.  The 
kindred  noun  yBpowdrrfi  is  used  by  Greek  comic  writers  to 
denote  a  mean-spirited  person.     See  Aristoph.  Knights^  349. 

But  use  a  little  wine  (aWA  olvtp  6\(y<p  XP^)*  '^^  reverse 
antithesis  appears  in  Hdt.  i.  171,  of  the  Persians :  ovie  olinp 
Siaxp^yrai  aXX'  vBpoirorAva'i  they  do  not  indulge  in  unne  but 
are  water-drinkers.  Comp.  Plato,  Repub.  561  C,  ixni  fJL€V 
fAcOwov  —  a0di9  Bi  vBpoiroT&v  sometimen  he  i$  drunk  —  then  he 
is  for  total-abstinence.  With  a  little  unne  comp.  mu>eh  wine^ 
ch.  iii.  8 ;  Tit.  U.  3. 

For  thy  stomach's  sake  (St^  irr6tuixov).  J.T6fjMx<^  N.  T.^. 
^LXX.  The  appearance  at  this  point  of  this  dietetic  pre* 
scription,  if  it  is  nothing  more,  is  sufficiently  startling ;  which 
has  led  to  some  question  whether  the  verse  may  not  have  been 
misplaced.  If  it  belongs  here,  it  can  be  explained  only  as  a 
continuation  of  the  thought  in  ver.  22,  to  the  effect  that  Tim- 
othy is  to  keep  himself  pure  by  not  giving  aid  and  comfort 
to  the  ascetics,  and  imperilling  his  own  health  by  adopting 
their  rules  of  abstinence.  Observe  that  olvo^  here,  as  every- 
where else,  means  wine^  fermented  and  capable  of  intoxicating^ 
and  not  a  sweet  syrup  made  by  boiling  down  grape-juice, 
and  styled  by  certain  modem  reformers  ^^  unf ermented 
wine."     Such  a  concoction  would  have  tended   rather  to 


CH.V.]  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  271 

aggravate  than  to  relieve  Timothy's  stomachic  or  other 
infirmities. 

Thine  often  infirmities  (r^  irvKvtk  aov  iurdeif^Casi).  This 
use  of  often  as  an  adjective  appears  in  earlier  English.  So 
Chaucer:  "Ofte  sythes"  or  "tymes  ofte,"  many  times. 
Shakespeare  :  ^^  In  which  my  often  rumination  wraps  me  in 
a  most  humourous  sadness  "  (^As  you  like  it^  IV.  i.  19).  And 
Ben  Jonson : 

**  The  jolly  waasal  walks  the  often  round.** 

TheForest^^ 
Even  Tennyson : 

**  WrenchM  or  broken  limb — an  often  chance 
In  those  brainHstonning  shocks  and  tourney-falls.** 

Oareth  and  LifneUe, 

Tlvtcink  often^  very  common  in  Class.  Originally,  elose^  com- 
pact^ comp.  Lat.  freqtiens.  In  this  sense  3  Mace.  iv.  10,  r^ 
irvKV^  aaviSfOfAari  the  close  planking  of  a  ship's  deck.  In  N.  T., 
except  here,  always  adverbial,  irvKvi,  or  irvicvdrepov  often  or 
oftener^  L.  v.  33  ;  Acts  zxiv.  26.  'Aaddvcia  weakness^  infirm- 
ity^ only  here  in  Pastorals.  In  the  physical  sense,  as  here, 
L.  V.  15 ;  viii.  2 ;  J.  v.  5  ;  Gral.  iv.  13.  In  the  ethical  sense, 
Rom.  vi.  19 ;  viii.  26. 

24.  Open  beforehand  Qn-poSrfXof).  A.  V.  wrong  in  giving 
Trpb  a  temporal  force,  whereas  it  merely  strengthens  SrfXoi 
evident^  manifest.  The  meaning  is  openiy  manifested  to  aU 
eyes.  In  N.  T.  only  here,  ver.  26,  and  Heb.  vii.  14.  In 
LXX,  see  Judith  viii.  29 ;  2  Mace.  iii.  17 ;  xiv.  39. 

Qoing  before  to  judgment  (Trpodyovacu  ek  Kplaiv).  Upo- 
dyeiv^  ^P.  In  N.  T.  habitually  with  a  local  meaning,  either 
intransitive,  as  Matt.  ii.  9 ;  xiv.  22 ;  Mk.  xi.  9 ;  or  transitive, 
as  Acts  xii.  6 ;  xvii.  5.*  The  meaning  here  is  that  these  open 
sins  go  before  their  perpetrator  to  the  judgment-seat  like  her- 

*  A  temporal  meaning  is  sometimes  claimed  for  Heb.  vlL  IS  (so  Holts- 
mann),  but  without  sufficient  reason.  The  commandment  there  is  repre- 
sented as  an  introduction  to  a  greater  and  final  ordinance. 


272  WORD  8TUDIB8  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  VL 

aids,  proclaiming  their  sentence  in  advance.  Kplaiv^  not  spe- 
cifically of  the  judgment  of  men  or  of  the  final  judgment  of 
God,  or  of  the  sentence  of  an  ecclesiastical  court — but  indefin- 
itely. The  writer  would  say  :  no  judicial  utterance  is  neces- 
sary to  condemn  them  of  these  sins.  The  word  in  Paul,  only 
2  Th.  i.  6. 

They  follow  after  (hroKoXouOoOauf).  The  verb  only  here, 
ver.  24,  1  Pet.  ii.  21,  and  (the  disputed)  Mk.  xvi.  20.  The 
sins  follow  up  the  offender  to  the  bar  of  judgment,  and  are 
first  made  openly  manifest  there. 

25.  Otherwise  (JtXXm).  N.  T.^.  Not,  otherwise  than 
ffood^  but  otherwise  than  man\fe$t. 

Be  hid  (jcpvfirjvcu).  In  Paul  only  Col.  iii.  8.  The  good 
works,  although  not  conspicuous  (Tr/xfSi/Xa),  cannot  be  entirely 
concealed.  Comp.  Matt.  v.  14-16.  It  has  been  suggested 
that  these  words  may  have  been  intended  to  comfort  Timothy 
in  his  possible  discouragement  from  his  ^*  often  infirmities.'^ 
von  Soden  thinks  they  were  meant  to  encourage  him  against 
the  suspicion  awakened  by  his  use  of  wine.  By  persevering 
in  his  temperate  habits  (plvfp  oKiy^^  it  will  become  manifest 
that  he  is  no  wine-bibber. 


CHAPTER  n. 

1.  As  many  servants  as  are  under  the  yoke  (iaoi  €ia\» 
Inro  ^vybv  SofiXoi).  Incorrect.  Rather,  a$  many  as  are  under 
the  yoke  as  bondservants.  As  bondservants  is  added  in  explan- 
ation of  under  the  yoke^  which  implies  a  hard  and  disagree- 
able condition.  Yoke  is  used  only  here  of  the  state  of  slavery. 
In  Gal.  V.  1 :  Acts  xv.  10,  of  the  Mosaic  law.  See  on  Matt, 
xi.  29. 

Their  own  (roiW  tZlov^).  Lit.  private^  personal^  peculiar y 
as  1  Cor.  iii.  8 ;  vii.  T.     Sometimes  strange^  eccentric.     Con- 


Ch.VI.1  the  FIB8T  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  278 

trasted  with  SfffiSa-u^  public  or  KOivA;  eamman.  See  Acts  iv, 
82.  Sometiines  without  emphasis,  substantially  »  possessive 
pronoun,  just  as  Lat.  proprius  passes  into  9utiM  or  i^'tM,  or 
oUeio^  belonging  to  one^$  house  into  the  simple  one^$  own.  See 
on  Gral.  vi.  10,  and  comp.  Matt.  xxii.  5 ;  xxv.  14.  In  LXX 
commonly  with  the  emphatic  sense.  Very  often  in  the 
phrase  icar*  IBlav  privately^  as  Mk.  iv.  84 ;  L.  ix.  10 ;  Gal. 
ii.  2,  but  nowhere  in  Pastorals. 

Masters  (ietnrJraii^.  Comp.  Tit.  ii.  9,  and  see  on  2  Pet. 
ii.  1.  Not  in  Paul,  who  styles  the  master  of  slaves  x6pw9 
lord.     See  Eph.  vi.  9 ;  Col.  iv.  1. 

Count  (Jfy^UrOwrav).  Implying  a  more  conscious,  a  surer 
judgment,  resting  on  more  careful  weighing  of  the  facts. 
See  Philip,  ii.  8,  6. 

Be  not  blasphemed  (^^  —  pkaur^ii^cu).  Or  be  evU 
9poken  of.  See  on  blasphemy^  Mk.  vii.  22,  and  be  etfU  epohen 
of  Rom.  xiv.  16 ;  1  Cor.  x.  80.  Paul  uses  the  word,  but 
not  in  the  active  voice  as  in  the  Pastorals. 

2.  Partakers  of  the  benefit  (oi  r^  evep^wta^  ivrCKaykfia^' 
6fA€Poi).  The  verb  means  to  take  hold  of;  hence,  to  take 
hold  for  the  purpose  of  helping  ;  to  take  up  /or,  as  L.  i.  54 ; 
Acts  XX.  85.  ^P.  *lLvef^eala  benefit  only  here  and  Acts  iv.  9. 
Better,  kindlif  service.  Rend,  they  that  busy  themselves  in 
the  kindly  service.*  The  reference  is  to  the  kindly  acts  which 
the  masters  do  to  their  slaves ;  not  to  the  benefits  received 
by  the  slaves.     Comp.  Gral.  v.  18. 

8.   Teach  otherwise  (JkepohibafficayM).    See  on  ch.  i.  8. 

Consent  (irpoaipx^cu).  Lit.  draw  nigh.  To  approach 
as  one  who  confidingly  accepts  another's  proffer.     Hence,  to 

•&oW^aMiOkiBr:  ekhdeiWohUhunsh^etssigeh.  Stmilarly,  Holtonaiiii, 
▼on  Soden,  and  Huther. 

TOL.   IV.  — 18 


274  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NBW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  VL 

a$$ent  to.  Comp.  Acts  x.  28 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  4 ;  Heb.  iv.  16 ; 
X.  22.  Often  in  LXX,  and  habitually  in  the  literal  sense. 
The  figurative  sense,  Sir.  i.  27,  80;  iv.  16;  vi.  26.  ®P. 
The  phrase  only  here. 

Of  our  Lord,  etc.  Either  eaneeming  our  Lord,  or  spoken 
dy  him.  Probably  the  latter,  according  to  N.  T.  usage,  in 
which  word  of  the  Lord  or  word  of  God  commonly  means  the 
word  that  proceeds  from  God.  The  phrase  worde  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  only  here. 

Doctrine  which  is  according  to  godliness  (t^  icar*  eifai- 
fieiav  BiBaaicdkCa).  The  phrase  only  here.  See  on  1  Tim. 
i.  10.     For  €vaifi€Ui,  on  1  Tim.  ii.  2. 

4.  He  is  proud  (rerv^on-ai).     See  on  ch.  iii.  6. 

Knowing  nothing  (^firfSiv  iirurrdfAevo^).  Although  he 
knows  nothing.  ^P.  Very  frequent  in  Acts.  Comp.  ch. 
i.  7. 

Doting  (voa&v).  N.  T.^.  Lit.  sick.  Comp.  {r/iatvotHri 
healtJ^ul^  ver.  3. 

Questions  (?i;Ti;cr€t9).  ^P.  <>LXX.  Quite  often  in  Class. 
Lit.  processes  of  inquiry  ;  hence,  debates.     Comp.  ch.  i.  4. 

Strifes  of  words  (Xo7o/Aax^9).  N.  T.^.  ^LXX,  ^Class. 
One  of  the  unique  compounds  peculiar  to  these  Epistles. 
The  verb  \oyofiax€lv  2  Tim.  ii.  14. 

Surmisings  (Jm6voim).     N.  T.^.     See  Sir.  iii.  24.     'T^ro 

under  and  vov^  mind^  thought.     A  hidden  thought.  The  verb 

%nrovo€lv  to  suppose^  only  in  Acts.  See  xiii.  25 ;  xxv.  18 ; 
xxvii.  27. 

5.  Perverse  disputings  (Sunraparpifial).  N.  T.^.  ^LXX, 
^Class.     UaparptlS'q  is  a  rubbing  against.     At^  signifies  eon* 


CB.yL]  THE  FIBST  BPISTLB  TO  TIMOTHY.  276 

tinuance.    The  meaning  therefore  is  eontinuedfrietian.    Hence 
wearing  d%9euman;  protracted  wrangling.* 

Of  corrupt  minds  (Jk€^apiUiHov  rhv  vovp).  More  correctly, 
corrupted  in  mind.  The  verb  not  common  in  N.  T.  In  Paul 
only  2  Cor.  iv.  16.  Only  here  in  Pastorals.  Auuf)0opd  eor- 
ruption  only  in  Acts.  Comp.  tcaT&l>0apfiAfoi  rhv  povp  corrupted 
in  mind^  2  Tim.  iii.  8. 

Destitute  of  the  truth  {air&rr^pfnUvfov  7rp  iXrfdeCa^^ .  Rev. 
bereft  of  the  truth.  In  N.  T.  commonly  of  d^rauding^  Mk. 
X.  19 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  7,  8 ;  yii.  5.  The  implication  is  that  they 
once  possessed  the  truth.  They  put  it  away  from  themselves 
(ch.  i.  19 ;  Tit.  i.  14).  Here  it  is  represented  as  taken  away 
from  them.     Comp.  Rom.  i.  28. 

Gain  is  godliness  (iropiaiihv  elvai  t^v  eva^fieiav).  Wrong. 
Rend,  that  godlineee  i$  a  way  (or  source^  of  gain.  Hopurfi^^ 
only  here  and  ver.  6,  is  a  gain-making  bueineee.  See  Wisd. 
xiii.  19  ;  xiv.  2.  They  make  religion  a  means  of  livelihood. 
Comp.  Tit.  i.  11. 

6.  Contentment  (avrapsceCa^^.  Only  here  and  2  Cor. 
ix.  8.  The  adjective  axndpKff^  self-^uffieienti  Philip,  iv.  11. 
Comp.  Sir.  xl.  18.  Avrdp/ceia  is  an  inward  self-sufficiency, 
as  opposed  to  the  lack  or  the  desire  of  outward  things.  It 
was  a  favourite  Stoic  word,  expressing  the  doctrine  of  that 
sect  that  a  man  should  be  sufficient  unto  himself  for  all 
things,  and  able,  by  the  power  of  his  own  will,  to  resist  the 
force  of  circumstances.  In  Ps.  of  Sol.  v.  18,  we  read : 
*^  Blessed  is  the  man  whom  God  remembereth  with  a  suffic- 

*The  A.V.  perverse  disputings  grew  out  of  the  reading  of  T.  R.  v-opadc- 
arpifial,  in  which  va^  was  taken  in  the  sense  of  neglect  or  violaHon.  Some 
of  the  Greek  Fathers  supposed  that  the  word  inTolyed  the  idea  of  moral  or 
mental  contagion^  and  illostrated  it  by  mangy  sheep,  which  communicate 
disease  by  rubbing  against  each  other.  It  is  suggestiTe  that  diarpi/9^  a  t^eor- 
ing  away  or  wuU  of  time  gradually  passed  into  the  meaning  of  argument. 
Diatribe,  from  the  sense  of  diepvtatioHy  passed  into  that  of  iiweetive  or 


276  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  Vt 

iency  convenient  for  him''  (jh  avfifierplif  airrapK€alas:)\  that 
is,  with  a  sufficiency  proportioned  to  his  needs. 

7.  And  it  is  certain  we  can  carry,  etc.  Omit  and  and 
tertain.  Rend,  in  because.  The  statement  is :  We  brought 
nothing  into  the  world  heeaute  we  can  carry  nothing  out. 
The  fact  that  we  brought  nothing  into  the  world  is  shown 
by  the  impossibility  of  our  taking  with  us  anything  out  of  it ; 
since  if  anything  belonging  to  us  in  our  premundane  state 
had  been  brought  by  us  into  the  world,  it  would  not  be  separ- 
ated from  us  at  our  departure  from  the  world.  Comp.  Job 
i.  21;  Eccl.  V.  15;  Ps.  xlix.  17. 

8.  hood  (huLTfH^y     N.  T.^. 

Raiment  (atceirdafjLara^.  N.  T.^.  ^LXX.  It  means  eov^ 
ming  generally,  though  the  reference  is  pxx)bably  to  clothing, 
von  Soden  aptly  remarks  that  a  dwelling  is  not  a  question  of 
life  with  an  Oriental. 

Let  U8  be  content  (kp/ceadritrSfuOa}.  More  correctly,  we 
shall  be  content.  Once  in  Paul,  2  Cor.  xii.  9.  A  few  times 
in  LXX.  Comp.  Ps.  of  Sol.  xvi.  12  :  "  But  with  good  will 
and  cheerfulness  uphold  thou  my  soul ;  when  thou  strength* 
enest  my  soul  I  shall  be  satisfied  (apsc^aet,  imi)  with  what  thou 
givest  me." 

9.  Tliey  that  will  be  ricli  (oi  fiovXifievoi  irXovrelv).  Better, 
they  that  desire  to  be  rich.  It  is  not  the  possession  of  riches, 
but  the  love  of  them  that  leads  men  into  temptation. 

Fall  (ifjuiriwrovo'iv).  ^P.  Lit.  fall  into;  but  invariably  in 
N.  T.  with  €&  into. 

Temptation  (ireipaa-fAhv).     See  on  Matt.  vi.  18. 

Foolish  (apoifTov^^.  Foolish  answers  to  several  words  in 
N.  T.,  avoifro9,  iurvpero^y  i^pnv^  puspdi.     'Apoi)to9  not  under^ 


CH.VI.]  THE  riBST  BPISTLB  TO  TIMOTHY.  277 

standing  ;  a  want  of  proper  application  of  the  moral  judgment 
or  perception,  as  L.  xxiv.  25 ;  Gral.  iii.  1.  See  notes  on  both. 
"A^/Mtfy  is  $en$ele88^  $tupid^  of  images,  beasts.  Comp.  L.  xii. 
20,  note.  *Aavvero9  approaches  the  meaning  of  avoijro^  unin- 
telligent. See  Sir.  xxii.  18, 15 ;  xxvii.  12.  It  also  implies  a 
moral  sense,  wicked^  Wisd.  i.  5 ;  xi.  15 ;  Sir.  xv.  7.  On  the 
etymological  sense,  see  on  Matt.  xi.  25 ;  Mk.  xii.  88 ;  L.  ii. 
47.  Mtoptk  is  mthout  forethought^  as  Matt.  vii.  26  ;  xxv.  3  ; 
without  learning^  as  1  Cor.  i.  27;  iii.  18;  with  a  moral  sense, 
empty ^  useless^  2  Tim.  ii.  23 ;  Tit.  iii.  9 ;  and  impioue^  godless^ 
Matt.  V.  22 ;  Ps.  xciii.  8 ;  Jer.  v.  21. 

Hurtful  C/3Kal3€p<ky     N.  T.^.     LXX  once,  Prov.  x.  26. 

Drown  (^fivOl^owri).  Only  here  and  L.  y.  7,  note.  A 
strong  expression  of  the  results  of  avarice. 

Destruction  (SkeOpov).  See  on  1  Th.  i.  9,  and  additional 
note. 

Perdition  (airfiXeiav).  It  is  unsafe  to  distinguish  between 
SXeOpo^  destruction  in  general^  and  awcaiKeia  as  pointing  mainly 
to  destruction  of  the  soul.  'A^rcoXeta  sometimes  of  spiritual 
destruction,  as  Philip,  i.  28;  but  also  of  destruction  and 
waste  in  general,  as  Mk.  xiv.  4 ;  Acts  viii.  20.  One  is  re- 
minded of  Virgil,  Aen.  iii.  56  : 

'*  Quid  non  mortalia  pectora  cogiB^ 
Aari  sacra  fames  ?  *' 

10.  Love  of  money  ((fuXapyvpU).  N.  T.^.  See  4  Mace, 
i.  26.     Rare  in  Class. 

The  root  ip^a)*  Better,  a  root.  It  is  not  the  only  root. 
In  Paul  only  metaphorically.     See  Rom.  xi.  16,  IT,  18. 

Coveted  after  (ppeySfievoi).  See  on  ch.  iii.  1.  The  figure 
is  faulty,  since  <l>i\apyvpla  is  itself  a  desire. 


278  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Cb.  VL 

Have  erred  (aweirXavi^Offtrav).  More  correctly,  have  been 
led  astray.     ^P. 

Pierced  through  (irepUireipav).     N.  T.<>    <>LXX. 

Sorrows  (oSwok).     See  on  Rom.  ix.  2. 

11.  Man  of  God  (^ivOpanre  dcoO).  The  phrase  only  in  Past- 
orals.    Comp.  2  Tim.  iii.  17.     Not  an  official  designation. 

Righteousness  (SiKoioavvrfv).  See  on  Rom.  i.  17.  Not  in 
the  Pauline  dogmatic  sense,  but  as  Eph.  v.  9,  martd  rectitude 
according  to  God's  law. 

.  Meekness  (Trpaihrad^v).  N.  T.<>.  ^LXX.  Meekness  of 
feeling  (wddo^y.  The  usual  word  is  wpairri^^  often  in  Paul. 
See  on  meek^  Matt.  v.  5.  With  the  whole  verse  comp.  Tit. 
iii.  12. 

12.  Fight  the  good  fight  (^aympC^ov  rbv  tcaXJov  iiy&va^.  A 
phrase  peculiar  to  the  Pastorals.  Comp.  2  Tim.  iv.  7.  Not 
necessarily  a  metaphor  from  the  gymnasium  or  arena,  al- 
though iLya>v  contest  was  applied  originally  to  athletic  strug- 
gles. But  it  is  also  used  of  any  struggle,  outward  or  inward. 
See  Col.  ii.  1 ;  iv.  12. 

Lay  hold  (^hriXafiov).  ^P.  Frequent  in  Luke  and  Acts. 
Occasionally  in  this  strong  sense,  as  L.  xx.  20 ;  xxiii.  26; 
Acts  xviii.  17,  but  not  usually.  See  Mk.  viii.  23 ;  L.  ix.  47; 
Acts  ix.  27. 

Professed  a  good  profession  (oofioXdyrfaa^  rrfv  teaXtfp 
ofJLoXjoylav).  Botli  the  verb  and  the  noun  in  Paul,  but  this 
combination  only  here.  For  the  use  of  KaXif:  good  see  ch.  i. 
18,  and  ver.  12.  Rend,  confessed  the  good  confession^  and  see 
on  your  professed  subjection^  2  Cor.  ix.  13.  It  is  important 
to  preserve  the  force  of  the  article,  a  point  in  which  the 
A.  V.  is  often  at  fault. 


Ch.  VI.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  279 

13.  Quickeneth  (^^(oayopovvro^^.  ®P.  Rend,  who  pre- 
serveth  alive.  Quickeneth  is  according  to  the  reading  fw- 
owoiovvTO^  maketh  alive,  Comp.  LXX,  Ex.  i.  17;  Judg. 
viii.  19.  This  association  of  God  as  the  preserver  with 
confession  is  noteworthy  in  Matt.  x.  28-33. 

Witnessed  a  good  confession  (^fiaprvpi^aavTo^  rffv  tcaXifv 
ofjLoXoyCav^.  Better,  the  or  hi$  good  confession.  The  phrase 
is  unique.  The  good  confession  is  the  historical  confession 
of  Jesus  before  Pilate,  which  is  the  warrant  for  the  truthful- 
ness of  Timothy's  confession.  Christ  is  called  **  the  faithful 
and  true  tvitness "  (/xa/^rw),  Apoc.  i.  6 ;  iii.  14.  It  is  true 
that  fidprvf:  was  used  very  early  of  those  who  laid  down  their 
lives  for  the  truth  (see  Acts  xxii.  20 ;  Apoc.  ii.  18),  and 
Polycarp  speaks  of  to  /uifnvpiov  rov  aravpov  the  tvitnesa  of  the 
ero$8  (Philip,  vii.) ;  but  this  did  not  become  general  until 
after  the  end  of  the  second  century.* 

Before  Pontius  Pilate.  The  mention  of  Pontius  Pilate  in 
connection  with  the  crucifixion  is  of  constant  occurrence  in 
early  Christian  writings.  See  Ignatius,  Magn.  xi;  Tral.  ix; 
Smyrn,  i.  It  has  been  supposed  that  these  words  were  taken 
from  a  liturgical  confession  in  which  the  Christian  faith  was 
professed. 

14.  Commandment  (ivroXiiv).  Usually  of  a  single  com- 
mandment or  injunction,  but  sometimes  for  the  whole  body 
of  the  moral  precepts  of  Christianity,  as  2  Pet.  ii.  21 ;  iii.  2. 
The  reference  may  be  explained  by  fi  wapayyeXia  the  com- 
mandmentj  ch.  i.  5,  meaning  the  gospel  as  the  divine  standard 
of  conduct  and  faith.  Comp.  2  Tim.  i.  14.  The  phrase 
Ttjpelv  Tffp  ivToXijv  to  keep  the  commandment  is  Johannine. 
Sec  J.  xiv.  15,  21 ;  xv.  10 ;  1  J.  ii.  3,  4 ;  iii.  22,  24 ;  v.  3. 

Without  spot  (^aawtXav}.  Unsullied.  Comp.  Jas.  i.  27 ; 
1  Pet.  i.  19 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  14. 

•  See  Hegesippos  in  Eosebius,  J7.  E,  iii.  20,  32,  and  the  Epistle  of  the 
churches  of  Vienne  and  Lyons  to  the  churches  of  Asia  and  Phrygia,  Eusebios, 
JI.  E.  V.  1. 


280  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  VL 

Appearing  {hn^vcCiK).  See  on  2  Th.  ii.  8.  In  the  Books 
of  Maccabees  it  is  used  to  describe  appearances  and  inter- 
ventions of  God  for  the  aid  of  his  people.  See  2  Mace.  ii. 
21 ;  iii.  24 ;  xiv.  16  ;  xv.  27 ;  8  Mace.  v.  8,  51.  In  2  Tim. 
iv.  18,  and  Tit.  ii.  18,  it  denotes,  as  here,  the  second  coming 
of  Christ.  In  2  Tim.  i.  10,  his  historical  manifestation,  for 
which  also  the  verb  hn^lv€iv  is  used.  Tit.  ii.  11;  iii.  4. 
For  the  Lord's  second  advent  Paul  commonly  uses  irapowrla 
presence  ;  once  the  verb  <^aP€povv  to  make  manifest  (Col.  iii.  4), 
and  once  iLiroxaXvy^i^  revelation  (2  Th.  i.  7).  It  is  quite 
possible  that  the  word  hri^dveia^  so  characteristic  of  these 
Epistles,  grew  out  of  the  Gnostic  vocabulary,  in  which  it 
was  used  of  the  sudden  appearing  of  the  hitherto  concealed 
heavenly  aeon,  Christ.  This  they  compared  to  a  sudden 
light  from  heaven ;  and  Christ,  who  thus  appeared,  though 
only  docetically,  without  an  actual  fleshly  body,  was  styled 
trmrifp  saviour^  although  his  oneness  with  the  God  of  creation 
was  denied.  The  Creator  and  the  Redeemer  were  not  the 
same,  but  were  rather  opposed.  Christ  was  only  a  factor  of 
a  g^eat  cosmological  process  of  development.  As  Neander 
observes :  ^^The  distinctive  aim  of  the  Gnostics  was  to  appre- 
hend the  appearance  of  Christ  and  the  new  creation  proceeding 
from  him  in  their  connection  with  the  evolution  of  the  whole 
universe." 

15.  In  his  times  (^tcaipoi^  IBloi^}.  Better,  Ms  own  seasons^ 
or  its  own  seasons.  Either  the  seasons  proper  to  the  appear- 
ing, or  the  seasons  which  God  shall  see  fit  to  select.  See  on 
ch.  ii.  6 

Potentate  (hwdumfi).  Only  here  of  God.  Very  often  in 
LXX.  See  Sir.  xlvi.  5;  2  Mace.  xii.  15,  etc.  In  Class, 
applied  to  Zeus  (Soph.  Antig,  608).  In  Aesch.  Agam,  6, 
the  stars  are  called  XaiiirpoX  Bvvdarai  bright  rulers^  as  the 
regulators  of  the  seasons. 

Of  kings  (t&v  fiaffiK€u6vrmv).  Lit.  of  those  who  rule  at 
kings.  Only  here  for  the  noun  fiaaiXA^v.  BaaiXei^  fiaaikr 
4»v  king  of  kings^  Apoc.  xvii.  14 ;  xix.  16. 


Ch.vij  the  first  epistle  to  timothy.  281 

Of  lords  (jcvpi€u6vTfov).  Lit.  of  those  who  lord  it.  Only 
here  for  the  noun  tcvptmv.  See  icipio^  icuplmv  lord  of  lordsj 
Apoc.  xix.  16 ;  comp.  LXX,  Deut.  x.  17 ;  Ps.  cxxxv.  8. 
Probably  liturgical. 

16.  Who  only  hath  Immortality  (o  fjuiiw  ix»v  aOavcurlav). 
Comp.  a^dprrtp  incorruptible^  ch.  i.  17.  It  has  been  sug- 
gested that  there  is  here  a  possible  allusion  to  the  practice 
of  deifying  the  Roman  emperors,  with  an  implied  protest 
against  paying  them  divine  honours.  In  the  Asian  prov- 
inces generally,  this  imperial  cultus  was  organised  as  the 
highest  and  most  authoritative  religion.  Domitian  (81- 
96  A.D.)  assumed  the  titles  of  "Lord"  and  "God,"  and 
insisted  on  being  addressed  as  Dominus  et  Deus  noster  in  all 
communications  to  himself.  Trajan  (98-117  a.d.)  forbade 
his  subjects  to  address  him  as  "  Lord  "  and  "  God,"  but  Pliny 
(112  A.D.)  required  the  citizens  of  Bithynia  to  pay  divine 
honours  to  Trajan's  statue.  Hadrian  (117-138  A.D.)  allowed 
the  worship  of  his  statues.* 

In  light.     Comp.  Ps.  ciii.  2 ;  1  J.  i.  5,  7 ;  Jas.  i.  17. 

Which  no  man  can  approach  unto  (awpda-irov).  More 
simply,  unapproachable.     N.  T.^.     ^LXX. 

17.  Them  that  are  rich  in  this  world  (rok  wXovaloi^  iv 
r^  vvv  ai&vi).  Forming  one  conception.  Chrysostom  says : 
"Rich  in  this  world,  for  others  are  rich  in  the  world  to 
come."  Comp.  L.  xvi.  25.  Tikova(o^  rich^  by  Paul  only 
metaphorically.  See  2  Cor.  viii.  9;  Eph.  ii.  4.  The  phrase 
0  vvv  aU>v  the  now  age^  only  here  and  Tit.  ii.  12,  the  usual 
expression  being  6  aliav  o2rro9  thi%  age  or  worlds  which  is  not 
found  in  Pastorals. 

Be  not  highminded  (/x^  {n^Xt^poveiv).  The  verb  N.  T.^. 
^LXX,  <^Cla88.     Comp.  Rom.  xi.  20 ;  xii.  16. 

*  See  W.  M.  Ramsay,  The  Church  in  the  Soman  Empire  before  A.D.  170, 
and  the  monograph  of  £.  6.  Hardy,  Chrietianity  and  the  Soman  Gov*  nir 
ment,  the  best  treatise  on  the  subject  in  English. 


282  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  VI 

Uncertain  riches  (wXovrov  hhrfkjirqrC).  A  rendering  which 
weakens  the  sense  by  withdrawing  the  emphasis  from  the 
thought  of  uncertainty.  Rend,  the  uncertainty  of  richen.  For 
a  similar  construction  see  Rom.  vi.  4.  'ASiyXrfn;^  uncertainty^ 
N.  T.^.  ^LXX.  Originally  obscurity.  IIXoOto?  wealthy  fre- 
quent in  Paul,  but  never  in  the  material  sense.  The  play 
upon  the  word  rich  in  this  and  the  next  verse  will  be  noticed. 

To  Bnloy  (ek  awdKavtnv^.  Lit.  for  et^'oyment.  Only  here 
and  Heb.  xi.  25.  See  3  Mace.  vii.  16.  In  Class,  occasion- 
ally, but  the  verb  awoXaveiv  to  have  enjoyment  or  benefit  is 
common.  A  contrast  is  implied  between  being  highminded 
on  account  of  wealth  —  cherishing  and  worshipping  it  —  and 
rightly  enjoying  it.  The  true  character  of  such  enjoyment 
is  shown  in  the  next  verse. 

18.  Do  good  {iiyadoepyetv).  In  this  uncontracted  form, 
N.  T.^  ^LXX,  ^Class.  Comp.  Acts  xiv.  17.  The  usual 
word  is  ayaOoiroielvj  see  Mk.  iii.  4 ;  L.  vi.  9,  88,  85 ;  1  Pet. 
ii.  15.  ^P.  who  has  ipyd^eaOai  to  ayaObv  to  work  that  which 
is  ffood^  Rom.  ii.  10 ;  Gal.  vi.  10 ;  Eph.  iv.  28. 

Good  works  (^Ipyoi^  ivaXo!?).  For  tcaXtk  see  on  ch.  iii.  7, 
and  J.  x.  11 :  for  aya0(k  on  Rom.  v.  7. 

Ready  to  distribute  (ci/iiera&frou?).  N.  T.^.  ^LXX, 
^Class.  For  the  verb  fieraSiSdvai  to  impart  to  the  poor,  see 
L.  iii.  11 ;  Eph.  iv.  28. 

Willing  to  communicate  (^koivcovikov^^.  N.  T.^.  ®LXX. 
See  on  fellowship^  Acts  ii.  42,  and  comp.  Koivtoveiv  to  partake^ 
1  Tim.  v.  22,  and  Koivtk  common^  Tit.  i.  14.  Stronger  than 
the  preceding  word,  as  implying  a  personal  share  in  the 
pleasure  imparted  by  the  gift. 

19.  Laying  up  In  store  (awoOr^aavpt^fHrra^^.  N.  T.^. 
Laying  away  (airo). 


Ck.  VI.]  THB  FIB8T  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  288 

Eternal  life  (r^  Smw^  Sb»^)-  More  correctly,  the  life  which 
i$  life  indeed^  or  that  which  i$  truly  life.     See  on  ch.  v.  3. 

20.  That  which  is  committed  to  thy  trust  (t^v  irapa- 
di/JKflv).  Only  in  Pastorals.  Comp.  2  Tim.  i.  12, 14.  From 
irapit  beside  or  with,  and  nOA^cu  to  place.  It  may  mean  either 
something  put  be$ide  another  as  an  addition  or  appendix  (so 
Mk.  yi.  41 ;  Acts  xvi.  84),  or  something  put  with  or  in  the 
keeping  of  another  as  a  trust  or  deposit.  In  the  latter  sense 
always  in  LXX.  See  Lev.  vi.  2,  4 ;  Tob.  x.  18 ;  2  Maoc. 
iii.  10, 15.  Hdt.  vi.  78,  of  giving  hostages ;  ix.  45,  of  con- 
fidential words  intrusted  to  the  hearer's  honour.  The  verb 
is  a  favorite  with  Luke.  The  meaning  here  is  that  teaching 
which  Timothy  had  received  from  Paul ;  the  ^^ sound  words'* 
which  he  was  to  guard  as  a  sacred  trust,  and  communicate 
to  others. 

Vain  babblings  {KcvoilHovCa^^.  Only  in  Pastorals.  ^LXX, 
^Class.     From  K€v<k  empty  and  ^i^  voice. 

Oppositions  of  science  falsely  so  called  (ivnOdaei^  Ti}^ 
^^^evSc^vfifiov  yvwaeos).  Better,  oppositions  of  tJie  falsely -named 
knowledge.  ^Avrffleat^^  N.  T.^.  ^LXX.  Used  here,  in 
its  simple  sense,  of  the  arguments  and  teachings  of  those 
who  opposed  the  true  Christian  doctrine  as  intrusted  to 
Timothy.  Tv&ai^  knowledge  was  the  characteristic  word  of 
the  Gnostic  school,  the  most  formidable  enemy  of  the  church 
of  the  second  century.  The  Gnostics  claimed  a  superior 
knowledge  peculiar  to  an  intellectual  caste.  According  to 
them,  it  was  by  this  philosophic  insight,  as  opposed  to  faith, 
that  humanity  was  to  be  regenerated.  Faith  was  suited  only 
to  the  rude  masses,  the  animal-men.  The  intellectual  ques- 
tions which  occupied  these  teachers  were  two :  to  explain 
the  work  of  creation,  and  to  account  for  the  existence  of 
evil.  Their  ethical  problem  was  how  to  develop  the  higher 
nature  in  the  environment  of  matter  which  was  essentially 
evil.  In  morals  they  ran  to  two  opposite  extremes  —  asceti- 
cism and  licentiousness.     The  principal  representatives  of 


284  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  VL 

the  school  were  Basilides,  Valentinus,  and  Marcion.  Al- 
though  Gnosticism  as  a  distinct  system  did  not  reach  its  full 
development  until  about  the  middle  of  the  second  century, 
foreshadowings  of  it  appear  in  the  heresy  at  which  Paul's 
Colossian  letter  was  aimed.  It  is  not  strange  if  we  find  in 
the  Pastoral  Epistles  allusions  pointing  to  Gnostic  errors; 
but,  as  already  remarked,  it  is  impossible  to  refer  these  allus- 
ions to  any  one  definite  system  of  error.  The  word  yvAai^ 
cannot  therefore  be  interpreted  to  mean  the  Gnostic  system ; 
while  it  may  properly  be  understood  as  referring  to  that  con- 
ceit of  knowledge  which  opposed  itself  to  the  Christian  faith. 
^euSAiwfio^falaely'namedj  N.  T.^.  ^LXX.  It  characterises 
the  yv&a-i^  as  claiming  that  name  without  warrant,  and  as 
being  mere  vain  babbling.     Comp.  Col.  ii.  8. 

21.   Professing.    See  on  ch.  ii.  10. 

Erred  (^^ardxff^av).  See  on  ch.  i.  6,  and  oomp.  2  Tim. 
ii.  18. 

Grace  be  with  thee.  The  correct  reading  is  ^^  ^/^>^ 
with  you.  Although  addressed  to  an  individual,  he  is  in- 
cluded in  the  church.  This  brief  benediction  occurs  in  Paul 
only  in  Colossians. 


THE   SECOND   EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


CHAPTER  I. 


1.  An  apostle  by  the  will  of  God.  So  2d  Corinthians, 
Ephesians,  Colossians.  1st  Corinthians  adds  eaJUd  or  hy 
call  (#cXi;to9). 

According  to  the  promise,  etc.  (jcar*  hrajyeXlav).  'Attoo-- 
riXjo^  Karit  does  not  appear  in  any  of  the  Pauline  salutations. 
In  1  Tim.  xar  iiriTayifv  according  to  the  commandment^  and 
in  Titus  Karh  irUrriv^  etc.,  according  to  the  faiths  etc.  Kar* 
iirayyekCav^  though  in  other  connections,  Acts  xiii.  28 ;  Gal. 
iii.  29.  ^EirayyeXCa^  primarily  announcement^  but  habitually 
promise  in  N.  T.  In  Pastorals  only  here  and  1  T.  iv.  8. 
With  the  promise  of  the  life  in  Christ  goes  the  provision  for 
its  proclamation.  Hence  the  apostle,  in  proclaiming  ^^  ye  shall 
live  through  Christ,''  is  an  apostle  according  to  the  promise. 

Of  life  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  The  phrase  promise 
of  life  only  here  and  1  Tim.  iv.  8.  ^P.  Life  in  Christ  is  a 
Pauline  thought.  See  Rom.  viii.  2 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  10 ;  Rom. 
vi.  2-14;  Gal.  ii.  19,  20;  Col.  iii.  4;  PhiUp.  i.  21.  It  is 
also  a  Johannine  thought;  see  J.  i.  4;  iii.  16;  xi.  26; 
xiv.  6 ;  1  J.  V.  11. 

2.  Dearly  beloved  (^ayamrrfi).  Better,  beloved.  Comp. 
1  Cor.  iv.  17.  In  1  Tim.  i.  2,  Timothy  is  addressed  as 
71^109  true^  and  Titus  in  Tit.  i.  4. 

3.  I  thank  God  (x^pf'V  ix^  r^  6e^.  Lit.  I  have  thanks 
to  God.     The  phrase  in  L.  xvii.  9;  Acts  ii.  47;  ^P.  unless 

2S6 


286  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  L 

2  Cor.  i.  15;*  1  Tim.  i.  12;  Heb.  xii.  28;  8  J.  4.  Paul 
uses  eirxapurrA  I  give  thank$  (not  in  Pastorals)  or  euXoytf- 
709  0  O&k  bleised  be  God  (not  in  Pastorals).  The  phrase 
X^pf'V  ix^  ^  ^  Latinism,  habere  ffratiam^  of  which  several  are 
found  in  Pastorals,  f 

I  serve  (Xarpewai).  In  Pastorals  only  here.  Comp.  Rom. 
i.  9,  25 ;  Philip,  iii.  8.  Frequent  in  Hebrews.  Orig^ally, , 
to  serve  for  hire.  In  N.  T.  both  of  ritual  service,  as  Heb. 
viii.  5 ;  ix.  9 ;  x.  2 ;  xiii.  10 ;  and  of  worship  or  service  gen- 
erally, as  L.  i.  74;  Rom.  i.  9.  Especially  of  the  service 
rendered  to  God  by  the  Israelites  as  his  peculiar  people,  as 
Acts  xxvi.  7.  Comp.  Xarpela  service^  Rom.  ix.  4;  Heb. 
ix.  1,  6.  In  LXX  always  of  the  service  of  God  or  of  heathen 
deities. 

From  my  forefathers  (^airi  wpoy6vwv).     n/Mpyoyo9,  Past^. 

See  on  1  Tim.  v.  4.  The  phrase  N.  T.®.  For  the  thought, 
comp.  Acts  xxiv.  14 ;  Philip,  iii.  6.  He  means,  in  the  spirit 
and  with  the  principles  inherit^  from  his  fathers.  Comp. 
the  sharp  distinction  between  the  two  periods  of  Paul's  life, 
Gal.  i.  13,  14. 

With  pure  conscience  (^iv  /cadapa  avp&Siiaei).  As  1  Tim. 
iii.  9.  The  phrase,  Past^.  Heb.  ix.  14  has  tcadapiel  rifv 
avveiSrja-iv  ^/i&v  shall  purge  our  conscience. 

That  without  ceasing  (cb?  aBiaXeiirrov).  The  passage  is 
much  involved.  Note  (1)  that  x^P^^  ^X^  '''^  ^^V  I  thank  Q-od 
must  have  an  object.  (2)  That  object  cannot  be  that  he 
unceasingly  remembers  Timothy  in  hia  prayers.  (3)  That 
object,  though  remote,  is  inrS/Avriaip  Xal3a)v  when  I  received 
reminder  (ver.  6).     He  thanks  God  as  he  is  reminded  of  the 

•  Where  Westcott  and  Hort  read  x^P^^ioV,  Tischendorf  and  Weiss  x^P*" 
thanks. 

t  As  dC  tiv  alrlap  quam  ob  rem  (2  Tim.  i.  6,  12 ;  Tit.  L  13) :  3r  rpirow 
quemadmodum  (2  Tim.  iii  8)  :  otovs  quales  (2  Tim.  iii.  11).  Little  or  noth- 
ing can  be  inferred  from  these  instances  as  to  the  composition  of  these  £pi^ 
ties  at  Rome. 


Ch.  I.]  THE  SBGOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  287 

faith  of  Timothy's  ancestors  and  of  Timothy  himself.  Rend, 
freely,  "I  thank  God  whom  I  serve  from  my  forefathers 
with  pure  conscience,  as  there  goes  along  with  my  prayers  an 
unceasing  remembrance  of  thee,  and  a  daily  and  nightly  long- 
ing, as  I  recall  thy  tears,  to  see  thee,  that  I  may  be  filled  with 
joy  —  I  thank  God,  I  say,  for  that  I  have  been  reminded  of 
the  unfeigned  faith  that  is  in  thee,"  etc.  *A8id\€iirrov  uneeM- 
ing^  only  here  and  Rom.  ix.  2.  * AhioKElima^  uneeanngly^ 
Rom.  i.  9;  1  Th.  i.  8;  ii.  18;  v.  17. 

I  have  remembrance  (Jxa^  rifv  /iveCav).  The  phrase  once 
in  Paul,  1  Th.  iii.  6.  Commonly,  /iv€(av  woiovfjuii  I  make 
mention^  Rom.  i.  9 ;  Eph.  i.  16 ;  1  Th.  i.  2 ;  Philem.  4. 

Night  and  day  (uukto^  teal  fifUpai).  See  1  Tim.  v.  5. 
The  phrase  in  Paul,  1  Th.  ii.  9 ;  iii.  10 ;  2  Th.  iii.  8.  Const, 
with  greatly  denting.^ 

4.  Greatly  desiring  (hnirod&v).  Better,  hnging.  Pastor- 
als only  here.  Quite  frequent  in  Paul.  See  Rom.  i.  11; 
2  Cor.  V.  2 ;  ix.  14 ;  Philip,  i.  8,  etc.  The  compounded  prep- 
osition hrX  does  not  denote  intensity,  as  A.  V.  greatly^  but 
direction.     Comp.  ch.  iv.  9,  21. 

Being  mindful  of  thy  tears  (^^lAvqiUiH^  aov  r&v  Scucpvmv). 
The  verb  ^fii^atceaOai.  in  Paul,  only  1  Cor.  xi.  2.  In  Pastor- 
als only  here.  The  words  give  the  reason  for  the  longing  to 
see  Timothy.  The  allusion  is  probably  to  the  tears  shed  by 
Timothy  at  his  parting  from  Paul.f  One  is  naturally 
reminded  of  the  parting  of  Paul  with  the  Ephesian  elders  at 
Miletus  (Acts  xx.  17flf.,  see  especially  ver.  37).  Holtzmann 
remarks  that  Paul's  discourse  on  that  occasion  is  related  to 
this  passage  as  programme  to  performance.     Bonds  await  the 

*  Others  with  /  Jiave  remembrance  ;  but  without  eeaeing  would  make  it 
superfluous.    Comp.  1  Th.  iii.  10. 

t  According  to  Hofmann,  they  are  epistolary  tears{  /  )  —  a  letter  of  Timo- 
thy to  Paul,  expressing  his  distress  at  the  apostle^s  imprisonment,  and,  there- 
fore, an  occasion  of  thanksgiying  to  Paul. 


288  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  L 

apostle  (Acts  xx.  28),  and  Paul  appears  as  a  prisoner 
(2  Tim.  i.  8).  He  must  fulfil  his  course  (Acts  xx.  24) ; 
here  he  has  fulfilled  it  (2  Tim.  iv.  7).  He  bids  the  overseers 
take  heed  to  the  flock,  for  false  teachers  will  arise  in  the 
bosom  of  the  church  (Acts  xx.  29,  80) ;  these  letters  con- 
tain directions  for  the  guidance  of  the  flock,  and  denuncia- 
tions of  heretical  teachers. 

That  I  may  be  filled  with  joy.  Const,  with  longing  to 
see  you, 

5.  When  I  call  to  remembrance  (Mfivrjaiv  Xafimv). 
The  object  of  x^P^^  hc^'^  ^^^'  8*  ^^^'  ^^^  received  a 
reminding.  The  phrase,  N.  T.^.  *T7r6fivrf<ns  reminding  (but 
sometimes  intransitive,  remembrance^^  only  here,  2  Pet.  i.  18 ; 
iii.  1.  In  LXX  three  times.  As  distinguished  from  ivdfA' 
vqtris;  remembrance  (1  Cor.  xi.  24,  25)  it  signifies  a  reminding 
or  being  reminded  by  another ;  while  hvaiivqai^  is  a  recalling 
by  one's  self. 

Unfeigned  faith  that  is  in  thee  (r^  hf  aoX  awirotcptrov 
iriarcto^y.  See  on  1  Tim.  i.  5.  For  the  peculiar  collocation 
of  the  Greek  words,  comp.  Acts  xvii.  28 ;  Rom.  i.  12 ;  Eph. 
i.  15.  The  writer's  thought  is  probably  not  confined  to 
Christian  faith,  but  has  in  view  the  continuity  of  Judaism 
and  Christianity.  In  ver.  8  he  speaks  of  serving  God  from 
his  forefathers.  In  Acts  xxiv.  14  Paul  is  represented  as 
saying  that  even  as  a  Christian  he  serves  the  God  of  his 
fathers,  believing  all  things  contained  in  the  law  and  the 
prophets. 

Dwelt  (iwfKffaep).  Paul  uses  the  verb  with  Mn,  the  divine 
Spirit^  God^  the  word  of  Christy  but  nowhere  ^th  faith.  The 
phrase /aiYA  dwells  in^  N.  T.^.  According  to  Paul,  Christians 
are  or  stand  in  faith  ;  but  faith  is  not  represented  as  dwelling 
in  them.  Christ  dwells  in  the  heart  through  faith  (Eph. 
iii.  17). 


Cb.  I.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  289 

First  (wp&Tov).  With  reference  to  Timothy,  and  with  a 
comparative  sense,  as  Matt.  v.  24  ;  vii.  5 ;  Mk.  iii.  27 ;  1  Th. 
iv.  16,  etc.  This  is  shown  bj  the  last  clause  of  the  verse. 
The  writer  merely  means  that  faith  had  already  dwelt  in 
Timothy's  grandmother  and  mother  before  it  did  in  him. 
How  much  farther  back  his  believing  ancestry  went  he  does 
not  say.     Comp.  Acts  xvi.  1. 

Qrandmother  (m^^mw)-  N.  T.^.  Once  in  LXX,  4  Mace. 
xvi.  9.  Later  Greek.  The  correct  classical  word  is  n/fdtf. 
See  Aristoph.  Ach.  49;  Plato,  Bepub.  461  D.  From  the 
emphasis  upon  Timothy's  receiving  his  training  from  his 
Jewish  mother,  it  has  been  inferred  that  his  father  died  early. 
That  he  was  the  child  of  a  mixed  marriage  appears  from 
Acts  xvi.  1. 

I  am  persuaded  (ir^€urfuu).  The  verb  in  Pastorals  only 
iiere  and  ver.  12.     Often  in  Paul. 

6.  Wherefore  (&'  fjv  alrCav).  Lit.  far  which  cause.  *Airta 
aot  in  Paul.  The  phrase  in  ver.  12 ;  Tit.  i.  18 ;  also  in  Luke, 
Acts,  and  Hebrews.     Paul's  expression  is  Sm(  or  &^  tovto. 

Stir  up  C&va^€»Trvpelvy  N.  T.^.  LXX,  Gen.  xlv.  27 ; 
i  Mace.  xiii.  7.  In  Class.,  as  Eurip.  Electro^  1121,  kif  ai  tri 
l^wnvpel^  veUrf  via  you  are  rekindling  old  strifes.  From  &vd 
again^  (fcmf?  alive^  irvp  fire.  To  l^mrvpov  is  a  piece  of  hot  coal^ 
%n  ember^  a  spark.  Plato  calls  the  survivors  of  the  flood 
4rfwcpiL  ^mrvpa  rot)  r&v  hvOfMnrtov  r^ivov^  SuureawrfUva  small 
sparks  of  the  human  race  preserved.  The  word  is,  therefore, 
figurative,  to  stir  or  kindle  the  embers.  'Ay^  combines  the 
meanings  again  and  tip,  rekindle  or  kindle  up.  Vulg.  only 
the  former,  resuscitare.  Comp.  ianhmuf  kindle  up,  L.  xii.  49 ; 
Jas.  iii.  5.  It  is  not  necessary  to  assume  that  TimothyV 
^al  had  become  cold. 

The  gift  of  Qod  (ri  x^^  ^^  ^^*  See  on  1  Tun. 
iv.  14. 

TOk  IT.  ^19 


290  WORD  STUDIES  ^N  THE  NEW  TBSTAMEKT.         [Ch.  L 

The  laying  on  of  my  hands.    See  on  1  Tim.  iv.  14. 

7.  Spirit  of  fear  {irveOfAa  SetXla^^.  Better,  of  cowardiee. 
N.  T.^.  Comp.  Rom.  viii.  15,  and  see  on  the  Spirit^  Rom. 
viii.  4,  §  6. 

Of  power  (Bwdfietoi^.  Found  in  all  the  Pauline  Epistles 
except  Philemon.  In  Pastorals  only  here,  ver.  8,  and  ch. 
iii.  5.  Not  used  by  our  writer  in  the  sense  of  working  mira- 
ele9y  which  it  sometimes  has  in  Paul.  Here,  the  power  to 
overcome  all  obstacles  and  to  face  all  dangers.  It  is  closely 
linked  with  the  sense  of  irapprfcCa  boldness. 

Of  love  (Jt'idinf:).    See  on  Gal.  v.  22. 

Of  a  sound  mind  (aciHf>povurfAov).  N.  T.^.  ^LXX,^Class. 
Not  self-control,  but  the  faculty  of  generating  it  in  others  or  in 
ime^s  self  making  them  trw^pov^  of  sound  mind.  Comp.  Tit. 
ii.  4.     Rend,  discipline.     See  on  aoiHf>poavvrf^  1  Tim.  ii.  9. 

8.  Be  not  ashamed  (fji^  hraurxyvd^^.    See  on  L.  ix.  26. 

Testimony  (^fAafrrvpiov).     See  on  1  Tim.  ii.  6. 

His  prisoner  (hdayuov  axnov).  Paul  styles  himself  the 
prisoner  of  the  Lord^  Eph.  iii.  1 ;  iv.  i ;  Philem.  i.  9.  Only 
here  in  Pastorals.  Not  in  a  figurative  sense,  one  who  belongs 
to  Christy  but  one  who  is  imprisoned  because  of  his  labours  as  an 
apostle  of  Christ.  On  Paul's  supposed  second  imprisonment, 
see  Introd.  IV. 

Be  partaker  of  the  afflictions  {arvvKaKowddrfa-op).  Only 
here  and  ch.  ii.  3.  ^LXX,  ^Class.  The  compounded  a-vv 
with,  not  tvith  the  gospel^  as  Rev.,  but  with  me.  Share  afflic- 
tions with  me  for  the  gospel. 

'  According  to  the  power  of  Qod.    Which  enables  him  to 
endure  hardness.     Connect  with  be  partaker^  etc. 


Ch.  I.]  THB  SECOND  EPI8TLB  TO  TIMOTHY.  291 

9.  Who  hath  saved  us.  Salvation  is  ascribed  to  God. 
See  on  our  Saviour^  1  Tim.  i.  1. 

Called  (^KaXAravTt^^.  Comp.  1  Tim.  vi.  12,  and  see  Rom. 
viii.  80  ;  ix.  11 ;  1  Cor.  i.  9 ;  Gal.  i.  6 ;  1  Th.  ii.  12.  It  is 
Paul's  technical  term  for  God's  summoning  men  to  salvation. 
In  Paul  the  order  is  reversed :  called^  saved. 

With  a  holy  calling  («c\i^ei  a^Cq.).  KXijai^  eaUing^  often 
in  Paul ;  but  the  phrase  holy  eaUing  only  here.  In  Paul, 
kkrjai^  sometimes  as  here,  with  the  verb  tcaXetv  to  eaU^  as 
1  Cor.  vii.  20 ;  Eph.  iv.  1,  4. 

Purpose  (irfM&riv).     See  on  Acts  xi.  28 ;  Rom.  ix.  11. 

Grace  which  was  given  (x^y  rifv  io0€iaav).  Comp. 
Rom.  xii.  8,  6;  xv.  15;  1  Cor.  iii.  10;  Eph.  iii.  8;  iv.  7. 
The  phrase  only  here  in  Pastorals. 

Before  the  world  began  (irpo  xpi^^^  oImvImv).  See  ad- 
ditional note  on  2  Th.  i.  9.  In  Pastorals  the  phrase  only  here 
and  Tit.  i.  2.  Not  in  Paul.  Lit.  before  eternal  times.  If  it  is 
insisted  that  aU»vio^  means  everlasting^  this  statement  is  ab- 
surd. It  is  impossible  that  anything  should  take  place  btfore 
everlasting  times.  That  would  be  to  say  that  there  was  a 
beginning  of  times  which  are /ram  everlasting.  Paul  puts  the 
beginnings  of  salvation  in  God's  purpose  before  the  time  of 
the  world  (1  Cor.  ii.  7 ;  1  Pet.  i.  20);  and  Christ's  partici- 
pation in  the  saving  counsels  of  God  prior  to  time,  goes  with 
the  Pauline  doctrine  of  Christ's  preexistence.  The  meaning, 
therefore,  of  this  phrase  is  rightly  given  in  A.V. :  b^ore  the 
world  began^  that  is,  before  time  was  reckoned  by  aeons  or 
cycles.  Then,  in  that  timeless  present,  grace  was  given  to 
us  in  God's  decree^  not  actually^  since  we  did  not  exist.  The 
gift  planned  and  ordered  in  the  eternal  counsels  is  here 
treated  as  an  actual  bestowment. 

10.  Made  manifest  (^v^ptn^O^laav).  See  on  1  Tim.  iii.  16. 
In  contrast  with  the  preceding  clause,  this  marks  the  histor- 


292  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ca.  £ 

ical  fulfilment  in  time  of  the  eternal,  divine  counsel.  Comp. 
Tit.  i.  3.  There  is  an  implication  that  the  divine  counsel 
was  hidden  until  the  fitting  time :  comp.  Eph.  iii.  5,  and  see 
Col.  i.  26. 

By  the  appearing  (BiiL  tQ?  ^tti^pc^).   See  on  2  Th.  ii.  8 ; 

1  Tim.  vi.  14. 

Who  hath  abolished  (^Karapyi^avro^^.  Better,  nnee  he 
made  of  none  effect.  In  Pastorals  only  here.  Frequent  in 
Paul.  See  on  make  withovt  effect^  Rom.  iii.  3,  and  comp.  is 
swallowed  up^  1  Cor.  xv.  54.  Notice  the  association  of  the 
verb  with  hnif>dvua  appearing  in  2  Th.  ii.  8. 

Brought  to  light  (<^a>r^ain-09).     Only  here  in  Pastorals. 

In  Paul,  1  Cor.  iv.  5  ;  Eph.  i.  18 ;  iii.  9. 

I  mmortal ity  (a^dapalav) .  Better,  incorruption.  With  this 
exception,  only  in  Paul.  See  Wisd.  ii.  23 ;  vi.  9 ;  4  Mace, 
ix.  22 ;  xvii.  12. 

11.  A  teacher  of  the  Gentiles  (^BcSda-Koko^  iOv&v),  Omit 
of  the  Gentiles.  Comp.  1  Tim.  ii.  7,  from  which  the  words 
were  probably  transferred  when  the  three  Epistles  were 
jointly  edited.  Paul  calls  himself  an  apostle^  and  describes 
himself  as  preaching  {/crjpwra-tov^ ;  but  lie  nowhere  calls  him- 
self SiBdaxaXo^  a  teacher^  although  he  uses  ScSdaxeiv  to  teach^ 
of  himself,  1  Cor.  iv.  17  ;  Col.  i.  28.  He  also  uses  iiiaxn 
teaching^  of  matter  given  by  him  to  the  converts,  Rom.  vi.  17; 
xvi.  17  ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  6.  He  distinguishes  between  the  apos- 
tle and  the  teacher,  1  Cor.  xii.  28  ;  Eph.  iv,  11. 

12.  I  am  not  ashamed.     Comp.  ver.  8,  and  Rom.  i.  16. 

Whom  I  have  believed  (^  ireirUrrevKo).  Or,  in  whom  I 
have  put  my  trust.     See  on  J.  i.  12  ;  ii.  22  ;  Rom.  iv.  5. 

Able  (ivvar6^).  Often  used  with  a  stronger  meaning,  as 
1  Cor.  i.  26»  mighty ;  Acts  xxv.  5,  oi  hvvarol  the  chief  men : 


Ch.  I.]  THE  SECOND   EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  298 

as  a  designation  of  God,  o  Bupar6^  the  mighty  one^  Luke  i.  49 : 
of  preeminent  ability  or  power  in  something,  as  of  Jesus, 
Suvairk  hf  Ipy^  teal  \iy^  mighty  in  deed  and  wordf  L.  xxiv. 
19  :  of  spiritual  agencies,  *'  The  weapons  of  our  warfare  are 
War^  migkty^^^  etc.,  2  Cor.  x.  4.     Very  often  in  LXX. 

That  which  I  have  committed  (r^y  wapaOiiicffv  /jlov). 
More  correctly,  thcU  which  has  been  committed  unto  me :  my 
sacred  trust.  The  meaning  of  the  passage  is  that  Paul  is 
convinced  that  God  is  strong  to  enable  him  to  be  faithful  to 
his  apostolic  calling,  in  spite  of  the  sufferings  which  attend 
it,  untU  the  day  when  he  shall  be  summoned  to  render  his 
final  account.  The  irapaOi^Kr)  or  thing  committed  to  him 
was  the  same  as  that  which  he  had  committed  to  Timothy 
that  he  might  teach  others  (1  Tim.  vi.  20).  It  was  the  form 
of  sound  words  (ver.  13);  that  which  Timothy  had  heard 
from  Paul  (ch.  ii.  2);  that/atV  deposit  (ver.  14).  It  was 
the  gospel  to  which  Paul  had  been  appointed  (ver.  11); 
which  had  been  intrusted  to  him  (1  Tim.  i.  11 ;  Tit.  i.  8 ; 
comp.  1  Cor.  ix.  17 ;  Gal.  ii.  7  ;  1  Th.  ii.  4).  The  verb 
'rraparcOA/cu  to  commit  to  one's  charge  is  a  favourite  with  Luke. 
See  L.  xii.  48  ;  Acts  xx.  32.  Sums  deposited  with  a  Bishop 
for  the  use  of  the  church  were  called  trapaOrjKcu  tQ?  iKKkriaCai 
trust-funds  of  the  church.  In  the  Epistle  of  the  pseudo-Igna- 
tius to  Hero  (VII)  we  read  :  "  Keep  my  deposit  (irapaOrjicriv) 
which  I  and  Christ  have  committed  (irapO^fieOa')  to  you.  I 
commit  (iraparlOfifu)  to  you  the  church  of  the  Antiochenes.'* 

That  day  {ixeivrfp  t^v  fifiipav).  The  day  of  Christ's  sec- 
ond appearing.  See  on  1  Th.  v.  2.  In  this  sense  the  phrase 
occurs  in  the  N.  T.  Epistles  only  ch.  i.  18 ;  iv.  8 ;  2  Th.  i.  10; 
but  often  in  the  Gospels,  as  Matt.  vii.  22 ;  xxvi.  29 ;  Mk. 
xiii.  82,  etc.  The  day  of  the  Lord's  appearing  is  designated 
by  Paul  as  i}  fiiUpc^  absolutely,  the  day^  Rom.  xiii.  12 ;  1  Cor. 
iii.  13 ;  1  Th.  v.  4  :  fiiUpa  rod  tcvplov  the  day  of  the  Lordj 
1  Cor.  i.  8 ;  2  Cor.  i.  14 ;  1  Th.  v.  2 ;  2  Th.  u.  2 :  the  day 
of  Jesus  Christ  or  Christy  Philip,  i.  6, 10 ;  ii.  16 :  the  day  when 
God  shall  judge^  Rom.  ii.  16  :  the  day  of  wrath  and  revelation 


294  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ck.  L 

of  the  righteouB  judgment  of  Q-od^  Rom.  \i.  bi  the  day  of 
redemption^  Eph.  iv.  80. 

18.  The  form  (jlnrvrvirwriv).  Pasts^.  ^LXX,  ^Class. 
See  on  1  Tim.  i.  16. 

Of  sound  words  (vyuuviprwv  \iywp).    See  on  1  Tim.  i.  16. 

In  faith  and  love.  The  teaching  is  to  be  held,  preached, 
and  practised,  not  as  a  mere  schedule  of  conduct,  however 
excellent,  but  with  the  strong  conviction  of  faith  and  the 
fervour  of  love. 

14.  That  good  thing  which  was  committed  (rifv  tcaXiiP 
irapa0rfiCf)v).  That  fair,  honourable  trust,  good  and  beautiful 
in  itself,  and  honourable  to  him  who  receives  it.  The  phrase 
N.  T.^.  See  on  ver.  12.  Comp.  the  good  warfare^  1  Tim. 
i.  18  ;  teaching^  1  Tim.  iv.  6 ;  Jight^  1  Tim.  vi.  12  ;  eo^feseion^ 
1  Tim.  vi.  12. 

•  15.  in  Asia.  Proconsular  Asia,  known  as  A»ia  Propria 
or  simply  Asia.  It  was  the  Roman  province  formed  out  of 
the  kingdom  of  Pergamus,  which  was  bequeathed  to  the 
Romans  by  Attains  III  (b.c.  180),  including  the  Greek 
cities  on  the  western  coast  of  Asia,  and  the  adjacent  islands 
with  Rhodes.  It  included  Mysia,  Lydia,  Caria,  and  Phrygia. 
The  division  Asia  Major  and  Asia  Minor  was  not  adopted 
until  the  fourth  century  a.d.  Asia  Minor  (Anatolia)  was 
bounded  by  the  Euxine,  Aegean,  and  Mediterranean  on  the 
north,  west,  and  south  ;  and  on  the  east  by  the  mountains  on 
the  west  of  the  upper  course  of  the  Euphrates. 

Have  turned  away  (a7re<rrpa^o-ay).  Not  from  the  &ith, 
but  from  Paul. 

16.    Onesiphorus.     Mentioned  again,  ch.  iv.  19. 

Refreshed  (ai/^i/fo/).  N.  T.^.  Several  times  in  LXX ; 
often  in   Class.     'AvfiC-^vft?  refreshing^  Acts  iii.    19 ;    and 


Ch.  u.]  the  second  epistle  to  timothy.  295 

Karay^vx&'V  to  eoolj  L.  xvi.  24.     Originally  to  eool;  to  revive 
by  fresh  air. 

Chain  (iXvaiv).  Once  in  Paul,  Eph.  yi.  20.  Several  times 
ill  Mark,  Luke,  and  Acts.  It  may  mean  handcuffs  or  manacles 
(see  Lightfoot,  Philippians^  ed.  of  1896,  p.  8),  but  is  not 
limited  to  that  sense  either  in  classical  or  later  Greek.  See 
Hdt.  ix.  74 ;  Eurip.  Orest.  984.     Mk.  y.  4  is  not  decisive. 

18.  Very  well  (/S^rioy).  N.  T.^.  The  sense  is  compar- 
ative ;  better  than  I  can  tell  you. 


CHAPTER  n. 

1.  Therefore  (pifp).    In  view  of  what  has  been  said  in  the 

previous  chapter. 

Be  strong  (ivSmniiMv).  In  Paul,  Rom.  iv.  20 ;  Eph.  vi. 
10  ;  Philip,  iv.  13.     Lit.  be  strengthened  inwardly. 

In  the  grace  (iv  t^  xdptri).  Grace  is  the  inward  source  of 
strength.  Comp.  the  association  of  grace  and  strength  in 
2  Cor.  xii.  9. 

2.  Among  many  witnesses  (&^  woW&v  iiafrrvpo^v).  Lih 
through  the  medium  of^  and  therefore  in  the  presence  of. 

Commit  (irapdOov).  As  a  trust  or  deposit  (irapadriicri). 
See  on  ch.  i.  12, 14.     In  Paul  only  1  Cor.  x.  27. 

Faithful  (TTurroJ?).  Not  believing^  but  trusty^  as  appears 
from  the  context.     See  on  1  J.  i.  9 ;  Apoc.  i.  5  ;  iii.  14. 

Able  (iKavoX).  In  Pastorals  only  here.  Very  common  in 
Luke  and  Acts :  a  few  times  in  Paul.  See  on  many^  Rom. 
XV.  28. 


296  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ck.  U 

8.  Endure  hardness  (avptcaxoTrdOffaov).  Comp.  ch.  i.  8. 
A.  V.  fails  to  give  the  force  of  avp  with.  Rend,  suffer  hard' 
$hip  with  me. 

Soldier  (orpanAmii').  Only  here  in  Pastorals.  ^P.  Fre- 
quent  in  Acts. 

4.  That  warreth  (jrrpar€u6i»€ifo^).  Better,  when  engaged  in 
warfare.  Rev.  no  soldier  an  service.  In  Paul,  1  Cor.  ix.  7 ; 
2  Cor.  X.  8.     In  Pastorals  only  here  and  1  Tim.  i.  18. 

Entangleth  himself  (ifiirX^Kerat).  Only  here  and  2  Pet. 
ii.  20  (see  note).  This  has  been  made  an  argument  for 
clerical  celibacy. 

In  the  affairs  of  this  life  (rai^  rod  fiiov  irpayfAarCcw^. 
Better,  affairs  of  life.  Not  as  A.  V.  implies,  in  contrast 
with  the  affairs  of  the  next  life,  but  simply  the  ordinary 
occupations  of  life.  In  N.  T.  filo^  means  either  means  of  sub- 
sistence^ as  Mk.  xii.  44 ;  L.  viii.  43 ;  1  J.  iii.  17 ;  or  course 
of  life,  as  L.  viii.  14.     B/b?  ^P. 

Him  who  hath  chosen  him  to  be  a  soldier  (r^  arparo- 

\oyijaaPTi}.     N.  T.^.      ^LXX.      Better,   enrolled  him  as  a 
soldier. 

5.  Strive  for  masteries  (A^X^).  N.  T.^.  ^LXX.  Paul 
uses  aytDvi^eaOai  (see  1  Cor.  ix.  25),  which  appears  also  in 
1  Tim.  iv.  10;  vi.  12;  2  Tim.  iv.  7.  For  masteries  is  super- 
fluous. Rev.  contend  in  the  games ;  but  the  meaning  of  the 
verb  id  not  limited  to  that.  It  may  mean  to  contend  in  battle; 
and  the  preceding  reference  to  the  soldier  would  seem  to 
suggest  that  meaning  here.  The  allusion  to  crowning  is 
not  decisive  in  favour  of  the  Rev.  rendering.  Among  the 
Romans  crowns  were  the  highest  distinction  for  service  in 
war.  The  corona  triumphalis  of  laurel  was  presented  to  a 
triumphant  general ;  and  the  corona  obsidionalis  was  awarded 
to  a  general  by  the  army  which  he  had  saved  from  a  siege  or 


CtL  n.]  THB  8BCOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  297 

from  a  shameful  capitulation.  •  It  was  woven  of  grass  which 
grew  on  the  spot,  and  was  also  called  corona  graminea.  The 
corona  myrtea  or  ovalu^  the  crown  of  bay,  was  worn  by  the 
general  who  celebrated  the  lesser  triumph  or  ovatio.  The 
golden  corona  muralU^  with  embattled  ornaments,  was  given 
for  the  storming  of  a  wall ;  and  the  corona  castrensis  or  vol- 
laris^  also  of  gold,  and  ornamented  in  imitation  of  palisades, 
was  awarded  to  the  soldier  who  first  climbed  the  rampart  of 
the  enemy's  camp. 

Is  he  not  crowned  (ov  ar^avovrtu).  The  verb  only  here 
and  Heb.  ii.  7,  9.  For  or^i^vo?  crown^  see  on  Apoc.  ii.  9 ; 
iv.  4 ;  1  Pet.  v.  4.     Paul  has  irri^^vov  Xafieiv^  1  Cor.  ix.  25. 

Lawfully  (yo/i(fim^.  Past^.  See  1  Tim.  i.  8.  According 
to  the  law  of  military  service  which  requires  him  to  abandon 
all  other  pursuits.  So  the  law  of  the  ministerial  office  requires 
that  the  minister  shall  not  entangle  himself  with  secular  pur- 
suits. If  he  fulfils  this  requirement,  he  is  not  to  trouble  him- 
self about  his  worldly  maintenance,  for  it  is  right  that  he 
should  draw  his  support  from  his  ministerial  labour :  nay, 
he  has  the  first  right  to  its  material  fruits. 

6.  The  husbandman  that  laboureth  (rbv  tcoTnAvra  ymp- 
yiv).  The  verb  implies  Aard,  wearisome  toil.  See  on  1  Th. 
i.  3 ;  V.  12.  Tewfyytk  hushandman^  only  here  in  Pastorals. 
^P.     See  on  J.  xv.  1. 

Must  be  first  partaker  (hei  irp&nrov  —  luraXafifidvtiv). 
Better,  must  he  the  first  to  partake.  His  is  the  first  right 
to  the  fruits  of  his  labour  in  the  gospel.  The  writer  seems 
to  have  in  his  eye  1  Cor.  ix.  7,  where  there  is  a  similar 
association  of  military  service  and  farming  to  illustrate  the 
principle  that  they  who  proclaim  the  gospel  should  live  of 
the  gospel.  MeraXaiifidveiv  to  partake^  ^P,  and  only  here  in 
Pastorals.  Paul  uses  lur^x^v*  See  1  Cor.  ix.  10, 12 ;  x.  17, 
21,  30. 

7.  Consider  (Mfo).     Better,  understand. 


298  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  KEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  IL 

And  the  Lord  give  thee  understanding  (^Swaci  ydp  6  icvpioq 
avvetriv) .  More  correctly , /or  the  Lard  thcUl  give.  *  For  avuww 
understanding^  see  on  Mk.  xii.  88;  L.  ii.  47;  Col.  i.  9. 

8.  Remember  that  Jesus  Christ — was  raised,  etc.  In- 
correct. Rend,  remember  Jesue  Christ  raised  from  the  dead. 
Mvr)/i6v€U€  remember^  only  here  in  Pastorals :  often  in  Paul. 
*Ey€lp€iv  to  raise^  very  often  in  N.  T.,  but  only  here  in  Past; 
orals.  The  perfect  passive  participle  (^iyrjyepfiiuov)  only  here. 
The  perfect  marks  tiie  permanent  condition — raised  and  still 
living. 

Of  the  seed  of  David.  Not  referring  to  Christ's  human 
descent  as  a  humiliation  in  contrast  with  his  victory  over 
death  {iyrjyep/iAfov)^  but  only  marking  his  human,  visible 
nature  along  with  his  glorified  nature,  and  indicating  that  in 
both  aspects  he  is  exalted  and  glorified.  See  the  parallel 
in  Rom.  i.  3,  4,  which  the  writer  probably  had  in  mind,  and 
was  perhaps  trying  to  imitate.  It  is  supposed  by  some  that 
the  words  Jestis  Christ — seed  of  David  were  a  part  of  a 
confessional  formula. 

According  to  my  gospel.  Comp.  Rom.  ii.  16 ;  xvi.  25,  and 
see  1  Cor.  xv.  1 ;  2  Cor.  xi.  7;  Gal.  i.  11 ;  ii.  2 ;  1  Tim.  i.  11. 

9.  Wherein  I  suffer  trouble  (iv  ^  KOMoiraOS).  Wherein 
refers  to  the  gospel.  KaKoiraOeiv  only  here,  ch.  iv.  5,  and 
Jas.  V.  18.     LXX,  Jon.  iv.  10. 

As  an  evildoer  (is  KaKovpyo^).  Only  here  and  in  Luke. 
Better,  malefactor.  The  meaning  is  technical.  Comp.  L. 
xxiii.  32,  38,  39. 

Unto  bonds  Ch^XP''  ^^y^v)'  Comp.  Philip,  ii.  8,  m^i 
Oavdrov  unto  death:  Heb.  xii.  4,  fi^xpi^  atfAaro^  unto  blood. 
Const,  with  I  suffer  trouble. 

•  The  A.  v.  follows  T.  R.  Siffi  may  {the  Lord)  give. 


Ch.  II.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  299 

But  the  word  of  Qod  is  not  bound  (a\X^  6  Xiyo^  rov  Oeov 
ov  BeBerai}.  Nevertheless,  although  I  am  in  bonds,  the  gospel 
which  I  preach  will  prevail  in  spite  of  all  human  efforts  to 
hinder  it.  Word  of  God  often  in  Paul.  In  Pastorals,  1  Tim. 
iv.  5 ;  Tit.  ii.  5.  Bound,  in  Paul  metaphoricallj,  as  here, 
Rom.  vii.  2 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  27,  89. 

10.  Therefore  (&^  tovto).  Because  I  know  that  God  is 
carrying  on  his  work.* 

That  they  may  also  (Jpa  Kal  airroV).  More  correctly,  thejf 
also  may^  etc.     AUo,  as  well  as  myself. 

Obtain  the  salvation  (amrripCa^  rv^oMrty).  The  phrase 
N.  T.^.  Paul  has  wepiiroirjai^  aomfpla^  obtaining  of  salvation, 
1  Th.  V.  9. 

Which  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  The  phrase  $alvatian  which  u  in 
Christ  Jesuij  N.  T.^.  For  other  collocations  with  in  Christ 
Jesus  in  Pastorals,  see  1  Tim.  i.  14 ;  iii.  18 ;  2  Tim.  i.  1,  9, 
13  ;  ii.  1,  8,  15. 

With  eternal  glory  (ficr^  B6^  atmviov).  The  phrase 
eternal  glory  only  here  and  1  Pet.  v.  10.  Paul  has  alAvtov 
fidpof;  B6^  eternal  weight  of  glory,  2  Cor.  iv.  17.  Glory  here 
is  the  eternal  reward  of  Christians  in  heaven. 

11.  It  is  a  faithful  saying.  Better,  faitJ^ful  is  the  saying. 
See  on  1  Tim.  i.  16.  It  refers  to  what  precedes — the  eternal 
glory  of  those  who  are  raised  with  Christ  (ver.  8)  which 
stimulates  to  endurance  of  sufferings  for  the  gospel. 

For  (7^p).  Faithful  is  the  saying  that  the  elect  shall 
obtain  salvation  with  eternal  glory,  for  if  we  be  dead,  etc.f 

*  Others  connect  with  what  follows :  I  endure — on  this  account,  namely, 
that  the  elect  may  obtain  salvation.  For  the  elects^  sake  is  not  against  thia 
connection,  since  God^s  election  does  not  do  away  with  the  faithful  eiforts  of 
his  servants. 

t  Others  refer  faUhftU  i$  ike  raying  to  what  follows,  and  render  yi^ 
namely. 


800  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  II 

The  following  words  to  the  end  of  ver.  12  may  be  a  fragment 
of  a  hymn  or  confession,  founded  on  Rom.  vi.  8 ;  viii.  17. 

If  we  be  dead  with  him  (el  (nwaireOdvofiev).  A.V.  misses 
the  force  of  the  aorist.  Better,  if  we  died^  etc.  Comp.  Rom. 
vi.  8 ;  Col.  ii.  20.  For  the  verb,  comp.  Mk.  xiv.  81 ;  2  Cor. 
vii.  8. 

12.  If  we  suffer  we  shall  also  reign  with  him  (ej  {nroiUin^ 
fiey,  icaX  owficuriXevaofAev).  For  9uffer^  rend,  endure.  Sto^ 
fiaa-iXeveip  to  reign  with^  only  here  and  1  Cor.  iv.  8.  Comp. 
L.  xix.  17, 19 ;  xxii.  29, 80 ;  Rom.  v.  17;  Apoc.  iv.  4 ;  v.  10 ; 
xxii.  5. 

If  we  deny  him  he  also  will  deny  us  (ej  ^pptjadfA^a^  tcSuceU 
P09  ippiiaercu  ^^£9).  The  verb  ®P.  Sim  must  be  supplied. 
The  meaning  of  the  last  clause  is,  will  not  acknowledge  u$  a$ 
hU  own,     Comp.  L.  ix.  26 ;  Matt.  x.  88. 

18.  If  we  believe  not  (e/  hirurroviuv).  Better,  are  faithr 
le89  or  untru£  to  him.  Comp.  Rom.  iii.  8.  In  Pastorals 
only  here. 

Faithful  (wurri^^.  True  to  his  own  nature,  righteous  char- 
acter,  and  requirements,  according  to  which  he  cannot  accept 
as  faithful  one  who  has  proved  untrue  to  him.  To  do  this 
would  be  to  deny  himself. 

14.  Put  them  in  remembrance  (tnrofiifipfjatce).  ^P.  See 
on  inr6fivrf<nv  reminding^  ch.  i.  5. 

Charging  (8iafiafyrvp6fA€iw^.  In  Paul  only  1  Th.  iv.  6. 
Very  frequent  in  Acts.  See  on  Acts  ii.  40 ;  xx.  28.  The 
sense  is  rather  conjuring  them  by  their  loyalty  to  God.  Paul 
uses  the  simple  ^uifnvp&rdcu  in  a  similar  sense.  See  GaL 
▼•  8 ;  1  Th.  ii.  12  (note) ;  Eph.  iv.  17. 

Before  Qod  (ivAwiov  70S  (?€oS).     See  on  1  Tim.  v.  4. 


Ch.  n.]  THE  SBGOKD  BPISTLB  TO  TIMOTHY.  301 

Strive  about  words  (Xoyofuixeip).  N.  T.^.  ^LXX, 
^Class.  Comp.  Xoyofiaxioi  disptUe$  of  warcUy  1  Tim.  vi.  4, 
and  see  1  Cor.  iv.  20. 

To  no  profit  (^'  oifBiv  xpv^^f^iO*  Lit.  to  nothing  u$eful. 
*£Wr'  ovBev,  ^P.  He  uses  €h  ic€v6v  to  no  purpoie.  See  2  Cor. 
vi.  1 ;  Gal.  ii.  2 ;  Philip,  ii.  16 ;  1  Th.  iii.  6.  Xpi^aifio^ 
useful,  N.  T.o. 

To  the  subverting  {iirl  Karaarpo^).  "'EnrX  does  not  mean 
here  to  or  for  (purpose  or  object),  but  indicates  the  ground 
on  which  the  unprofitableness  of  the  wordy  strife  rests. 
Unprofitable  because  it  works  subversion  of  the  hearers. 
KaTcurrpoif>^  suhversion^  transliterated  into  eat€Utrophe^  only 
here  and  2  Pet.  ii.  6.  In  LXX  of  the  destruction  or  over^ 
throw  of  men  or  cities.  KaTcun'p4<f>eiv  to  overturn.  Matt. 
xxi.  12 ;  Mk.  xi.  15 ;  Acts  xv.  16,  cit.  Paul  uses  tcaOaCpeai^ 
pulling  down,  2  Cor.  x.  4,  8 ;  xiii.  10. 

15.  Study  ((nrovSon-oy) .  Originally,  make  haste.  In  Paul, 
Gal.  ii.  10;  Eph.  iv.  8  (note) ;  1  Th.  ii.  17. 

To  shew  thyself  approved  {aeavrhv  Utcifiov  irapcurrtfacu^). 
Hapaaiiia'ai,  better,  present.  In  Pastorals  only  here  and 
ch.  iv.  17.  Often  in  Acts  and  Paul.  See  on  Acts  i.  8; 
Rom.  xvi.  2 ;  Eph.  v.  27.  AStcifAov  approved,  only  here  in 
Pastorals,  five  times  by  Paul.  See  on  Jas.  i.  12.  On  SoMfirj 
approvedness,  Rom.  v.  4 ;  and  on  &>«ct/M£(fay  to  approve  on  test^ 
1  Pet.  i.  7. 

A  workman  (ipydrrfp).  In  Paul,  2  Cor.  xi.  IS;  Philip, 
lii.  2.     In  Pastorals,  1  Tim.  v.  18. 

That  needeth  not  to  be  ashamed  (aven-aUrxyvrov).  N.  T.^. 
^LXX,  ^Class.  Lit.  not  made  ashamed,  as  Philip,  i.  20.  A 
workman  whose  work  does  not  disgrace  him. 

Rightly  dividing  (optforo/ioiWa).  N.  T.^.  ^Class.  In 
LXX,  Prov.  iii.  6 ;  xi.  5 ;  both  times  in  the  sense  of  direct- 


302  WOBD  STUDIES  IK  THE  KEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ck.  II 

ing  the  way.  From  opOtk  straight  and  r^fiveiv  to  cut.  Hence, 
to  cut  straight^  as  paths ;  to  hold  a  straight  course  ;  generally, 
to  make  straight;  to  handle  righUy.  Vulg.  recte  tra^stare. 
The  thought  is  that  the  minister  of  the  gospel  is  to  present 
the  truth  rightly,  not  abridging  it,  not  handling  it  as  a  char- 
latan (see  on  2  Cor.  ii.  17),  not  making  it  a  matter  of  wordy 
strife  (ver.  14),  but  treating  it  honestly  and  fully,  in  a 
straightforward  manner.  Various  homiletic  fancies  have 
been  founded  on  the  word,  as,  to  divide  the  word  of  truth, 
giving  to  each  hearer  what  he  needs :  or,  to  separate  it  into 
its  proper  parts:  or,  to  separate  it  from  error:  or,  to  cut 
straight  through  it,  so  that  its  inmost  contents  may  be  laid 
bare.  Others,  again,  have  found  in  it  the  figure  of  dividing 
the  bread,  which  is  the  office  of  the  household  steward ;  or  of 
dividing  the  sacrificial  victims ;  or  of  cutting  a  straight  fur- 
row with  the  plough. 

16.  Shun  (TTcpi/IjTflkro).  ^P.  In  Pastorals,  here  and  Tit. 
iii.  9.  Originally,  to  place  round;  to  stand  round.  In  the 
middle  voice,  to  turn  one*s  self  <'f>out^  as  for  the  purpose  of 
avoiding  something:  hence,  avoids  shun.  Often  in  Class., 
but  in  ^is  sense  only  in  later  Greek. 

Profane  and  vain  babblings  QfiefirjXovf;  KOfo^vCa^).  For 
profane^  see  on  1  Tim.  i.  9.  Vain  is  superfluous,  being 
implied  in  babblings.  For  babblings,  see  on  1  Tim.  vi.  20. 
Babble  is  a  word  of  early  origin,  an  imitative  word,  formed 
on  the  efforts  of  a  young  child  to  speak,  and  having  its  coun- 
terparts in  many  languages.  It  appears  very  early  in  Eng- 
lish, as  in  Piers  Plowman : 

**  And  80  I  bablede  on  my  bedes.** 

Vi8.  2487. 

Bacon : 

**  Who  will  open  himself e  to  a  blab  or  a  babler  ?  ** 

Ess.yrl 

Shakespeare : 

^  "  Leave  thy  vain  bibble  babble." 

TweVth  N.  iv.  2. 

They  will  increase  (wpoici^vtnv).  See  on  Rom.  xiii.  12, 
and  6aL  i.  14. 


Cb.  IL]  THB  SBOOND  EPI8TLB  TO  TIMOTHY.  308 

Ungodliness  (&<rc/3e^9).  The  opposite  of  eifa^fieui  godlu 
ne9%^  for  which  see  on  1  Tim.  ii.  2.  In  Pastorals,  Tit.  ii.  12. 
In  Paul,  Rom.  i.  18 ;  xi.  26,  oit. 

17.  Will  eat  (vofitfv  £^).  Lit.  mU  have  poiturage^  and 
so  grow.  No/a^  wvp(k  is  a  ipreading  of  fire:  a  sore  is  said 
pofjb^v  rroUlaOai  to  spread.  Comp.  Acts  iv.  17,  BiavefitfOy 
spread^  of  the  influence  of  the  miracle  of  Peter,  from  the  same 
root,  v^fuiv  to  diitribute  or  divide  ;  often  of  herdsmen,  to  pas- 
ture.    No/A^  only  here  and  J.  x.  9. 

Canlcer  (ydffypaiva^.  Transliterated  into  ^ati^en^.  ilii 
eating  sore ;  a  cancer.     N.  T.^.     ^LXX.     Comp.  Ovid : 

**  Solet  immedlcabile  cancer 
Serpere,  et  illaeeu  vitiaUs  addere  partes.** 

Metam,  tt.  826 

18.  Have  erred  (ri<rr6xn^o,v)'    See  on  1  Tim.  i.  6. 
The  resurrection  (avturraaiv).     Only  here  in  Pastorals. 

19.  Nevertheless  (jUvroi).  Mostly  in  John.  ^P.  Only 
here  in  Pastorals. 

The  foundation  of  God  standeth  sure  (o  arepe^  0€fUkio9 
rod  0€ov  loTfftceu}.  Wrong.  2,T€p€Oi  sure  is  attributive,  not 
predicative.  Rend,  the  firm  foundation  of  God  standeth.  The 
phrase /(nin<2a^»on  of  Q-od^  N.  T.^.  Be/JL^Xio^  foundation  is  an 
adjective,  and  X^o9  stone  is  to  be  supplied.  It  is  not  to  be 
taken  by  metonymy  for  oUia  house  (ver.  20),  but  must  be 
interpreted  consistently  with  it,*  and,  in  a  loose  way,  repre- 
sents or  foreshadows  it.  So  we  speak  of  an  endowed  institu- 
tion as  a  foundation.  By  ^^the  sure  foundation  of  God*'  is 
meant  the  church,  which  is  ^^  the  pillar  and  stay  of  the  truth  " 
(1  Tim.  iii.  16),  by  means  of  which  the  truth  of  God  is  to 
withstand  the  assaults  of  error.    The  church  has  its  being  in 

•  In  LXX,  fio^^t  pdlaee^  fortress,  citadel,  haU,  is  rendered  by  St/itXia, 
See  Hoa.  YiiL  14 ;  Amoa  L  4,  7, 10,  12,  14 ;  Jer.  ▼!.  6 ;  Im.  zx7. 2. 


804  WOBD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  II. 

the  contents  of  **the  sound  teaching  "  (1  Tim.  i.  10),  which  is 
^^  according  to  godliness  "  (1  Tim.  vi.  3),  and  which  is  depos- 
ited in  it.  "  The  mystery  of  godliness  "  is  intrusted  to  it 
(1  Tim.  iii.  16).  Its  servants  possess  ^^  the  mystery  of  the 
faith"  (1  Tim.  iii.  9).  In  1  Cor.  iii.  11,  Christ  is  repre- 
sented as  ^^the  chief  comer-stone."  In  Eph.  ii.  20,  the 
church  is  built  '^upon  the  foundation  of  the  apostles  and 
prophets,"  with  Christ  as  the  corner-stone,  and  grows  into  a 
**holy  temple  (yahv)  in  the  Lord."  Here,  the  church  itself 
is  the  foundation,  and  the  building  is  conceived  as  a  great 
dwelling-house.  While  the  conception  of  the  church  her© 
does  not  contradict  that  of  Paul,  the  difference  is  apparent 
between  it  and  the  conception  in  Ephesians,  where  the  church, 
is  the  seat  of  the  indwelling  and  energy  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Comp.  1  Cor.  iii.  16, 17.  l,T€p€(kfirm  only  here,  Heb.  v.  12, 
14,  and  1  Pet.  v.  9  (note).  '"Eartiieaf  itandetk,  in  contrast 
with  overthrow  (ver.  18). 

Seal  (a-if^paytSa).  Mostly  in  the  Apocalypse.  Only  here 
in  Pastorals.  In  Paul,  Rom.  iv.  11 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  2.  Used  here 
rather  in  the  sense  of  inscription  or  motto.  Comp.  Deut.  vi. 
9 ;  xi.  20 ;  Apoc.  xxi.  14.  There  are  two  inscriptions  on  the 
foundation  stone,  the  one  gnaaranteeing  the  security^  the  other 
the  purity^  of  the  church.  The  two  go  together.  The  purity 
of  the  church  is  indispensable  to  its  security. 

The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  hie  (irpw  tcvpu^  rovg 
Svra^  avTov).  The  first  inscription  :  O-od  know$  hit  own. 
Comp.  Num.  xvi.  5  ;  1  Cor.  xiii.  12.  For  ^voo  knoweth^  see 
on  (}al.  iv.  9.  Them  that  are  his^  his  iKkucrol  chosen;  see 
ver.  10  ;  Tit.  i.  1 ;  Rom.  viii.  38  ;  Col.  iii.  12  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  9 : 
Apoc.  xvii.  14.  Not,  however,  in  any  hard,  predestinarian 
sense.*     Comp.  J.  x.  14 ;  Matt.  vii.  23  ;  L.  xiii.  25,  27. 

•  As  in  the  Westminster  Confession,  where  this  passage  is  cited  as  a  proof* 
text  of  the  dogma  that  those  ^*  angels  and  men  '^  who  are  ^*  predestinated  and 
foreordained'*  to  everlasting  life  or  death,  **are  particularly  and  nnchange* 
ably  designed :  and  their  number  is  so  certain  and  definite  that  it  cannot  be 
either  increased  or  diminished."    Ch.  UL,  Sect.  iy. 


Ch.  n.]  THE  SECOND  KPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  805 

Let  every  one  that  nameth  the  name  of  Christ  depart 
from  iniquity.  The  second  inscription^  concerning  the  purity 
of  the  church.  For  of  Chri$t  rend,  of  the  Lord  (jcvplov). 
*OvofjM^»v  nametht  only  here  in  Pastorals.  It  means  to  give 
a  name  to^  to  BtyU^  as  Mk.  iii.  14  ;  L.  vi.  14  ;  1  Cor.  v.  11 :  to 
pronounce  a  name  as  having  a  special  virtue^  as  in  incantation, 
as  Acts  xix.  13  :  to  utter  a  name  a$  acknowledging  and  appro- 
priating what  the  name  involves^  as  a  confession  of  faith  and 
allegiance.  So  here.  Comp.  Rom.  xv.  20  ;  1  Cor.  v.  11 ; 
Isa.  xxvi.  13.  For  6vofjM  name^  see  on  1  Th.  i.  12.  'Attoo-- 
rifrai  airi  i&ucbK  depart  from  iniquity.  For  the  verb,  see  on 
1  Tim.  iv.  1.  Mostly  in  Luke  and  Acts.  Comp.  Num. 
xvi.  26 ;  Isa.  Iii.  11.  Whatever  may  be  implied  in  Gtxi's 
election,  it  does  not  relieve  Christians  of  the  duty  of  strict 
attention  to  their  moral  character  and  conduct.  Comp. 
Philip,  ii.  12.  The  gift  of  grace  (Eph.  ii.  8)  is  exhibited  in 
making  one  a  coworker  with  God  (1  Cor.  iii.  9).  The  sal- 
vation bestowed  by  grace  is  to  be  ** carried  out*'  (Philip, 
ii.  12)  by  man  with  the  aid  of  grace  (Rom.  vi.  8-19  ;  2  Cor. 
vi.  1).  What  this  includes  and  requires  appears  in  Philip, 
iii.  10 ;  iv.  1-7  ;  Eph.  iv.  18-16,  22flf. ;  Col.  ii.  6,  7. 

20.  But  the  church  embraces  a  variety  of  characters. 
Unrighteous  men  steal  into  it.  So,  in  a  great  household 
establishment  there  are  vessels  fit  only  for  base  uses. 

House  (oUUf).  As  OefUXu^  foundoHon  indicates  the 
inward,  essentiaJ  character  of  the  church,  oUla  exhibits  its 
visible,  outward  aspect.  The  mixed  character  of  the  church 
points  to  its  greatness  (^/J^dXff). 

Veaaela  (jjKevri).  See  on  Matt.  xii.  29;  Mk.  iii.  27; 
Acts  ix.  16 ;   xxvii.  17 ;   1  Pet.  iii.  7. 

Of  wood  and  of  earth  (J^SkLva  icaX  iarpdiciva^.  BvKivoi 
wooden^  only  here  and  Apoc.  ix.  20.  *Oarpdiuvo^  of  hdked 
elay^  only  here  and  2  Cor.  iv.  7  (note).  Comp.  the  different 
metaphor,  1  Cor.  iii.  12. 

▼OL.  IT.— SO 


806  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  IL 

Some  to  honour  and  some  to  dishonour.  After  Rom. 
ix.  21. 

21.  Purge  Ciictcaddpjif).  Only  here  and  1  Cor.  y.  7.  The 
meaning  is,  separate  himself  from  communion  tvith. 

From  these  (^tto  tovtvv).  From  such  persons  as  are  de- 
scribed as  ^^  vessels  onto  dishonour."  Some  attempt  to  relieve 
the  awkwardness  of  this  figure  by  referring  theee  to  persons 
mentioned  in  w.  16, 17. 

Unto  honour  (ek  xi/Ai^y).  Const,  with  veeeel,  not  with 
ianctified. 

Sanctified  {ff^uuriUvov).  Comp.  1  Tim.  iv.  5.  Set  apart 
to  noble  and  holy  uses,  as  belonging  to  God.  See  on  074- 
aaijuk  sanctification,  Rom.  vi.  19.  For  iyio^  holy^  see  on 
1  Tim.  V.  10. 

Meet  (ebxpfi^rrov).  From  ev  well  and  XP^^^  ^  f^^* 
Hence,  ea$y  to  make  use  of  useful.  The  A.V.  meet^  is  fit^ 
suitable.  Rend,  serviceable.  In  contrast  with  to  no  profit^ 
ver.  14.  See  Philem.  11,  where  the  contrast  with  axpriarot: 
useless  is  brought  out.     Only  here,  ch.  iv.  11,  Philem.  11. 

For  the  master's  use  (r^  hetnr&rri).  Use  is  superfluous. 
Rend,  for  the  master.  The  master  of  the  household.  See  on 
1  Tim.  vi.  1.  % 

Prepared  (JfroiiuuriUvov).  In  Paul,  1  Cor.  ii.  9;  Philem.  22. 
Only  here  in  Pastorals.     Comp.  Tit.  iii.  1. 

Every  good  woric.  The  phrase  in  Paul,  2  Cor.  ix.  8; 
Col.  i.  10  ;  2  Th.  ii.  17.  In  Pastorals,  1  Tim.  v.  10 ;  2  Tim. 
iii.  17 ;  Tit.  i.  16 ;  iii.  1. 

22.  Youthful  lusts  (pewepuch^  hr^0vn(a/^').  Neoorepi/eeh 
youthfuly  N.T.^.    For  iiriOvfAta  desire^  lust^  see  on  Mk.  iv.  19 ; 


Oh.  n.]  THB  8BC0KD  EPI8TLB  TO  TIMOTHY.  807 

1  Th.  iv.  5.     Such  counsel  from  Paul  to  Timothy  seems 
strange. 

Follow  (S(»ic€).  Pursue.   Stronger  ihBn  fallow.   A  favour 
ite  word  with  Paul  to  denote  the  pursuit  of  moral  and  spir-* 
itual  ends.     See  Rom.  ix.  80,  81 ;  xii.  18 ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  1 ; 
Philip,  iii.  12. 

Peace  (^elpiivrfv).  Not  a  distinct  virtue  in  the  list,  but  a 
consequence  of  the  pursuit  of  the  virtues  enumerated.  Const, 
with  unth  them  that  eaU^  etc.  For  peace  with  Suifcup  pureue^ 
see  Rom.  xiv.  19;  Heb.  xii.  14,  and  Ps.  xxxiv.  14,  cit. 
1  Pet.  iii.  11. 

Call  on  the  Lord  (hrucaXjaviUifmv  rip  xipiov).  A  Pauline 
phrase,  only  here  in  Pastorals.  See  Rom.  x.  12,  18,  14; 
1  Cor.  i.  2.     See  also  Acts  ii.  21 ;  ix.  14 ;  xxii.  16. 

Out  of  a  pure  heart  (iK  tcaOap&i  tcapBCaii).  Const,  with 
call  an  the  Lard.  The  phrase,  1  Tim.  i.  5;  1  Pet.  i.  22. 
Comp.  Matt.  v.  8. 

23.  Foolish  (/M»f>^).  In  Pastorals  only  here  and  Tit.  ilL 
9.  Moi/xf?  means  duUj  duggieh^  etupid :  applied  to  the  taste, 
Jlatt  insipid :  comp.  finpavOy  have  lost  his  savour^  Matt.  v.  18. 
In  Pastorals  never  substantively,  a  faoU  but  so  in  1  Cor. 
iii.  18 ;  iv.  10.     Comp.  a^piov^  1  Cor.  xv.  86. 

Unlearned  (airaiMrov^).  Rev.  ignorant  is  better;  but 
the  meaning  at  bottom  is  u/ndiseiplined :  questions  of  an  uii- 
trained  mind,  carried  away  with  novelties :  questions  which 
do  not  proceed  from  any  trained  habit  of  thinking. 

Questions  (Cirnjo-m).   Better,  jice«etmtii^«.   See  on  1  Tim. 
.  4. 


VI 


Avoid  (iro/NUTw).    See  on  1  Tim.  iv.  7.    Better,  rq^  or 
decline. 


808  WORD  STUDIBS  IK  THE  NEW  TBBTAMKKT.       [Cm.  JL 

Qender  (yemmai^.  Only  here  in  Pastorals.  In  Paul, 
metaphoricidly,  1  Cor.  iv.  15 ;  Philem.  10 ;  Gral.  iv.  24. 

24.  The  servant  of  the  Lord  (BoSkop  KvpCau).  The 
teacher  or  other  special  worker  in  the  church.  Comp.  Tit. 
i.  1 ;  Rom.  i.  1 ;  Gal.  i.  10 ;  PhiUp.  i.  1 ;  Col.  iv.  12.  Of 
any  Christian,  1  Cor.  vii.  22 ;  Eph.  vi.  6.  The  phrase  is 
often  applied  to  the  O.  T.  prophets  as  a  body :  see  Amos 
iii.  7 ;  Jer.  yii.  25 ;  Ezra  ix.  11 ;  Dan.  ix.  6.  To  Joshua, 
Judg.  ii.  8 ;  to  David,  Ps.  Ixxvii.  70. 

Must  not  (ov  tu).     Moral  obligation. 

Gentle  (riinov).    Only  here  and  1  Th.  ii.  7  (note). 

Apt  to  teach,  patient  (BiBcucrucdp,  hveiUaicov).  AASoicruak 
apt  to  teach,  only  here  and  1  Tim.  iii.  2  (note).  *Ave^lKaico9 
forbearing^  N.  T.®.  *Ave^ucasc{a  forbearance^  Wisd.  ii.  19. 
Rend,  forbearing. 

25.  In  meekness  {iv  wpairrrrC).  A  Pauline  word,  only 
here  in  Pastorals,  but  comp.  irpatnraBla  meekne$%^  1  Tim.  vi. 
11  (note).     Const,  with  imtructing. 

Instructing  Qiroihevovra).  See  on  1  Tim.  i.  20.  Better, 
correcting. 

Those  that  oppose  themselves  (Tobt;  avriSumO^fievov^). 
N.  T.^.  ^LXX.  Class,  only  late  Greek.  Themselves  is 
wrong.  The  meaning  is,  those  who  oppose  the  servant  of 
the  Lord ;  who  carry  on  the  avTi04tr€K  oppositions  (1  Tim. 
vi.  2ff)'y^ gainsay ers  (avnXi^ovTe;^  Tit.  i.  9).  Paul's  word  is 
iLvrUeurOcu  to  oppose .-  see  1  Cor.  xvi.  9 ;  Gtd.  v.  17 ;  Philip, 
i.  28 ;  2  Th.  ii.  4. 

Repentance  (^jurJofouiv).  Only  here  in  Pastorals.  See  on 
repent^  Matt.  iii.  2. 

•   To  the  acknowledging  of  the  truth  Qek  hriypsHriv  iXtj- 
Otla^).     More  correctly,  the  knowledge.     The  formula  Past^. 


Ch.  hi.]         thb  second  epistle  to  timothy  809 

See  1  Tim.  ii.  4  (note) ;  2  Tim.  iii.  7.  For  c&  unto  after 
fjLerdpoia  repentance^  see  Mk.  i.  4 ;  L.  iii.  3 ;  xxiv.  47 ;  Acts 
xi.  18 ;  XX.  21 ;  2  Cor.  vii.  10. 

26.  May  recover  themselves  (jkvavii^^waiv).  Lit.  may 
return  to  soberness,  N.  T.^.  See  on  be  sober ^  1  Th.  v.  6.  A 
similar  connection  of  thought  between  coming  to  the  knowl- 
edge of  God  and  awaking  out  of  a  drunken  stupor,  occurs 
1  Cor.  XV.  84. 

Out  of  the  snare  of  the  devil  Qk  r^  rov  hiafiiKov  irayiSo^'). 
Comp.  Ps.  cxxiv.  7.  The  phrase  snare  of  the  devils  only  here 
and  1  Tim.  iii.  7  (note).  The  metaphor  is  mixed ;  return  to 
soberness  out  of  the  snare  of  the  devil. 

Who  are  taken  captive  (^i^foyprjfUpoi).  Or,  having  been 
held  captive.  Only  here  and  L.  v.  10  (note  on  thou  shalt 
catch). 

By  him  (yw'  airov).     The  devil. 

At  his  will  (€^  rh  ixeivov  04\fiyM).  Better,  unto  his  will : 
that  is,  to  do  his  (God's)  will. 

The  whole  will  then  read :  "  And  that  they  may  return  to 
soberness  out  of  the  snare  of  the  devil  (having  been  held 
captive  by  him)  to  do  God's  will."* 


CHAPTER  in. 

1.    Comp.  the  beginning  of  1  Tim.  iv. 

This  know  (tovto  jiveMr/ee).  The  phrase  N.  T.^.  Comp. 
Paul*8  yivdkrKeiP  v/*a9  fiovko/juu  I  would  have  you  to  know^ 
Philip,  i.  12 ;  and  Oikn  Bk  vfia^  eiSAnu  I  would  you  should 
know^  1  Cor.  xi.  8. 

•  Some,  M  A. v.,  make  both  «^o0  and  intpov  refer  to  the  devil.  Othen 
explain :  **  having  been  taken  captiTe  by  him  (the  servant  of  God)  to  do  his 
(Ood*a)  wilL**  Othen  again,  "  having  been  taken  captive  by  him  (Qod)  to 
do  hia  (God's)  wilL" 


810  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NBW  TB8TAKENT.      [Cs.  IH* 

In  the  last  days  (jhr  iaxi-rav;  fiiUpoist).  The  phrase  only 
here  in  Pastorals,  Acts  ii.  17,  Jas.  v.  3.  Similar  expres- 
sions are  iv  tecup^  ^o^at^  in  the  la$t  season^  1  Pet.  i.  5 :  ^ 
iaxdrov  r&v  j(p6v(DV  at  the  last  of  the  times^  1  Pet.  i.  20 :  hr* 
iax^Tov  ')(p6vov  at  the  last  time^  Jude  18 :  iw  iaxdrtop  r&» 
fliup&v  at  the  laet  of  the  daye^  2  Pet.  iii.  8 :  iv  v<rr4pov;  fcaipoJg 
in  the  latter  eeaeone^  1  Tim.  iv.  1.  The  times  immediately 
preceding  Christ's  second  appearing  are  meant.  Comp.  Heb. 
i.  2 ;  Jas.  v.  8. 

Perilous  times  (jcai^oX  xaXcTro/)-  Only  here  and  Matt. 
viii.  28.  Lit.  hard  timea :  eehwere  Zeiten.  Ka^nk  denotes  a 
definite,  specific  season.     See  on  Matt.  xii.  1 ;  Acts  i.  17. 

Shall  come  (iwm/iaovTaC),  Or  wiU  eet  in.  Mostly  in  PauL 
Only  here  in  Pastorals.     See  on  Gral.  i.  4. 

2.  Lovers  of  their  own  selves  (<l>tKavToi).  Better,  fovert 
of  self.  N.  T.^.  ^LXX.  Aristotle,  De  Repuh.  ii.  5,  says : 
^^  It  is  not  loving  one's  self,  bnt  loving  it  unduly,  just  as  the 
love  of  possessions." 

Covetous  (if^iXdpyvpot).  Better,  lovers  of  money.  Only 
here  and  L.  xvi.  14.  For  the  noun  ^Xapyvpla  love  of  money^ 
see  on  1  Tim.  vi.  10.  Love  of  money  and  covetousness  are 
not  synonymous.  Covetous  is  irKeoviicnt^ ;  see  1  Cor.  v.  10, 
11 ;  Eph.  V.  6.     See  on  Rom.  i.  29. 

Boasters  (h\a^6ve:^.  Or  swaggerers.  Only  here  and  Rom. 
i.  30.     See  on  aXa^oveCcu^  boastings^  Jas.  iv.  16. 

Proud  (yirepii^voi).  Or  haughty.  See  on  {nrepri^vla 
pride^  Mk.  vii.  22. 

Blasphemers  (^/SXxiaffnffioi).  See  on  1  Tim.  i.  18.  Better^ 
railers.     See  also  on  fiKaa^^nCa  blasphemy^  Mk.  vii.  22. 

Unthankful  {hxipi^TOi).     Only  here  and  L.  vi.  85. 


Ch.  III.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  811 

Unholy  (iivStnoi).     Only  here  and  1  Tim.  i.  9  (note). 

3.  Without  natural  affection  (aaropyoi).  Only  here  and 
Rom.  i.  31.  ^LXX.  See  on  aydirtf  lave.  Gal.  v.  22,  under 
cT^pyetv  to  love  with  a  natural  affection. 

Truce-breakera  (JunrovhoC).  N.  T.^.  ^LXX.  Rend,  tm- 
placable.  From  a  not,  and  airopSai  a  treaty  or  truee.  The 
meaning  is,  refusing  to  enter  into  treaty,  irreconcilable.* 

Incontinent  (iucparek).  Or  intemperate,  without  Belf-con^ 
trol.  N.  T.<>.  Once  in  LXX,  Prov.  xxvii.  20.  ^AxpaaCa 
incontinence.  Matt,  xziii.  25  ;  1  Cor.  vii.  5  ;  1  Maoc.  vi.  26  ; 
Ps.  of  Sol.  iv.  8. 

Fierce  (jLvrnjytpoi).  Or  ravage.  N.  T.^.  ^LXX.  Comp. 
hveTuETiiiiOv^  merciless,  Rom.  i.  31. 

Despisere  of  those  that  are  good  (h^XdrfoBoi).  Better, 
haters  of  good.  N.  T.®.  ®LXX,  ^Class.  Comp.  the  oppos- 
ite, if>i\dya0ov  lover  of  good.  Tit.  i.  8. 

4.  Traitore  (wpoSJrai).  Or  betrayers.  Only  here,  L.  vi. 
16  ;  Acts  vii.  62. 

Heady  (irpoirenK).  Precipitate,  reckless,  headstrong  in 
the  pursuit  of  a  bad  end  under  the  influence  of  passion.  Only 
here  and  Acts  xix.  86.  In  LXX,  shick,  loose,  hence  foolish, 
Prov.  X.  14,  and  dividing  or  parting  asunder,  as  the  lips  ;  of 
one  who  opens  his  lips  and  speaks  hastily  or  thoughtlessly, 
Prov.  xiii.  3.     Comp.  Sir.  ix.  18. 

Highminded  (renn^fUvoi).  Better,  besotted  or  clouded 
with  pride.     See  on  1  Tim.  iii.  6,  and  comp.  1  Tim.  vi.  4. 

Lovers  of  pleasure  more  than  lovers  of  God  {^Xrftovoi 
ImWov  fj  il>ik60€oi).  Pleasure-lovers  rather  than  God-lovers. 
Both  words  N.  T.o.     OLXX. 

•  So  Aeeohyhis,  Agam.  1286,  of  Clytaemneftra,  d^roi^r  /  4^r  ^Om§ 
ri>#9v#«r  ^^breathiiig  an  in^laeabls  curse  agalmt  her  friendi.'* 


812  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ck.  m 

5.  A  form  (^fidp^wnv).  Only  here  and  Rom.  ii.  20. 
Mop^  form  (for  the  want  of  any  other  rendering)  is  the 
expression  or  embodiment  of  the  essential  and  permanent 
being  of  that  which  is  expressed.  M(j/9^aMri9,  lit.  farming  or 
ihaping.  Yet  the  meaning  differs  in  different  passages.  In 
Rom.  ii.  20,  ijy6p^toin/^  is  the  truthful  embodiment  of  knowl- 
edge and  truth  as  contained  in  the  law  of  God.  Here,  the 
mere  outward  semblance,  as  distinguished  from  the  essential 
reality. 

The  power  (r^y  Swafuv).     The  practical  virtue.    Comp. 

1  Cor.  iv.  20.      It  is  impossible  to  overlook  the  influence  of 
Rom.  i.  29-81  in  shaping  this  catalogue. 

Turn  away  (jkinnphrov).  N.  T.^.  Comp.  irapavrov  atfoid^ 
ch.  ii.  23  ;  iicrpeirSfievo^  turning  away^  1  Tim.  vi.  20 ;  and 
hcicKlven  turn  away^  Rom.  xvi.  17. 

6.  Of  this  sort  (he  rotrmv).  Lit.  of  these.  The  formula 
often  in  Paul. 

Which  creep  (oi  ivSwovres^.  N.  T.o.  Thrust  themselves 
into.    Comp.  Jude  4,  irapeureSvrfa-av  crept  in  privily  (see  note) ; 

2  Pet.  ii.  1  (note),  irapeurd^ova-iv  %haU  privily  bring  in;  and 
Gal.  ii.  4,  irapeurdiCTOv^  brought  in  by  stealth. 

Lead  captive  (a/;^fuiXa>T/^oin-c9).  Only  here  in  Pastorals. 
See  on  captives^  L.  iv.  18  ;  and  2  Cor.  x.  5. 

Silly  women  Qfwaucdpia).  N.  T.o.  ^LXX.  SiUy  is 
expressed  by  the  contemptuous  diminutive.  Comp.  Vulg. 
muliereulas. 

Laden  (awfopeuiUiHi).  Only  here  and  Rom.  xii.  20,  cita- 
tion. In  LXX,  see  Judith  xv.  11,  of  loading  a  wagon  with 
the  property  of  Holof ernes.  It  implies  heaped  up;  heavUg 
laden. 


Ch.  m.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  818 

Led  away  (iiy6fjL€Pa).  Away  is  superfluous.  It  is  only 
an  inference.  The  meaning  is  under  the  direction  of.  Comp. 
Rom.  viii.  14 ;  Gal.  v.  18. 

Divers  (iroiteCKat^^.  In  Pastorals  only  here  and  Tit.  iii.  8. 
Lit.  variegated^  of  different  tints.  See  on  manifold  wisdom^ 
Eph.  iii.  10.* 

7.  Ever  learning.  From  any  one  who  will  teach  them. 
See  on  1  Tim.  v.  13.  It  is  a  graphic  picture  of  a  large  class, 
by  no  means  extinct,  who  are  caught  and  led  by  the  instruct- 
ions of  itinerant  religious  quacks. 

Never  able  (/Lti/SeTrore  Swd/jLeva^.  Because  they  have  not 
the  right  motive,  and  because  they  apply  to  false  teachers. 
Ellicott  thinks  that  there  is  in  Bvpd/jLeva  a  hint  of  an  unsuc- 
cessful endeavour,  in  better  moments,  to  attain  to  the  truth. 

8.  As  (iv  Tpihrov).  The  formula  occurs  in  the  Synoptic 
Gospels  (see  Matt,  xxiii.  37  ;  L.  xiii.  84),  and  in  Acts  (i.  11 ; 
vii.  28),  but  not  in  Paul. 

Jannes  and  Jambres.  According  to  tradition,  the  names 
of  the  chiefs  of  the  magicians  who  opposed  Moses.  Ex.  vii. 
11,  22. 

Of  corrupt  minds  (jcar^apiiivoi  r6v  vow).  Better,  eor- 
rupted  in  mind.  The  verb,  N.  T.^.  Comp.  tie^apiUyew  rbp 
vow  corrupted  in  mind^  1  Tim.  vi.  5. 

Reprobate  (jkS6Kifioi).  In  Pastorals  only  here  and  Tit. 
i.  16.  A  Pauline  word.  See  on  Rom.  i.  28,  and  caMtaway^ 
1  Cor.  ix.  27. 

9.  Shall  proceed  (wpoKdy^vaui).    See  on  oh.  ii.  16. 

«  Holtznumn,  on  Tit.  iii.  8,  hat  an  apt  comment:  **Im  Diemte  ein« 
hunten  Getriebes  von  B«|^«iden.**  Weiaioker:  ^^Yon  aUexlei  Begierden 
nmgetrieben.** 


014  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  KEW  TESTAMENT.      ICs.  HL 

Folly  (avoid).  Only  here  and  L.  vi.  11  (note).  The 
8en9eles9ne$9  of  their  teaching,  with  an  implication  of  its 
immoral  character. 

Manifest  (hcSffXtk).  N.  T.o.   LXX,  8  Maco.  in.  19  ;  yi.  6. 

10.  Hast  fully  known  (irainf/eoXovdffaaii).  Better,  thou 
didit  follow.     See  on  1  Tim.  iv.  6.     ^P. 

Manner  of  life  iiy(»yS).  Or  conduct.  N.  T.^.  LXX, 
mostly  2d  and  8d  Maccabees.  Often  in  Class.,  but  mostly 
in  a  transitive  sense,  leading^  c<mdueting. 

Purpose  (irpo04a€i).  See  on  Acts  xi.  28  ;  Rom.  Jx.  11. 
In  Paul,  only  of  the  divine  purpose. 

Longsuffering,  charity,  patience.  For  longtuffering^  see 
on  Jas.  V.  7.  For  charity  rend,  love^  and  see  on  Gral.  v.  22. 
For  patienccy  see  on  2  Pet.  i.  6  ;  Jas.  v.  7. 

11.  Persecutions^  afflictions  (SM07/io29,9ra0i{/Aao-iy).  AMiy- 
/bu^  persecution,  only  here  in  Pastorals.  Occasionally  in 
Paul.  UdOrffjM  mffering^  only  here  in  Pastorals.  Often  in 
Paul,  usually  in  the  sense  of  wfferingt^  but  twice  of  sinful 
pasiionSy  Rom.  vii.  5 ;  Gral.  v.  24. 

Antiochi  Iconium,  Lystra.  See  Acts  xiii.  50  ;  xiv.  2ff.; 
xiv.  19.  These  cities  may  have  been  selected  as  illustrations 
because  Timothy  was  at  home  in  that  region.  See  Acts 
xvi.  1,  2.  Antioch  is  mentioned  by  Paul,  Gal.  ii.  11.  Icon- 
ium  and  Lystra  nowhere  in  his  letters. 

Delivered  (ipvaaro).  Often  in  Paul.  Originally,  to  draw 
to  one%  self;  to  draw  out  from  peril.  Paul,  in  Rom.  xi.  26, 
applies  the  prophecy  of  Isa.  lix.  20  to  Christ,  who  is  called  i 
pwifi€P09  the  deliverer^  LXX. 

12.  Who  will  live  (o^  ^Aoi^m  {^).  Wio§$  witt  i9  to 
live,  or  who  are  bent  on  living. 


Cb.  m.]  THB  SECOND  EPISTLB  TO  TIMOTHY.  315 

Godly  (cwcrc/SA?).  Only  here  and  Tit.  ii.  12.  Comp.  teai^ 
€iaifi€iav  according  to  godlineis^  1  Tim.  vi.  8  ;  Tit.  i.  1 ;  and 
ip  ircury  eifatfieltf  in  aU  godlinesiy  1  Tim.  ii.  2.  See  also  1  Tim. 
iv.  7  ;  vi.  11,  and  on  godlineiiy  1  Tim.  ii.  2. 

Shall  suffer  persecution  (^Bu^xJ^iiaovToi).  In  this  sense 
only  here  in  Pastorals. 

13.  Seducers  Qphrm).  N.  T.^.  Better,  %mpo9tor%  or 
deceiven.  From  yoav  to  howl.  Originally,  one  who  chanti 
spells  ;  a  wizard^  sorcerer.     Hence,  a  cheat. 

Shall  wax  worse  and  worse  (irpoid^vaw  hr\  rb  xei/H)y). 
Lit.  shall  proceed  to  the  worse.  The  formula,  Past^.  Compt 
ver.  9  and  ch.  ii.  16. 

Deceiving  (irXaxf&vrei).  Properly,  leading  astrajf.  See 
on  irXdvoi^  seducing^  1  Tim.  iv.  1. 

14.  Hast  been  assured  of  (hrurm0rfi).  N.  T.o.  Quite 
often  in  LXX.  So  2  Sam.  yii.  16,  shall  be  established  (of  the 
house  of  David)  :  Ps.  Ixxvii.  37,  steadfcut  in  his  covenant. 

15.  From  a  child  (airh  /9p^v9).  Mostly  in  Luke.  ^P. 
Only  here  in  Pastorals.  See  on  1  Pet.  ii.  2.  Comp.  Mk. 
ix.  21,  he  irouZMev  from  a  child. 

The  holy  Scriptures  (J^ph  ypaykii4xrci)\  Note  particularly 
the  absence  of  the  article,  rpafifurra  is  used  in  N.  T.  in  sev- 
eral senses.  Of  characters  of  the  alphabet  (2  Cor.  iii.  7;  Gal. 
vi.  11)  :  of  a  document  (h.  xvi.  6,  take  thy  bill} :  of  epistles 
(Acts  xxviii.  21)  :  of  the  writings  of  an  author  collectively 
(J.  v.  47)  :  of  learning  (Acts  xxvi.  24,  iroWd  ypafifurra  much 
learning}.  In  LXX,  hrurrdfievo^  ypdfifurra  knowing  how  to 
read  (Isa.  xxix.  11, 12).  The  Holy  Scriptures  are  nowhere 
called  Upk  ypd/ifurra  in  N.  T.  In  LXX,  ypd/Afurra  is  never 
used  of  sacred  writings  of  any  kind.  Both  Josephus  and 
Philo  use  r^  Upit  ypdfAfurra  for  the  O.  T.  Scriptures.*     The 

•  Jofleph.  Ant.  Proem.  3, 4 ;  z.  10,  4.  Fhflo,  VU.  Mo$.  3,  SO ;  Z>e  Proem, 
€t  Poen,  iU;Leg.ad0aH2^. 


81G  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ch.  IIL 

words  here  should  be  rendered  sacred  learning.  The  books 
in  the  writer's  mind  were  no  doubt  the  O.  T.  Scriptures,  in 
which  Timothy,  like  every  Jewish  boy,  had  been  instructed  ; 
but  he  does  not  mean  to  designate  those  books  as  teph  ypd^i* 
fjMTa.  He  means  the  learning  acquired  from  Scripture  by 
the  rabbinic  methods,  according  to  which  the  O.  T.  books 
were  carefully  searched  for  meanings  hidden  in  each  word 
and  letter,  and  especially  for  messianic  intimations.  Speci- 
mens of  such  learning,  may  be  seen  here  and  there  in  the 
writings  of  Paul,  as  1  Cor.  ix.  9  f .  ;  x.  1  f . ;  Gal.  iii.  16  f .  ; 
iv.  21  f.  In  Acts  iv.  13,  the  council,  having  heard  Peter's 
speech,  in  which  he  interpreted  Ps.  cxviii.  22  and  Isa. 
xxviii.  16  of  Christ,  at  once  perceived  that  Peter  and  John 
were  aypd/Afjuxroi,^  not  versed  in  the  methods  of  the  schools. 
Before  Agrippa,  Paul  drew  the  doctrine  of  the  Resurrection 
from  the  O.  T.,  whereupon  Festus  exclaimed,  ^^much  learn- 
ing (iroWii,  ypdfifUMTcut  thy  acquaintance  with  the  exegesis  of 
the  schools)  hath  made  thee  mad"  (Acts  xxvi.  24).  To 
Agrippa,  who  was  ^^  expert  in  all  customs  and  questions  which 
are  among  the  Jews  "  (Acts  xxvi.  3),  the  address  of  Paul,  a 
pupil  of  Hillel,  was  not  surprising,  although  he  declared  that 
Paul's  reasoning  did  not  appeal  to  him.  In  J.  vii.  16,  when 
Jesus  taught  in  the  temple,  the  Jews  wondered,  and  said : 
'^  How  knoweth  this  man  letters  f  "  That  a  Jew  should  know 
the  Scriptures  was  not  strange.  The  wonder  lay  in  the  exe- 
getical  skill  of  one  who  had  not  been  trained  by  the  literary 
methods  of  the  time. 

To  make  thee  wise  (o-e  (ro^^ou).  Only  here  and  2  Pet. 
i.  16.  See  note  there  on  cunningly  devised.  To  give  thee 
understanding  of  that  which  lies  behind  the  letter ;  to  enable 
thee  to  detect  in  the  O.  T.  books  various  hidden  allusions  to 
Christ ;  to  draw  from  the  O.  T.  the  mystery  of  messianic 
salvation,  and  to  interpret  the  O.  T.  with  Christ  as  the  key. 
This  gives  significance  to  the  following  words,  through  faith 
which  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  Jesus  Christ  was  the  key  of  Scrip- 
ture, and  through  faith  in  him  Scripture  became  a  power 
unto  salvation.     The  false  teachers  also  had  their  learning. 


Ch.  m.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  317 

but  used  it  in  expounding  Jewish  fables,  genealogies,  etc. 
Hence,  their  expositions,  instead  of  making  wise  unto  sal- 
vation, were  vain  babblings ;  profane  and  old  wives'  fables 
(1  Tim.  iv.  7 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  16).  Const,  through  faith,  etc., 
with  make  wUe,  not  with  $alvation. 

16.  All  Scripture  (iraaa  7pa^).  Better,  every  Scripture, 
that  is,  every  passage  of  Scripture.  Scripture  as  a  whole  is 
ai  ypaKfxU  or  al  ^pa/^  S^iai.  ^lepd  is  never  used  with  7/>a^. 
Tpa4>^  is  the  single  passage,  usually  defined  by  this,  or  that, 
or  the,  or  tvhieh  saith.* 

Is  given  by  inspiration  of  God  (^O&hrvewrroi}.  N.  T.^. 
^LXX.  From  Oeo^  Ood  and  irveip  to  breathe.  God-breathed. 
The  word  tells  us  nothing  of  the  peculiar  character  or  limits 
of  inspiration  beyoud  the  fact  that  it  proceeds  from  God.  In 
construction  omit  is,  and  rend,  as  attributive  of  ypai^  every 
divinely-inspired  Scripture. 

And  is  profitable  (/col  A^Xi/A09).  According  to  A.  V., 
kgI  and  is  merely  the  copula  between  two  predicates  of  ifpa/^. 
It  is  divinely-inspired  and  is  profitable.  According  to  the 
interpretation  given  above,  /col  has  the  force  of  also.  Every 
divinely-inspired  Scripture  is,  besides  being  so  inspired  and 
for  that  reason,  also  profitable,  etc.  *fi^Xi/A09  profitable, 
Past^.     See  on  1  Tim.  iv.  8. 

For  doctrine  (irfm  hiZaaKa\(av).  Better,  teaching.  Comp. 
to  make  thee  wise,  ver.  16. 

Reproof  (ikeyfjulp).  Better,  conviction.  N.  T.^.  ^Class. 
Comparatively  frequent  in  LXX,  mostly  in  the  sense  of 
rebuke :  sometimes  curse,  punishment.  See  Ps.  of  Sol.  x.  1, 
but  the  reading  is  disputed  with  iXJyxf^  See  on  the  verb 
ik^jxeiv,  J.  iii.  20. 

*  The  few  pMsages  which  are  cited  in  fayonr  of  the  use  of  ypa^  for 
Scripture  aa  a  whole,  as  J.  iL  22 ;  xrii.  12 ;  GaL  iii.  22,  are  not  decisive. 
They  can  all  he  assigned,  with  much  appearance  of  probahility,  to  definite 
O.  T.  passages. 


818  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ck.  IV. 

Correction  QiwavSpemtnv).  N.  T.^.  Twice  in  LXX.  Re- 
storing to  an  upright  state  (opOtk  erec€) ;  Betting  right. 

Instruction  (waiSelav).  Better,  eha9ti$ement  or  discipline. 
See  on  £ph.  vi.  4.  In  LXX  mostly  correction  or  discipline^ 
sometimes  admonition.  Specially  of  Grod's  chastisement  by 
means  of  sorrow  and  evil. 

17.  Perfect  (fi/ww).  N.  TA  ^LXX.  ILev.  complete; 
but  the  idea  is  rather  that  of  mutual,  symmetrical  adjustment 
of  all  that  goes  to  make  the  man  :  harmonious  combination  of 
different  qualities  and  powers.  Comp.  Kardfnuri^  perfecting^ 
2  Cor.  xiii.  9  :  Karafmcfiitk  perfecting  (as  accomplished), 
Eph.  iv.  12 :  icaraprrUrai  make  perfect  or  bring  into  complete 
adjustment,  Heb.  xiii.  21. 

Thoroughly  furnished  (i^fmaiUiwi).  The  same  root  as 
&fmo^.  It  fills  out  the  idea  of  ipno^;  fitted  out.  Only  here 
and  Acts  xi.  5  (note).     ^Class.  • 

Unto  all  good  works  Qirp^  irav  ipyov  ayaOhv).  More  cor- 
rectly, every  good  work.  Any  writing  which  can  produce 
such  profitable  results  vindicates  itself  as  inspired  of  God. 
It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  test  of  the  divine  inspiration  of 
Scripture  is  here  placed  in  its  practical  usefulness. 


CHAPTER  IV. 
1.    I  charge  (huLyLoprvpofuu).     See  on  1  Tim.  v.  21. 

At  his  appearing  (jcal  rifp  iin4>dv€iav).  Rend.  ^  and  by  his 
appearing,^'  iiri^dveiav  thus  depending  on  Butfiafrrvpofiai^  and 
the  accusative  being  the  ordinary  accusative  of  conjuration, 
with  which  by  must  be  supplied.  The  A.  V.  follows  the  read- 
ing scari^  at.  For  ifn(l>dv€ia  appearing^  see  on  1  Tim.  vi.  14  : 
2  Th.  ii.  8.     For  fiaaiKeia  kingdom^  see  on  L.  vi.  20. 


Ch.  IV.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  819 

2.  Be  instant  (hrlarrfOi).  Better,  be  ready.  Once  in 
Paul,  1  Th.  y.  3.  Frequent  in  Luke  and  Acts.  Lit.  $tand 
hy^  he  at  hand^  he  present.  To  came  mddenly  upon^  L.  ii.  88. 
Hence,  he  ready.  InstatU  signifies  urgent^  importunate^  per- 
severing. Lat.  instare  to  pre$$  upon.  Thus  Latimer,  ^^I 
preached  at  the  instant  request  of  a  curate."  So  N.  T., 
Rom.  xii.  12,  *^  Continuing  instant  in  prayer." 

In  season  (eifteaCpts^y  Only  here  and  Mk.  xiv.  11.  LXX 
once,  Sir.  xviii.  22.  Comp.  evKcupelv  to  have  leisure  or  oppor- 
tunity^ Mk.  yi.  81 ;  1  Cor.  xyi.  12 :  euKcupia  opportunity^ 
Matt.  xxvi.  16 :  eOtccupo^  seasonahle^  convenient^  Mk.  vi.  21 ; 
Heb.  iv.  16. 

Out  of  season  (^iucalpnii).  N.  T.^.  LXX  once,  Sir.  xxzy.  4. 
Comp.  cucoipeiaOiu  to  lack  opportunity^  Philip,  iy.  10.  Timothy 
is  not  adyised  to  disregard  opportuneness,  but  to  discharge 
his  duty  to  those  with  whom  he  deals,  whether  it  be  welcome 
or  not. 

Reprove  (jfXc7{oy).  Rather,  convict  of  their  errors.  See 
on  1  Tim.  y.  20  and  J.  iii.  20.  In  Paul,  1  Cor.  xiy.  24 ; 
Eph.  y.  11,  18.     Comp.  ikeyftSp  conviction^  ch.  iii.  16. 

Rebuke  (^iT//Ai7<roi/).  In  Pastorals  only  here.  ^P.  Mostly 
in  the  Synoptic  Gospels,  where  it  is  frequent.  It  has  two 
meanings :  relmke^  as  Matt.  yiii.  26 ;  L.  xyii.  8,  and  charge^ 
as  Matt.  xii.  16 ;  xyi.  20,  commonly  followed  by  tva  that  or 
X^<op  saying  (Matt.  xx.  81;  Mk.  i.  25;  iii.  12;  yiii.  30; 
L.  iy.  35),  but  see  L.  ix.  21.  The  word  implies  a  sharp^ 
severe  rebuke,  with,  possibly,  a  suggestion  in  some  cases  of 
impending  penalty  (tim^J)  ;  charge  on  pain  of.  This  might 
go  to  justify  the  rendering  of  Holtzmann  and  yon  Soden, 
threaten.  To  charge  on  pain  of  penalty  for  disobedience 
implies  a  meruice^  in  this  case  of  future  judgment. 

Exhort  (wapoicdkia'op).  See  on  consolation^  L.  yi.  24 ; 
comfort^  Acts  ix.  81.     Tischendorf  changes  the  order  of  the 


81ti  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  Ill 

words  here  should  be  rendered  $aered  learning.  The  books 
in  the  writer's  mind  were  no  doubt  the  O.  T.  Soriptares,  in 
which  Timothy,  like  every  Jewish  boy,  had  been  instructed  ; 
but  he  does  not  mean  to  designate  those  books  as  Sepi^  ypdf^ 
fiara.  He  means  the  learning  acquired  from  Scripture  by 
the  rabbinic  methods,  according  to  which  the  O.  T.  books 
were  carefully  searched  for  meanings  hidden  in  each  word 
and  letter,  and  especially  for  messianic  intimations.  Speci- 
mens of  such  learning  may  be  seen  here  and  there  in  the 
writings  of  Paul,  as  1  Cor.  ix.  9  f .  ;  x.  1  f .  ;  Gral.  iii.  16  f .  ; 
iv.  21  f .  In  Acts  iv.  18,  the  council,  having  heard  Peter*s 
speech,  in  which  he  interpreted  Ps.  cxviii.  22  and  Isa. 
xxviii.  16  of  Christ,  at  once  perceived  that  Peter  and  John 
were  aypafifiaroi^  not  versed  in  the  methods  of  the  schools. 
Before  Agrippa,  Paul  drew  the  doctrine  of  the  Resurrection 
from  the  O.  T.,  whereupon  Festus  exclaimed,  "wiwcA  learn- 
ing (ttoXX^  ypdfifioTa^  thy  acquaintance  with  the  exegesis  of 
the  schools)  hath  made  thee  mad"  (Acts  xxvi.  24).  To 
Agrippa,  who  was  ^^  expert  in  all  customs  and  questions  which 
are  among  the  Jews  "  (Acts  xxvi.  3),  the  address  of  Paul,  a 
pupil  of  Hillel,  was  not  surprising,  although  he  declared  that 
Paul's  reasoning  did  not  appeal  to  him.  In  J.  vii.  15,  when 
Jesus  taught  in  the  temple,  the  Jews  wondered,  and  said  : 
"  How  knoweth  this  man  lettere  f  "  That  a  Jew  should  know 
the  Scriptures  was  not  strange.  The  wonder  lay  in  the  exe- 
getical  skill  of  one  who  had  not  been  trained  by  the  literary 
methods  of  the  time. 

To  make  thee  wise  (<r€  co<l>Urai).  Only  here  and  2  Pet. 
i.  16.  See  note  there  on  cunningly  devised.  To  give  thee 
understanding  of  that  which  lies  behind  the  letter ;  to  enable 
thee  to  detect  in  the  O.  T.  books  various  hidden  allusicnis_ 
Christ ;  to  draw  from  the  O.  T.  the  mystery  of  mea 
salvation,  and  to  interpret  the  O.  T.  with  Christ  as  tj 
This  gives  significance  to  the  following  words,  thro^ 
which  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  Jesus  Christ  was  the  ke 
ture,  and  through  faith  in  him  Scripture  beca' 
unto  salvation.     The  false  teachers  also  had  ** 


Cb.  IV.]  THB  8BCOKD  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  821 

masse.*  In  periods  of  unsettled  faith,  scepticism,  and  mere 
curious  speculation  in  matters  of  religion,  teachers  of  all 
kinds  swarm  like  the  flies  in  Egypt.  The  demand  creates 
the  supply.  The  hearers  invite  and  shape  their  own  preachers. 
If  the  people  desire  a  calf  to  worship,  a  ministerial  calf -maker 
is  readily  found.  *^  The  master  of  superstition  is  the  people, 
and  in  all  superstition  wise  men  follow  fools  '*  (Bacon,  £$$. 
xvii). 

Having  itching  ears  {xinfOSfiepoi  rifp  iueo^v).  Or,  being  tickled 
in  their  hearing.  Kvi^Oeiv  to  tickle^  If.  T.^.  ^LXX.  KvTfOSfiepo^ 
itching.  Hesy chius  explains,  ^^  hearing  for  mere  gratification.  *' 
Clement  of  Alexandria  describes  certain  teachers  as  ^^scratch- 
ing and  tickling,  in  no  human  way,  the  ears  of  those  who 
eagerly  desire  to  be  scratched"  (JStrom.  y).  Seneca  says: 
''  Some  come  to  hear^  not  to  leam^  just  as  we  go  to  the  theatre, 
for  pleasure,  to  delight  our  ears  with  the  speaking  or  the  voice 
or  the  plays  "  (J^.  108).  *AicoiJ,  A.  V.  ears^  in  N.  T.  a  report^ 
as  Matt.  iy.  24 ;  xiy.  1 ;  xxiy.  6 :  in  the  plural,  eare  (neyer 
ear  in  singular),  as  Mk.  yii.  85 ;  L.  yii.  1 :  hearing^  either  the 
acty  as  Acts  xxyiii.  26;  Rom.  x.  17,  or  the  senee^  1  Cor. 
xii.  17,  here,  and  yer.  4. 

4.  Shall  be  turned  unto  fables  (^l  rot^  fiHOav^  hcrpair/f- 
aovTcu).  More  correctly,  will  turn  aside.  The  passiye  has  a 
middle  sense.     For  fables  see  on  1  Tim.  i.  4. 

5.  Watch  thou  (ai  vfjifHl).  See  on  1  Th.  y.  6,  and  on 
hvav^y^waip  recover^  2  Tim.  ii.  26. 

Endure  afflictions  (jcoMonddrimv).  Or  wffer  hardship. 
See  on  ch.  ii.  9,  and  comp.  ch.  iy.  5. 

Of  an  evangelist  (eui77€XurroS).  Here,  Acts  xxi.  8  and 
Eph.  iy.  11.     In  the  last  passage,  a  spedal  function,  with 

•  Weiniek«r*8«<c^Aer«M<i8fB6U6.  BetttrTOin8oden,«<c^ai|ffaiiMiMlii; 
«rBahiii6n,ifiifaiieA€rMfdMftii;  or  H ofmann,  hifuniiMiiifetu 

YOU  IT.— 21 


822  WOBD  STUDIES   IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  IV 

apostles,  prophets,  pastors,  and  teachers.  A  travelling  minis- 
ten  whose  work  was  not  confined  to  a  particular  church.  So 
Philip,  Acts  viii.  5-18,  26-40.  A  helper  of  the  apostles.  An 
apostle,  as  such,  was  an  evangelist  (1  Cor.  i.  17),  but  every 
evangelist  was  not  an  apostle.  In  The  Teaching  of  the  Twelve 
ApoeUee  (about  100  a.d.)  it  is  prescribed  that  an  apostle  shall 
not  remain  in  one  place  longer  than  two  days,  and  that  when 
he  departs  he  shall  take  nothing  with  him  except  enough 
bread  to  last  until  his  next  station  (ch.  xi). 

Make  full  proof  of  thy  ministry  (r^v  StaxovCap  a-ov  irXffpo' 
^pvjaop) .  Better,  fulfii  or  fuUtf  perform.  In  Pastorals  only 
here  and  ver.  17.  See  on  L.  i.  1.  In  LXX  once,  Ecd. 
viii.  11,  isfuUff  pereuaded.  Only  in  this  passage  in  the  active 
voice.  Comp.  irktipwravr^  r^v  huucovlav  having  fulfilled  their 
ministration^  Acts  xii.  26 :  i7r\ijpov  rbv  Bpdfiov  was  fulfilling 
hie  couree^  Acts  xiii.  25,  and  rbv  Sp6fjLOP  reriK&ca  I  have  finished 
the  course^  ver.  7.    For  huucovlav  ministry^  see  on  1  Tim.  i.  12. 

6.  For  I  am  now  ready  to  be  offered  (^eo  7^/>  ^817  <r7r^- 
fiofuu).  J,  emphatic  contrast  with  <rv  thou^  ver.  5.  Already. 
What  he  is  now  suffering  is  the  beginning  of  the  end.  S^^ 
SeaOai  to  be  poured  out  as  a  libation^  only  here  and  Philip, 
ii.  17  (note).     In  the  active  voice  quite  often  in  LXX. 

Departure  (arnXua-eo)?).  N.  T.^.  ^LXX.  Comp.  ai/aXOcroi 
to  depart^  Philip,  i.  28.  The  figure  is  explained  by  some  of 
loosing  a  ship  from  its  moorings ;  by  others  of  breaking 
camp.  In  Philippians  the  latter  is  the  more  probable  ^ex- 
planation, because  Paul's  situation  in  the  custody  of  the 
Praetorians  at  Rome  would  naturally  suggest  a  military 
metaphor,  and  because  he  is  habitually  sparing  of  nautical 
metaphors.  Comp.  2  Cor.  v.  1,  and  Clement  of  Rome,  ad 
Corinth,  xliv :  ^^  Blessed  are  the  presbyters  who  have  gone 
before,  seeing  that  their  departure  (avdXuaiv)  was  fruitful 
and  ripe." 

7.  I  have  fought  a  good  fight  (rbp  Ka\iv  ky&va  ^y<»vur/iai). 
For  a  good  fight  rend,  the  good  fight.     For  the  phrase,  see 


Cr.  IV.]  THE  BBOOND  EPISTLB  TO  TIMOTHY.  828 

on  1  Tim.  vi.  12.     Comp.  Philip,  i.  27,  80 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  26 ; 
Col.  ii.  1 ;  1  Th.  ii.  2 ;  Eph.  vi.  11  S. 

Course  (Bpd/iov).  Metaphor  from  the  race-course.  Only 
here  and  Acts  xiii.  25 ;  xx.  24 :  comp.  1  Cor.  ix.  24 ;  Gal.  ii.  2; 
V.  7 ;  Rom.  ix.  16 ;  Philip,  ii.  16 ;  iii.  12-14. 

I  have  kept  the  faith  (rifv  irUmv  Ten^pfjKa).  The  phrase 
N.  T.^.     For  njpehf  to  keep^  see  on  1  Tim.  v.  22 ;  vi.  14. 

8.  Henceforth  (\oiirhv).  Lit.  as  to  what  remaim.  Aoi^^y 
or  rh  Xoiiriv  either  finaUtf^  as  2  Cor.  xiii.  11 ;  or  henc^arth 
as  here,  Mk.  xiv.  41 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  29 ,  Heb.  x.  18 :  or  for  the 
reft,  beiidee^  as  1  Th.  iv.  1  (note);  2  Th.  iii.  1. 

There  is  laid  up  (&w6k€it€u).  Or  laid  away.  In  Pastor- 
als only  here.  In  Paul,  see  Col.  i.  6  (note).  L.  xix.  20  of 
the  pound  laid  up  in  a  napkin. 

A  crown  of  righteousness  (d  r^  huceuooAn/^  or^iw). 
The  phrase  N.  T.^.  See  on  ar^avwrcu  i$  crowned^  ch.  ii.  6. 
Rend,  the  crown. 

Judge  (/c/MTi^).  Comp.  ver.  1.  Mostly  in  Luke  and  Acts. 
^P.  Only  here  in  Pastorals.  Applied  to  Christ,  Acts  x.  42  * 
Jas.  V.  9 ;  to  Grod,  Heb.  xii.  28 ;  Jas.  iv.  12. 

Shall  give  (^inroSAaei).  Most  frequent  in  Synoptic  Gos- 
pels. It  may  mean  to  give  over  or  away^  as  Matt,  xxvii.  68 ; 
Acts  V.  8 ;  Heb.  xii.  16 :  or  to  give  haeky  reeompenee^  as  here. 
Matt.  vi.  4,  6, 18;  Rom.  ii.  6. 

At  that  day  (h  Iceipff  rg  jJa^^).     See  on  ch.  i.  12. 

That  love  his  appearing  (rok  fjyawffMJai  rifv  hrt^dveua^ 
airrou).  For  love  rend,  have  loved.  Appearing^  Christ's  sec- 
ond coming :  see  on  1  Tim.  vi.  14 ;  2  Th.  ii.  8.  The  phrase 
N.  T.^.     Some  have  interpreted  appearing  as  Christ's  firet 


324  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ch.  IV. 

coming  into  the  world,  as  ch.  i.  10 ;  but  the  other  sense  is 
according  to  the  analogy  of  1  Cor.  ii.  9;  Philip,  iii.  20; 
Heb.  Ix.  28. 

9.  Do  thy  diligence  (jmrovBaaov).  Earnestly  endeavoar. 
See  on  ch.  ii.  15,  and  comp.  ch.  i.  8.  Do  diligence  and  give 
diligenee  (2  Pet.  i.  10)  are  old  English  phrases.   So  Chaucer : 

*  And  night  and  day  dide  ever  his  diligence 
Hir  for  to  please.'* 

MancipU'9  T.  14L 

**  And  ech  of  hem  doth  al  his  diligence 
To  doon  un-to  the  feste  reverence.'* 

Clerke'8  T.  106 

10.  Demas.  A  contraction  of  Demetrius  or  Demarchus. 
He  is  mentioned  Col.  iv.  13  and  Philem.  24.  It  is  supposed 
that  he  was  a  Thessalonian.  On  leaving  Paul  he  went  to 
Thessalonica ;  and  in  Philemon  his  name  is  mentioned  next 
to  that  of  Aristarchus  the  Thessalonian.  That  no  epithet 
is  attached  to  his  name  in  Col.  iv.  14  (comp.  "Luke  the 
beloved  physician '')  may  be  a  shadow  of  Demas's  behav- 
iour mentioned  here,  in  case  Colossians  was  written  later 
than  2d  Timothy. 

Hath  forsaken  (^iyKar^Xenrev).  In  Pastorals  here  and 
ver.  16.  See  on  2  Cor.  iv.  9.  The  compounded  preposition 
ip  indicates  a  condition  or  circumstances  in  which  one  has 
been  left,  as  the  common  phrase  left  in  the  lurch.  Comp. 
Germ,  im  Stiche. 

Having  loved  (070^170*09).  The  participle  is  explanatory, 
because  he  loved. 

This  present  world  (top  v\fp  al&va).  See  on  1  Tim.  vi.  17. 
Contrtust  love  his  appearing^  ver.  8. 

Crescens  (Kpi^aKr^).     N.  T.^.     Unknown. 

Qalatia  (TaXariap^.  Most  probably  Galatia.  See  Introd. 
to  Galatians.     Eusebius  (^S.  E.  iii.  4)  says :  ^*  Paul  testifies 


Ch.  iv.]  the  second  epistle  to  timothy.  825 

that  Crescens  was  sent  to  Gaul  ^TaXkiav).^^    Tischendorf 
adopts  this  reading. 

Dalmatia  (AaX^iar/ay).  Part  of  the  country  known  gen« 
erally  as  Illyricum,  along  the  eastern  coast  of  the  Adriatic 
See  Rom.  zv.  19. 

11.  Luke.  See  Introd.  to  Luke.  His  connection  with 
Paul  appears  first  in  Acts  zvi.  10.  He  remained  at  Philippi 
after  Paul's  departure,  and  was  there  seven  years  later,  when 
Paul  revisited  the  city  (Acts  zz.  5,  6).  He  accompanied 
Paul  to  Jerusalem  (Acts  zxi.  15),  after  which  we  lose  sight 
of  him  until  he  appears  at  Caesarea  (Acts  zzvii.  2),  whence 
he  accompanies  Paul  to  Rome.  He  is  mentioned  Col.  iv.  14 
and  Philem.  24. 

Take  (ava\afii»v).  In  N.  T.  mostly  in  Acts.  See  on  Acts 
zxiii.  31,  and  comp.  Acts  zz.  13, 14. 

Mark.  Mentioned  Col.  iv.  10 ;  Philem.  24 ;  1  Pet.  v.  18. 
Probably  John  Mark  (Acts  xii.  12,  25 ;  xv.  87),  called  the 
cousin  of  Barnabas  (Col.  iv.  10).  The  first  mention  of  him 
since  the  separation  from  Paul  (Acts  zv.  39)  occurs  in 
Colossians  and  Philemon.  He  is  commended  to  the  church 
at  Colossae.  In  1st  Peter  he  sends  salutations  to  Asia.  In 
both  Colossians  and  Philemon  his  name  appears  along  with 
that  of  Demas.  In  Colossians  he  is  named  shortly  before 
Luke  and  along  with  Aristarchus  who  does  not  appear  here. 
He  (Mark)  is  about  to  come  to  Asia  where  2d  Timothy  finds 
him.  The  appearance  in  Colossians  of  Aristarchus  with  Mark 
and  of  Demas  with  Luke  is  probably  the  point  of  connection 
with  the  representation  in  2d  Timothy. 

Profitable  for  the  ministry  (jAxpri(rro^  €k  ZuikovUlv). 
*Evxpv^^^  profitable^  only  here,  ch.  ii.  21,  Philem.  11.  For 
for  the  ministry  rend,  for  ministerinff  or  for  eertnee^  and  see 
on  1  Tim.  i.  12. 


826  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  IV. 

12.  Tychicus.  A  comparatively  uncommon  name  in  N.  T^ 
but  found  in  inscriptions  of  Asia  Minor  and  on  Asiatic  coins. 
He  is  mentioned  Acts  zz.  4,  6 ;  Eph.  vi.  21 ;  Col.  iv.  7.  In 
Acts  zz.  4  he  is  described  as  a  native  of  proconsular  Asia. 

18.  The  cloak  (^Xrfi^y).*  Hesychius,  however,  ezplains 
as  a  y\Maa6KOfjLov^  originally  a  case  for  keeping  the  mouth- 
pieces of  wind-instruments ;  thence,  generally,  a  box.  FXcmt- 
aJtcofjLov  is  the  word  for  the  disciples'  treasury-chest  (bag^ 
J.  zii.  6).  Also  a  box  for  transporting  or  preserving  parch- 
ments. Specimens  have  been  found  at  Herculaneum.  In 
LXX,  2  Sam.  vi.  11,  the  ark  of  the  Lord  (but  the  reading 
varies):  in  2  Chron.  xziv.  8,  the  ehe$t  placed  by  order  of 
Joash  at  the  gate  of  the  temple,  to  receive  contributions  for 
its  repair.  Joseph.  Ant.  vi.  1,  2,  of  the  coffer  into  which  the 
jewels  of  gold  were  put  for  a  trespass-offering  when  the  ark 
was  sent  back  (1  Sam.  vi.  8).  Phrynicusf  defines  it  as  ^*  a 
receptacle  for  books,  clothes,  silver,  or  anything  else."  ^04^ 
Xivri^  or  <f>aiv6\ri^  a  wrapper  of  parchments^  was  translated 
figuratively  in  Latin  by  toga  or  paentUa  '^  a  cloak,"  sometimes 
of  leather ;  also  the  wrapping  which  a  shopkeeper  put  round 
fish  or  olives;  also  the  parchment  cover  for  papyrus  rolls. 
Accordingly  it  is  claimed  that  Timothy  is  here  bidden  to 
bring,  not  a  cloak,  but  a  roll-case.  So  the  Syriac  Version. 
There  seems  to  be  no  su£Scient  reason  for  abandoning  the 
translation  of  A.  V. 

Carpus.    Not  mentioned  elsewhere. 

The  books  (^fiifiXUi).  B/)8Xo9  or  fitpKCov  was  the  term 
most  widely  used  by  the  Greeks  for  hook  or  volume.  The 
usual  derivation  is  from  /3v/3\o^  the  Egyptian  papyrus.  Comp. 
Lat.  liber  "the  inner  bark  of  a  tree,"  also  "book."  J     Pliny 

*  The  word  appears  in  different  forms.    T.  R.  ^i\6wrtt.    Also  ^i^Xi^f, 

t  A  Greek  sophist  of  Bithynia  in  the  second  half  of  the  third  century, 
aathor  of  a  selection  of  Attic  verbs  and  noons  excluding  all  but  the  best  Attio 
forms,  and  arranged  alphabetically. 

I  On  the  p^pXot  see  Hdt.  ii.  92,  and  Rawlinson*s  notes  in  his  Translation. 


ch.  ivj  the  second  epistle  to  timothy.  327 

(^Nat.  Sist.  ziii.  11)  says  that  the  pith  of  the  papyrus  plant 
was  cut  in  slices  and  laid  in  rows,  over  which  other  rows 
were  laid  crosswise,  and  the  whole  was  massed  by  pressure. 
The  name  for  the  blank  papyrus  sheets  was  x«fpTi;9  (charta) 
paper.  See  on  2  J.  12.  Timothy  is  here  requested  to  bring 
some  papyrus  documents  which  are  distinguished  from  the 
vellum  manuscripts. 

Parchments  (^ii^fifipdvak).  N.  T.^.  Manuscripts  written 
on  parchment  or  vellum.  Strictly  speaking,  vellum  was  made 
from  the  skins  of  young  calves,  and  the  common  parchment 
from  those  of  sheep,  goats,  or  antelopes.  It  was  a  more  dur- 
able material  than  papyrus  and  more  expensive.  The  Latin 
name  was  memhratM^  and  also  pergamena  or  pergamina^  from 
Pergamum  in  Mysia  where  it  was  extensively  manufactured, 
and  from  which  it  was  introduced  into  Greece.  As  to  the 
character  and  contents  of  these  documents  which  Timothy 
is  requested  to  bring,  we  are  of  course  entirely  ignorant.* 

14.  Alexander  the  coppersmith.  Comp.  1  Tim.  i.  20, 
and  Acts  xix.  33.  The  same  person  is  probably  meant  in  all 
three  cases. 

Did  me  much  evil  QiroXKd  fioi  tcaxi^  ipehiC^ro).  Lit. 
$hetved  me  much  iUrtreatment.     Comp.  1  Tim.  i.  16. 

May  the  Lord  reward  (A^o&Mrei).  More  correctly  ehaU 
reward.     A.  V.  follows  the  reading  inroS^. 

15.  Greatly  withstood  (XCav  hvriaTri).  Comp.  ch.  iii.  8, 
and  Gal.  ii.  11.  This  may  refer  to  the  occurrences  at  Ephe- 
sus  (Acts  xix.  88),  or  to  Alexander's  attitude  during  Paul's 
trial.  The  former  is  more  probable.  Xlav  greatly^  not  in 
Paul,  except  in  the  compound  virepXlap^  2  Cor.  xi.  5 ;  xii.  11. 
Only  here  in  Pastorals.     Mostly  in  Synoptic  Gospels. 

*  Much  cnrioas  and  aaeful  information  on  the  subject  of  ancient  book* 
making  is  contained  in  Theodor  Births  Daa  anMe  Buehwe$en  in  seinem  Fer> 
hdltnisM  Mur  LiUeratur,  Berlin,  1882. 


828  WORD  STUDIES  IN  TJ^  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Gh.  TV. 

16.  At  my  first  answer '(^i'  T$  irpArff  fiov  iiroXoyif). 
*Airo\oyia  defence  in  a  judicial  trial.  Comp.  Acts  zxv.  16. 
Also  against  private  persons^  as  1  Cor.  iz.  8 ;  2  Cor.  vii.  11. 
Drfence  of  the  gospel  against  its  adversaries^  as  Philip,  i.  7, 16 ; 
comp.  1  Pet.  iii.  15  (note).  It  is  impossible  to  decide  to 
what  this  refers.  On  the  assumption  of  a  second  imprison- 
ment of  Paul  (see  Introduction)  it  would  probably  refer  to  a 
preliminary  hearing  before  the  main  trial.  It  is  not  improb- 
able that  the  writer  had  before  his  mind  the  situation  of  Paul 
as  described  in  Philip,  i,  since  this  Epistle  shows  at  many 
points  the  influence  of  the  Philippian  letter.  It  should  be 
noted,  however,  that  airoXof^la  in  Philip,  i.  7,  16,  has  no 
specific  reference  to  Paul's  trial,  but  refers  to  the  defence  of 
the  gospel  under  any  and  all  circumstances.  In  any  case, 
the  first  Roman  imprisonment  cannot  be  alluded  to  here.  On 
that  supposition,  the  omission  of  all  reference  to  Timothy's 
presence  and  personal  ministry  at  that  time,  and  the  words 
about  his  first  defence,  which  must  have  taken  place  before 
Timothy  left  Rome  (Philip,  ii.  19-23)  and  which  is  here 
related  as  a  piece  of  news,  are  quite  inexplicable. 

Stood  with  me  (irapeydvero).  As  a  patron  or  an  advocate. 
The  verb  mostly  in  Luke  and  Acts :  once  in  Paul,  1  Cor.  xvi.  8 : 
only  here  in  Pastorals.  It  means  to  place  one^s  self  l>^^de  ; 
hence,  to  come  to^  and  this  latter  sense  is  almost  universal  in 
N.  T.  In  the  sense  of  coming  to  or  standing  by  one  as  a 
friend,  only  here. 

Be  laid  to  their  charge  (avrot?  Xo^^r^e/i;).  Mostly  in 
Paul :  only  here  in  Pastorals.  See  on  Rom.  iv.  8,  6  ; 
1  Cor.  xiii.  6. 

17.  Strengthened  (iveSwdfAo^aai).     See  on  1  Tim.  i.  12. 

The  preaching  (rb  Ki^pvyfia^.  Better,  the  message  (par 
excellence)^  the  gospel  message.  Usually  with  a  defining 
word,  as  of  Jonah;  of  Jesus  Christ;  my  preaching;  our 
preaching.     Absolutely,  as  here,  1  Cor.  i.  21 ;  Tit.  i.  8. 


Ch.  IV.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  829 

Might  be  fully  known  QirXfffHHfkopvjOi^.  See  on  ver.  5. 
Lit.  might  be  fulfilled;  fully  carried  out  by  being  proclaimed 
before  rulers  in  the  capital  of  the  world.  Comp.  Rom. 
XV.  19  ;  Acts  xxiii.  11 ;  xxviii.  81 ;  Philip,  i.  12-14. 

Out  of  the  mouth  of  the  lion  (&  arSftaro^  X^mw). 
Figurative  expression  for  danger  of  death.  Comp.  1  Cor. 
XV.  82.  As  usual,  all  manner  of  special  references  have  been 
imagined :  the  lions  of  the  amphitheatre ;  Nero ;  the  chief 
accuser ;  the  Jews ;  the  Devil. 

18.  Every  evil  work  (iravri^  tpyov  irovripov).  Every 
design  and  attempt  against  him  and  his  work.  Hovrfpd^ 
evU  cannot  be  limited  to  evil  on  its  active  side.  See  on 
1  Cor.  V.  18.  The  word  is  connected  at  the  root  with  TrdveaOtu 
to  be  needy  J  and  irovelv  to  toil;  and  this  connection  opens  a 
glimpse  of  that  sentiment  which  associated  badness  with  a 
poor  and  toiling  condition.  The  word  means  originally  full 
of  or  oppreesed  by  laboure ;  thence,  that  which  bring%  annoy* 
ance  or  toil.  Comp.  ritjJpa  irovrfpd  evil  day^  Eph.  v.  16 ; 
vi.  IS  :  1\ko^  irovfiphv  a  grievous  $ore^  Apoc.  xvi.  2. 

Heavenly  kingdom  (t^p  fiaaCKelav  r^v  hrovpdviov).  The 
phrase  N.  T.^.  'Eirovpapio^  heavenly  only  here  in  Pastorals. 
Mostly  in  Paul  and  Hebrews.  Heavenly  kingdom^  here  the 
future,  glorified  life,  as  1  Cor.  vi.  9,  10 ;  xv.  50 ;  Luke 
xiii.  29.  In  the  same  sense,  kingdom  of  Christ  and  of  Q-od^ 
Eph.  V.  5 ;  kingdom  of  their  Father^  Matt.  xiii.  43  ;  my 
Father's  kingdom^  Matt.  xxvi.  29 ;  kingdom  prepared  for  yo%u, 
Matt.  XXV.  84;  eternal  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ,  2  Pet.  i.  11. 

19.  Salute  (Anroo-cu).  Very  often  in  Paul.  The  singu- 
lar only  here  and  Tit.  iii.  16. 

Prisca  and  Aquila.  They  appear  in  Corinth,  Acts  xviii. 
2,  3 ;  in  Ephesus,  Acts  xviii.  18,  26 ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  19. 


880  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Gh.  IV. 

Onesiphorus.  Profit  hringtr.  Comp.  ch.  i.  16.  One  of 
the  punning  names  so  common  among  slaves.  Comp.  Chres- 
imus,  Chrestus,  Onesimus,  Symphoms,  all  of  which  signify 
iM^uZ  or  hdjif%d. 

20.  Erastus.  In  Acts  zix.  22,  sent  by  Paid  with  Timothy 
to  Macedonia  from  Ephesus.  In  Rom.  xvi.  28,  the  city- 
treasurer  who  sends  salutations.  He  cannot  be  certainly 
identified  with  the  one  mentioned  here.  The  writer  merely 
selects  names  of  well-known  companions  of  Paul. 

Trophimus.    See  Acts  zx.  4 ;  zxi.  9. 

Sick  (JurOeifovvra).  By  Paul  mostly  in  a  moral  sense,  as 
wtak  in  the  faiths  Rom.  iy.  19 ;  the  law  was  weak^  Rom. 
yiii.  8  ;  the  weak  brother^  1  Cor.  viii.  11.  Of  bodily  sick- 
ness, Philip,  ii.  26,  27. 

21.  Eubulus,  Pudens^  Linus,  Claudia.    N.  T.^. 

22.  Tlie  Lord  Jesus  Clirist  be  witli  thy  spirit.  Omit 
Jeiui  ChrUit.    The  closing  benediction  only  here  in  this  form. 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUa 


CHAPTER  I. 


1.  An  apostle — according  to  the  faith  of  God's  elect, 
etc.  The  norm  of  the  apostolate  in  each  of  the  three  Epistles 
is  unique,  and  not  Pauline.  In  1  Tim.,  (iccording  to  the  eom^ 
mandment  of  Q-od .-  in  2  Tim.,  according  to  the  promiee  of  life 
in  Chriet  Jesus.  Kar^  according  to^  not  for  the  faith,  but  cor* 
responding  to  the  norm  or  standard  of  faith  which  is  set  for 
God's  elect. 

And  acknowledging  of  the  truth  (koI  intyvwrw  &X17- 
^€/a9).  For  acknowledging  rend,  knowledge.  For  the  phrase, 
see  on  1  Tim.  ii.  4.  Governed,  like  irUmv  faiths  by  icarh. 
The  writer  is  an  apostle  according  to  the  faith  of  God's  elect, 
and  according  to  the  truth  which  is  contained  in  the  faith,  as 
that  truth  is  intelligently  apprehended  and  held. 

Which  is  after  godliness  (71)9  icar*  einr^fieiap).  Or  accord- 
ing to  godliness.  Comp.  1  Tim.  vi.  3.  This  addition  describes 
the  peculiar  and  essential  character  of  the  truth  which  is  held 
and  known  by  God's  elect,  namely,  that  it  is  concerned  with 
the  fear  and  obedience  of  God — all  that  constitutes  true  piety. 
See  on  1  Tim.  i.  10. 

2.  In  hope  of  eternal  life  (^'  ikiriBi  ^<a»^  aU$vtov). 
Const,  with  Apostle^  ver.  1.*    '£^1  resting  upon. 

*  Not  with  vi^riw^  nor  4wiy9tt9i9^  nor  dXif^(af,  neither  of  wliioh  rest  apoa 
hope ;  nor  with  r%t  xar  c^^kiar,  which  is  a  defining  daose  complete  la 
itaeif 

831 


832  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAICENT.         [Gb.  I 

God  that  cannot  lie  (o  &^S^  0^).  'Afcv%,  N.  T.^'. 
Once  in  LXX,  Wisd.  vii.  17.  Comp.  Rom.  iii.  4 ;  Heb.  vi.  18. 
Paul  expr^ses  the  idea  positively,  by  iXtfOij^  trut\ful^  Konu 
iii.  4. 

Before  th^  world  began  (irph  xP^vwp  aUo^inv).  Lit. 
btfore  eternal  times.  Before  time  began  to  be  reckoned  by 
aeons.    See  on  2  Tim.  i.  9,  and  additional  note  on  2  Th.  i.  9. 

8.  In  due  times  (^KtupoU  ISCoi/^}.  Better,  in  hi$  (or  iU) 
own  $ea8an$.     See  on  1  Tim.  ii.  6. 

Through  preaching  (&  KrfpvyfAaii).  Rather,  m  a  proc- 
lamation.    See  on  2  Tim.  iv.  17. 

Which  is  committed  unto  me  (8  hrurrevOfiv  iyi^^.  Better, 
wheremth  I  was  intrusted.     See  on  1  Tim.  i.  11. 

4.  Own  (ypfjtrtp).     See  on  1  Tim.  L  2. 

According  to  the  common  faith  {icarh  Koiviiv  irumv). 
The  phrase  N.  T.^.  Koivtk  common^  usually  in  contrast  with 
KaOaptk  pure  or  £7109  holy^  as  Acts  x.  14 ;  xi.  8 ;  Apoc. 
xxi.  27.  In  the  sense  of  general  as  here,  Acts  ii.  44 ;  iy.  82 ; 
Jude  8.  Comp.  2  Pet.  i.  1.  The  "catholic"  faith.  Kari 
according  to^  as  ver.  1. 

5.  In  Crete.  Crete  is  one  of  the  largest  islands  in  the 
Mediterranean.  By  the  mythological  writers  it  was  called 
Aeria,  Doliche,  Idaea,  Telchinia.  According  to  tradition, 
Minos  first  gave  laws  to  the  Cretans,  conquered  the  Aegean 
pirates,  and  established  a  navy.  After  the  Trojan  war  the 
principal  cities  of  the  island  formed  themselves  into  several 
republics,  mostly  independent.  The  chief  cities  were  Cnos- 
sus,  Cydonia,  Gortyna,  and  Lyctus.  Crete  was  annexed  to 
the  Roman  Empire  B.C.  67.  About  Paul's  visiting  the  island 
we  have  no  information  whatever  beyond  the  hints  in  this 
Epistle.    There  is  no  absolute  proof  that  Paul  was  ever  there 


Ch.  L]  the  epistle  to  TITUS. 

before  the  voyage  to  Rome.  Although  on  that  voyage  some 
time  appears  to  have  been  spent  at  Crete,  there  is  no  notice  of 
Paul  having  received  any  greeting  from  the  members  of  the 
Christian  churches  there.  According  to  this  Epistle,  Paul 
and  Titus  had  worked  there  together.  Paul  went  away,  and 
left  Titus  to  organise  the  churches  founded  by  himself.  He 
sent  this  letter  by  Zenas  and  ApoUos  (iii.  18),  and  announced 
in  it  the  coming  ot  Artemas  or  of  Tychicus.  On  their  arrival 
Titup  was  to  join  Paul  at  Nicopolis,  where  Paul  was  propos- 
ing to  winter. 

Shouldst  set  in  order  (Jinhiop0wrji).  N.  T.^.  Lit.  to 
Met  Btraight  beMtden  or  farther;  that  is,  should  arrange  what 
remained  to  be  set  in  order  after  Paul's  departure.  Used 
by  medical  writers  of  setting  broken  limbs  or  straightening 
crooked  ones.  \uip0wn^  reformation^  Heb.  ix.  10  :  SiSpOatfjia 
eorrectum^  Acts  xxiv.  8. 

Ordain  elders  (Karaaniajfi  wpeafivT^pov^^.  Kadiardpcu 
appoint  or  eomtitMte.  In  Paul  only  Rom.  v.  19.  For  the 
sense  here  comp.  Matt.  xxiv.  45,  47 ;  L.  xii.  14  ;  Acts  vi.  8. 
The  meaning  of  the  injunction  is,  that  Titus  should  appoint, 
out  of  the  number  of  elderly  men  of  approved  Christian 
reputation,  cen^ain  ones  to  be  overseers  (hrlaKoiroC)  of  the 
churches  in  the  several  cities.  The  eldership  was  not  a  dis- 
tinct church  office.     See  on  1  Tim.  v.  1. 

I  had  appointed  {Sierafd/irfp).  Better^  I  gave  thee  charge. 
Mostly  in  Luka  and  Acts. 

B.  Faithful  children  (rAcpa  irtard).  Better,  believing  chiU 
dren :  or,  as  Rev.,  children  that  believe.     Comp.  1  Tim.  iii.  4. 

Not  accueed  of  riot  (/itj^  h  KarrriopCa  iurwrCas;^.  Lit.  not 
in  accusation  oj  profligacy.  For  KarrriopCa  see  on  1  Tim.  v.  19. 
*A<rwrla^  lit.  Hn$avingne$B ;  hence,  dis$olutene$B^  profligacy. 
Comp.  L.  XV  iH,  of  the  prodigal  son,  who  lived  uneavinglg 
(i^mmni).    Only  here,  Eph.  v.  18,  and  1  Pet.  iv.  4  (note). 


8ft4  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THS  HSW  TBSTAMEHT.         fjCm.  L 

7.  A  bishop  (riv  hrlaKowov).  See  on  1  Tim.  iii.  1 ;  t.  1. 
Rend,  the  bishop.  It  will  be  observed  that  the  qnalifications 
of  the  elders  are  fixed  by  those  of  the  bishop.  Appoint  elders 
who  shall  be  nnaocosed,  etc.,/i^  the  bishop  most  be  unaociisedY 
etc.  The  overseers  must  have  the  qnalifications  of  approved 
presbjters. 

Steward  of  Qod  {Omni  oUov6fMOP).  Comp.  1  Cor.  iy.  1, 2 ; 
1  Pet.  iv.  10 ;  and  see  on  Rom.  xvi.  28 ;  L.  xvi.  1.  The 
phrase  N.  T.®. 

Selfwilled  (af^iSi^).    Only  here  and  2  Pet.  ii.  10  (note). 

Soon  angry  (ppyCXov).  N.  T.^.  Rarely  in  LXX  and 
Class.     Irascible. 

8.  A  lover  of  hospitality  (^Xi(fcpoy).  Better,  hoipUabU. 
See  on  1  Tim.  iii.  2. 

A  lover  of  good  men  {^XdyoBop).     N.  T.^.     Better, 

lover  of  good. 

Temperate  (#7ir/MiT9).  N.  T.^.  Originally,  Aavtn^  jMwer 
over;  po$$e$$ed  of;  hence,  eontroUing^  keeping  in  hand, 
*Ey/cpdT€M  temperance^  Acts  xxiv.  26  ;  Gal.  v.  23 ;  2  Pet.  i.  6. 
'EyfcpareveaOcu  to  contain  one's  self  1  Cor.  vii.  9 ;  ix.  26. 

9.  Holding  fast  {avrexifJ^^evov}.  Only  here  in  Pastorals. 
In  Paul,  1  Th.  v.  14  (note). 

The  faithful  word  (rov  irurrov  Xiyov).  The  trusttvorthjfy 
reliable  word.     Comp.  1  Tim.  i.  16  (note). 

As  he  hath  been  taught  {icarh  rifv  SiSa^^y).  Lit.  accord- 
ing.  to  the  teaching.  Const,  with  word.  Agreeing  with  the 
apostolic  teaching.     For  SiSaxn  teaching  see  on  2  Tim.  iv.  2. 

May  be  able  by  sound  doctrine  both  to  exhort  {Bvpar&9 
p  Kol  wapoKdXMV  iv  t§  BiSaa/caXCa  r^  v^uuvowrjf).      Bend* 


Ch.  I.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TTTUS.  885 

*^may  be  able  both  to  exhort  in  the  sound  teaching/*  For 
Suvaroi  able  or  powerful^  see  on  2  Tim.  i.  12.  Used  by  Paul 
in  the  phrase  ei  hwaniv  if  it  be  possible^  Rom.  xii.  18 ;  Gral. 
iv.  15 :  T^  SwaT6v  that  which  i$  poeeible^  Rom.  ix.  22 :  of  God, 
Rom.  iv.  21 ;  xi.  28  :  of  men,  in  the  ethical  sense,  Rom.  xy.  1 ; 
2  Cor.  xii.  10 ;  xiii.  9. 

Convince  (iX^eiv).  Better,  eanmot.  See  on  J.  iii.  20, 
and  iXeyfiov,  2  Tim.  iii.  16. 

The  gainsayers  (rod?  ivriXdyovra/i").  In  Pastorals  only 
here  and  ch.  ii.  9.  Once  in  Paul,  Rom.  x.  21,  cit.  Mostly 
in  Luke  and  Acts.  Q-aineay^  Angl.  Sax.  ^«^(6erm.  gegen) 
"against,"  and  **say."  Wiclif,  L.  xxi.  15:  "For  I  schal 
gyue  to  you  mouth  and  wysdom,  to  whiche  alle  youre  aduer- 
saries  schulen  not  mowe  agenstonde,  and  agenseye." 

10.  Vain  talkers  (^lAaraioki^oC).  N.  T.^.  ^LXX,  oClass. 
See  on  vain  jangling^  1  Tim.  i.  6. 

Deceivers  (<f>p€vawdTai).  N.  T.^.  <>LXX,  <>Cla8s.  See 
on  ^peifairarav  to  deceive^  Gal.  vi.  8. 

They  of  the  circumcision  (ol  he  r^  ttc/mto/^).  The 
phrase  only  here  in  Pastorals.  *Oi  he  wepirofi^^  Acts  x.  45 ; 
xi.  2 ;  Rom.  iy.  12 ;  Gal.  ii.  12 ;  Col.  iv.  11.  There  can  be  no 
doubt  of  the  presence  of  Jews  in  Crete.  Tacitus  (^ffiet.  y.  2) 
eyen  makes  the  absurd  statement  that  the  Jews  were  Cretan 
exiles ;  and  that  from  their  residence  in  the  yicinity  of  the 
Cretan  Moimt  Ida  they  were  called  Idaei^  whence  Judaei. 
There  appears  to  haye  been  some  confusion  between  the  Pal- 
estinians and  the  Philistines  —  the  Cherethim  or  Cherethitee^ 
who,  in  Ezek.  xxy.  16  ;  Zeph.  ii.  5  are  called  in  LXX  ILprfr^. 
Jews  were  in  the  island  in  considerable  numbers  between  the 
death  of  Alexander  and  the  final  destruction  of  Jerusalem. 
In  1  Mace.  xy.  28  the  Cretan  city  of  Gortyna  is  mentioned 
among  the  places  to  which  letters  were  written  by  Lucius,  the 
Roman  consul,  on  behalf  of  the  Jews,  when  Simon  Maccabaeus 


836  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Cb.  I. 

renewed  the  treaty  which  his  brother  Judas  had  made  with 
Rome.  Josephus  (^Ant.  xvii.  12, 1 ;  Bell.  Jud.  ii.  7, 1)  says 
that  Herod's  pseudo-son  Alexander  imposed  on  the  Cretan 
Jews  on  his  way  to  Italy.  Philo  (^Leg.  ad  Oai.  §  86)  makes 
the  Jewish  envoys  say  to  Caligula  that  all  the  principal 
islands  of  the  Mediterranean,  including  Crete,  were  full  of 
Jews. 

11.  Whose  mouths  must  be  stopped  (od?  Sel  hrurrofU^' 
€iv).  Lit.  ffffiom  it  is  necessary  to  silence.  'Errurro/A/Sciy, 
N.  T.^.  ^LXX.  Originally,  to  put  something  into  the  mouth, 
as  a  bit  into  a  horse's  mouth.  *Eirurr6fjuov  is  the  stop  of  a 
water-pipe  or  of  a  hydraulic  organ.  Comp.  ^luAv  to  muasU^ 
1  Tim.  V.  18. 

Who  subvert  (oXrive;  hvarpiwovaiv).  The  double  relative 
is  explanatory  of  must;  inasmu^ch  as  they^  etc.  For  siubvert 
rend,  overthrow.     See  on  2  Tim.  ii.  18. 

Houses  (oXkov^).     Families. 

12.  One  of  themselves  (jis;  i^  avr&v).  'Ain-Ay  refers  to 
the  gainsayerSy  w.  9, 10.  Ti9  refers  to  Epimenides,  contemp- 
orary with  Solon,  and  born  in  Crete  B.C.  659.  A  legend 
relates  that,  going  by  his  father's  order  in  search  of  a  sheep, 
he  lay  down  in  a  cave,  where  he  fell  asleep  and  slept  for  fif^ 
years.  He  then  appeared  with  long  hair  and  a  flowing  beard, 
and  with  an  astonishing  knowledge  of  medicine  and  natural 
history.  It  was  said  that  he  had  the  power  of  sending  his 
soul  out  of  his  body  and  recalling  it  at  pleasure,  and  that  he 
had  familiar  intercourse  with  the  gods  and  possessed  the 
power  of  prophecy.  He  was  sent  for  to  Athens  at  the  request 
of  the  inhabitants,  in  order  to  pave  the  way  for  the  legislation 
of  Solon  by  purifications  and  propitiatory  sacrifices,  intended 
to  allay  the  feuds  and  party-discussions  which  prevailed  in 
the  city.  In  return  for  his  services  he  refused  the  Athenians' 
offers  of  wealth  and  public  honours,  and  asked  only  a  branch 
of  the  sacred  olive,  and  a  decree  of  perpetual  friendship 


Gb.  I.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  837 

between  Athens  and  his  native  city.  He  is  said  to  have  lived 
to  the  age  of  157  years,  and  divine  honours  were  paid  him  by 
the  Cretans  after  his  death.  He  composed  a  Theogony,  and 
poems  concerning  religious  mysteries.  He  wrote  also  a  poem 
on  the  Argonautic  Expedition,  and  other  works.  Jerome 
mentions  his  treatise  On  Oraelen  and  Jte^onseM^  from  which 
the  quotation  in  this  verse  is  supposed  to  have  been  taken. 
According  to  Diogenes  Laertius  (i.  10)  Epimenides,  in  order 
to  remove  a  pestilence  from  Athens,  turned  some  sheep  loose 
at  the  Areopagus,  and  wherever  they  lay  down  sacrificed  to 
the  proper  god  :  whence,  he  says,  there  are  still  to  be  found, 
in  different  demes  of  the  Athenians,  anonymous  altars. 
Comp.  Acts  xvii.  22,  28.* 

The  Cretans,  etc.     The  words  K/)9tc? — i^tyat  form  a 

hexameter  line. 

Always  (oel).     Habitually. 

Liars  ('^reSoroi) .  In  Pastorals  here  and  1  Tim.  i.  10.  Once 
in  Paul,  Rom.  iii.  4.  Mostly  in  John.  The  Cretan  habit  of 
lying  passed  into  a  verb,  tcpriri^eiv  to  $peak  like  a  Cretan  s  to 
lie :  also  into  a  noun,  icprjTiafJuk  Cretan  behaviour  =  lying. 
Similarly,  the  licentiousness  of  Corinth  appeared  in  the  verb 
Kopivdui^eaOai  to  practite  whoredom^  and  in  the  noun  tcopu/O^ 
aanji  a  whoremonger.     Comp.  Ov.  ArtiM  AmaU  i.  296. 

**  non  hoc,  oentam  quae  sostinet  orbeB 
Qnamvis  sit  mendaz,  CreU  negare  potest** 

**  Crete,  which  a  hundred  cities  doth  maintain, 
Cannot  deny  this,  though  to  lying  given.** 

A  familiar  saying  was  rpCa  icdmra  KOKiara  the  thre$  wont  EP%^ 
Kpffre;^  ILamrdZoKOAy  ILlXuce^  Cretans^  Cappadoeian$^  (Xlieiani. 

Evil  beasts  (xasch  Of^pCa').     Rude,  cruel,  and  brutaL 

•  Readers  of  Goethe  will  recaU  his '' Festqiiel,**  i>et  .Qpim^nidef  iSirio^^ 
Werke,  Bd.  XVIII. 

VOL.  IV.  — 22 


838  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Gk.  I 

Slow-bellies  (yaar^pe:  apyai)-  Better,  idle-beUieB.  Rev. 
gives  the  correct  idea,  idle  gluttons.  They  are  so  given  to 
gluttony  that  they  are  mere  beUies.  Comp.  Philip,  iii.  19. 
FooT^/),  elsewhere  in  N.  T.  always  in  connection  with  child- 
bearmg.  So  mostly  in  LXX,  but  in  a  few  instances  as  here. 
See  Job  xx.  23 ;  Ps.  xvi.  14 ;  Sir.  xxxvii.  5.  In  Job  xx.  14 
as  the  rendering  of  s^  bowels.  'A/jycfe  idle^  ®P.  However 
such  words  may  have  befitted  the  pagan  seer,  it  is  not  pleas- 
ant to  regard  them  as  taken  up  and  indorsed  by  the  great 
Christian  apostle,  who  thus  is  made  to  stigmatise  as  liars, 
beasts,  and  gluttons  a  whole  people,  among  whom  he  had 
himself  so  successfully  laboured  that  several  churches  had 
been  founded  in  a  short  time.  They  are  strange  words  from 
a  venerable  Christian  minister  to  a  younger  minister  to  whom 
he  had  intrusted  the  care  of  those  very  souls ;  and,  in  any 
case,  are  superfluous,  as  addressed  to  one  who  must  have 
known  the  characteristics  of  the  Cretans  quite  as  well  as  the 
writer  himself. 

13.  Sharply  (aTrorrfftw).  Only  here  and  2  Cor.  xiii.  10 
(note).  Paul  has  airorofila  severity^  Rom.  xi.  22  (note). 
LXX,  airoT6tJja^  severely^  only  Wisd.  v.  22 ;  a'iroT6fAO^  severe 
(not  in  N.  T.),  Wisd.  v.  20  ;  xi.  10 ;  xii.  9.  From  airo- 
T^fiv€iv  to  cut  off.    It  signifies  abrupt,  harsh,  summary  dealing. 

14.  Not  giving  heed  (fi^  Trpocr^ow-e?).  Reprove  sharply, 
that  they  may  be  sound  in  the  faith,  and  may  show  their 
soundness  by  not  giving  heed,  etc.     See  on  1  Tim.  i.  4. 

To  Jewish  fables  ('IovBal/coi<;  fiv0oi<;).  See  on  1  Tim.  i.  4. 
Note  Jewish.     The  nature  of  these  we  do  not  know. 

Commandments  of  men  (ivroXai^  avOpJyrrtov).  See  on 
1  Tim.  vi.  14.  Comp.  Col.  ii.  22.  Prescriptions  concerning 
abstinence  from  meats,  marriage,  etc.  The  men  are  probably 
those  of  the  circumcision,  ver.  10.  What  they  teach  theoretic- 
ally, by  means  of  the  myths,  they  bring  to  bear  practically, 
by  means  of  their  precepts. 


Ch.  L]  the  epistle  to  TITUS.  889 

That  turn  from  the  truth  (Jiirwrrp€^iUmv  r^v  hXi/flwiv). 
Comp.  2  Tim.  iv.  4,  where  the  trtOh  and  fahlen  appear  in 
contrast. 

1«5.  Unto  the  pure  (toJ?  tcaOapoU).  The  pnre  in  heart 
and  conscience.     See  2  Tim.  i.  8. 

All  things  are  pure.  Comp.  1  Tim.  iv.  4, 5 ;  Acts  x.  16 ; 
Mk.  vii.  16, 18,  19;  1  Cor.  x.  26,  80;  Rom.  xiv.  20.  The 
aphorism  is  suggested  by  the  eommandmente  of  men^  ver.  14. 

Unto  them  that  are  defiled  (to!9  fAefua/i/AAfOi/^').  Only 
here  in  Pastorals.  See  also  J.  xyiii.  28  (note);  Heb.  xii.  16 ; 
Jude  8.  Only  in  J.  xviii.  28  in  a  ceremonial  sense.  Else- 
where of  moral  pollution. 

Nothing  is  pure.  Their  moral  pollution  taints  everything 
with  its  own  quality.  The  purest  things  become  soggestors 
and  ministers  of  impurity. 

Mind  and  conscience  (o  vw  koX  ^  oi/vc/Si/o-i?).  For  you? 
see  on  Rom.  vii.  28 :  for  avpeiSffcvf^  on  1  Pet.  iii.  16. 

16.  They  profess  (^ofioXoyownv).  Better,  eof^eee.  See  on 
2  Cor.  ix.  13,  and  comp.  1  Tim.  vi.  12.  Not  Umdljf  and  pub* 
licit/  profeBB  (as  Huther),  but  eat^eBB  as  opposed  to  denjf 
(J.  i.  20);  comp.  Heb.  xi.  18;  Rom.  x.  9, 10. 

Abominable  (/S&Xvicrol).  N.  T.^  ^lass.  LXX,  Prov. 
xvii.  16 ;  Sir.  xU.  6 ;  2  Mace.  i.  27.  See  on  ffB^XuyfJLa  abomm- 
atianj  Matt.  xxiv.  16,  and  comp.  Apoc.  xvii.  4,  6 ;  xxi.  27. 
The  kindred  verb  fiBeXwraeaOiu  abhar^  Rom.  ii.  22 ;  Apoc. 
xxi.  8. 

Reprobate  (iMufMi).  See  on  Rom.  i.  28 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  27, 
and  comp.  2  Tim.  iii.  8.  The  phrase  rq^robaU  wUo  €verjfifO0d 
work,  N.  T.^ 


840  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NSW  TESTAMENT.       [G&  O. 

CHAPTER  n. 

1.  Speak  thou  (Xaku).  See  on  Matt.  zzviiL  18 ;  J.  yiiL  28. 

Become  (wphrei).  Originally,  to  stand  out;  be  eontpieuauM. 
Thus  Homer,  Od.  viii.  172 :  /actA  H  irp4w€i  iypo/AAourw  he  i$ 
eompietiouB  among  tho$e  who  are  assembled.  Eurip.  ffel.  215 ; 
Ze^  irpiirmv  hC  aiOipoi^  Zeus  shining  clearly  through  the  aether. 
Hence,  to  become  conspicuofisly  fit;  to  become;  beseem.  In 
N.  T.  in  the  impersonal  forms  irp^irov  iarlv  it  is  becoming 
(Matt.  iii.  15);  irp^iru  it  becometh  (Eph.  y.  8);  hrpeirev  it 
became  (Heb.  ii.  10).  With  a  subject  nominative,  1  Tim.  ii.  10; 
Heb.  vii.  26. 

2.  Aged  men  (wp^fivran^.  Only  here,  L.  i.  18 ;  Philem.  9. 
To  be  understood  of  natural  age,  not  of  ecclesiastical  position. 
Note  that  1  Tim.  iii,  in  treating  of  church  officers,  deals  only 
with  Bishops  and  Deacons.  Nothing  is  said  of  Presbyters 
until  ch.  y,  where  Timothy's  relations  to  individual  members  of 
the  church  are  prescribed.  These  church  members  are  classi- 
fied in  this  and  the  following  verses  as  old  men^  old  tvomen^ 
younger  men^  servants.  In  LXX  irpea-fivrri^  is  occasionally 
interchanged  with  irpea/Seunj^  ambassador.  See  2  Chron. 
xxxii.  81 ;  1  Mace.  xiii.  21 ;  xiv.  21,  22 ;  2  Mace.  xi.  84. 

3.  Aged  women  (irpeafivriSaf:).  N.  T.^.  See  on  irpw^ 
ffvrepai^  1  Tim.  v.  2. 

Behaviour  (KaratrrriiAari).  N.  T.®.  See  on  KaraaixiK/i 
apparel^  1  Tim.  ii.  9.  It  means,  primarily,  condition  or  state. 
Once  in  LXX,  8  Mace.  v.  45,  fcardaTrffia  fiavi&Si^  the  mad* 
dened  state  into  which  the  war-elephants  were  excited. 
Hence  the  state  in  which  one  habitually  bears  himself — hia 
dqfortment  or  demeanour. 

At  becometh  holiness  (JepoirpeweK).  N.  T.^.  LXX, 
4  Mace.  ix.  25;  xi.  20.     In  the  Theages  (wrongly  ascribed 


Ch.  IL]  the  epistle  to  TITIJS.  341 

to  Plato),  T^  vUl  TO  6vofjLa  iOov  koI  Uptyirpeir^  you  have  given 
your  $on  (^TheageB)  an  honorable  and  reverend  name  (122  D). 
It  means  beneeming  a  $acred  place^  person^  or  matter.  Thus 
Athenaeus,  vii,  of  one  who  had  given  a  sacred  banquet,  says 
that  the  table  was  ornamented  UpoTrpeTrdarara  in  a  manner 
meet  appropriate  to  the  nacred  eireumstaneet.  The  meaning 
here  is  becoming  thane  who  are  engaged  in  $acred  service.  This 
is  the  more  striking  if,  as  there  is  reason  to  believe,  the  wpea- 
ffvTiBe^  represented  a  quasi-official  position  in  the  church. 
See  on  1  Tim.  v.  8,  and  comp.  1  Tim.  ii.  10;  Eph.  v.  8.* 

False  accusers  (&a/8(^i;9).  Better,  slanderers.  See  on 
Matt.  iv.  1,  and  1  Tim.  iii.  6, 11. 

Qiven  to  much  wine  (otp^  woXK^  SeSovXnfAdva^^.  More 
correctly,  enslaved  to  much  wine.  The  verb  only  here  in 
Pastorals.     Comp.  1  Tim.  iii.  8. 

Teachers  of  good  things  (^xaXoBiSaaicd'kov^^.  N.  T.^. 
OLXX,  oChiss. 

4.  They  may  teach  (am^povC^waC).  Better,  school  or 
train.  N.  T.^.  ^LXX.  The  verb  means  to  make  sane  or 
sober-minded  ;  to  recall  a  person  to  his  senses  ;  hence,  to  moder^ 
atej  chasten^  discipline. 

To  love  their  husbands,  to  love  their  children  (^Xor- 
ipov^  elvoAy  ^iKoriKvov^^.  Lit.  to  be  husband-lovers^  children- 
lovers.  Both  adjectives  N.  T.®.  ^LXX.  ^iXavBpo^  in  Class, 
not  in  this  sense,  but  loving  men  or  masculine  habits  ;  lewd.  In 
the  better  sense  often  in  epitaphs.  An  inscription  at  Perga- 
mum  has  the  following :  'lovXio?  'Rdaao^  ^OraKCKla  JloiiKXy 
T§  i\uKVTdTQ  ywaiKC,  <f>i\dvhp^  Kal  <f>i\oTdKP^  crvfjifiiMada^f 
ayLiyunrta^  irq  V  Julius  Bassus  to  Otacilia  PoUa  my  sweetest 
wife^  who  loved  her  husband  and  children  and  lived  with  me 
blamelessly  for  thirty  years. 

•  In  aocoidaiuM  with  this  view  TcmSodenrendenjiriMl^  TheA^V. 
is  better  than  the  Ber.  reverMi,  which  is  oolonrieM. 


«42  WOBD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NBW  TESTAMENT.       [Gb.  IL 

5.  Keepers  at  home  (^oUovpyoik^.  Wrong.  Rend,  work" 
er$  at  home.     N.  T.^.     ^LXX,  <>Cla88.» 

Qood  (^iiyadck).  Not  attributive  of  worken  at  home^  but 
independent.  Rend,  kindly.  The  mistress  of  the  house  is 
to  add  to  her  thrift,  energy,  and  strict  discipline,  benign, 
gracious,  heartily  kind  demeanour.  Comp.  Matt.  xx.  16; 
1  Pet.  ii.  18 ;  Acts  ix.  36.     See  on  Acts  xi.  24 ;  Rom.  v.  T.f 

Obedient  (inroraaaoiUiHK).  Better,  $%Aject  or  tn  tuJbjee- 
Hon.  Frequent  in  Paul,  but  not  often  in  the  active  voice. 
See  on  Jas.  iv.  7 ;  Rom.  viii.  7 ;  Philip,  iii.  21;  and  comp. 
1  Cor.  xiv.  84 ;  Eph.  v.  22 ;  Col.  iii.  18. 

7.  In  all  things  (ir€p\  irdvrd).  Lit.  concerning  all  things. 
The  exact  phrase,  N.  T.^.  For  analogous  use  of  irtpX  comp. 
L.  X.  40,  41 ;  Acts  xix.  26 ;  1  Tim.  i.  19 ;  vi.  4,  21 ;  2  Tim. 
iii.  8. 

Shewing  thyself  (aeainhv  irapexi^'fiw^.  See  on  1  Tim.  L 4. 
The  phrase  N.  T.^.  but  occurs  in  Class.,  as,  to  show  one^s 
self  holy  or  righteous;  m$e  or  skilful;  irap^&v  iaurbv  cwdt^ 
lov  to  make  himself  searee.  | 

Incorruptness  (a4>0opCav).  Const,  with  shewing.  N.  T.^. 
^Class.     LXX  once.  Hag.  ii.  18.     Omit  sincerity. 

8.  Sound  speech  (\iyov  iyiij).  'Tyiij^  sound,  only  here 
in  Pastorals.  The  usual  form  is  the  participle,  as  vyuMf6u' 
nov  Xiyatv,  2  Tim.  i.  13 ;  ir/uilvovai  XiyoK,  1  Tim.  vi.  3. 

*  A.  v.  follows  the  T.  B.  oUovpo^.  Even  with  this  reading  the  rendering 
is  not  accurate.  The  meaning  is  not  stayers  at  home,  but  keepers  or  guards 
ians  of  the  household. 

t  Some  interesting  remarks  on  the  use  of  dl7a#6t  by  Homer  may  be  found 
in  Gladstone's  Homer  and  the  Homeric  Age^  ii.  419  ff. 

X  See  Aristoph.  Fey.  049 :  Plato,  Euthyphro,  8  D ;  Protag.  812  A :  Xen. 
Cyrop.  n.  i.  22 ;  Yin.  L  89.  Deiasmann  cites  one  instance  in  an  inscription 
at  Carpathus,  second  century  b.c.,  Av4yK\irrop  a&rdw  ra^xir^**  *>Mi]f  shorn 
himself  blameless;  and  another  from  Mylasa  in  Caria»  first  oentniy  jb.0., 
XA^^i^r  huirbw  wapiaxnrmt  mag  show  himse^f  us^f^ 


Ch.  n.]  THE  EPISTLB  TO  TITUS.  843 

That  cannot  be  condemned  (Jucardypt^arov).  N.  T.^. 
^Class.     See  2  Mace.  iv.  47. 

He  that  is  of  the  contrary  part  (o  if  ivavrUvT).  The 
phrase  N.  T.^.  See  Mk.  xv.  89.  The  heathen  opposer  is 
meant.  Comp.  blasphemed^  ver.  6,  and  1  Tim.  vi.  1.  'Eyay- 
rio^  contrary^  in  Paul  only  1  Th.  ii.  15. 

May  be  ashamed  (ivrpair^').  Only  here  in  Pastorals.  In 
Paul,  1  Cor.  iy.  14 ;  2  Th.  iii.  14,  see  notes  on  both,  and  on 
Matt.  xxi.  87. 

Evil  thing  (^8Xoy).  Only  here  in  Pastorals.  In  Paul, 
Rom.  ix.  11 ;  2  Cor.  v.  10.     See  on  J.  iii.  20. 

9.  To  please  them  well  in  all  things  {iv  iraa-w  evapdar- 
01/9  cZi^oi).  Wrong.  Const,  in  all  thing$  with  to  be  in  mc&- 
jeetion.  Note  the  position  of  h  iraaiv  in  1  Tim.  iii.  11 ; 
iv.  15 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  7 ;  iy.  6,  and  comp.  inroKotkiv  tcarh  irdura 
obey  in  all  things^  Col.  iii.  20, 22 ;  and  inrordaa-ercu  —  iv  iravrl 
is  sul^ect  in  everything^  Eph.  y.  24.  'Et/apcoro?  well  pleasing^ 
only  here  in  Pastorals.  Almost  exclusiyely  in  Paul.  See 
also  Heb.  xiii.  21.     'Evap4(nw^  aeeeptably^  Heb.  xii.  28. 

10.  Purloining  (i^(r^i(b/i^t;9).  Only  here  and  Acts  y.  2, 8. 
LXX,  Josh.  yii.  1 ;  2  Mace.  iy.  82.  Often  in  Class.  From 
v6a^  apart.  The  fimdamental  idea  of  the  word  is  to  put  far 
away  from  another  ;  to  set  apart  for  one*s  self;  hence  to  purloin 
and  appropriate  to  one's  own  use.  Purloin  is  akin  to  prolong: 
prolongyn  or  purlongyn  **  to  put  fer  awey.'*  Old  French,  por- 
hignier  or  purloignier. 

Shewing  all  good  fidelity  Qn-aaav  irUmv  ivBeucwfAdvo^ 
ayadi^v^.  The  phrase  N.  T.^.  This  is  the  only  instance  in 
N.  T.  of  ayadik  with  Trlartn. 

Adorn  the  doctrine  (t^i^  BiBaaKdkCav  KwritAaiv).  The 
phrase  N.  T.^.     For  Kocfi&aiv  adom^  see  on  1  Tim.  ii.  9. 


844  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  KEW  TESTAMENT;       [G&  DL 

11.  This  U<iehing  or  doctrine  which  is  to  be  adorned  by 
the  lives  of  God's  servants  —  the  teaching  of  the  gospel  —  is 
now  stated  in  w.  11-15. 

The  grace  of  Qod  (i^  x'H^  '^^^  Oeov).  A  common  Pauline 
phrase.  The  exact  phrase  only  here  in  Pastorals.  It  is  the 
ultimate  ground  of  salvation.  Comp.  2  Tim.  i.  9 ;  Eph.  ii.  5, 8 ; 
Gal.  i.  16. 

That  bringeth  salvation  ((ron^/Mo^).  Lit.  saving.  N.  T.^. 
Const,  with  x^^  grace.     The  saving  grace  of  God. 

Hath  appeared  (hr€^vfi).  Only  in  Pastorals,  Luke,  and 
Acts.  In  the  active  voice,  to  bring  to  light,  $how.  See  on 
i7ruf>dp€ui  appearing^  1  Tim.  vi.  14. 

To  all  men.  Const,  with  thcU  bringeth  BcUvation,  not  with 
hath  appeared.  The  grace  of  God  which  is  saving  for  all 
men.     Comp.  1  Tim.  ii.  4. 

12.  Teaching  QircuSevowra').  Better,  instructing  or  train- 
ing. The  saving  economy  of  God  is  educative.  Comp.  Heb. 
xii.  4-11,  and  see  on  1  Tim.  i.  20. 

Ungodliness  (Maifieuiv).  In  Pastorals  only  here  and 
2  Tim.  ii.  16.  The  contrary  of  eifaifieuL,  for  which  see 
on  1  Tim.  ii.  2. 

Worldly  lusts  (^/coafUKi^  hrtdviiCasi).  The  phrase  N.  T.^. 
Kocr^u/vo9  worldly^  only  here  and  Heb.  ix.  1.  On  the  ethical 
sense  in  /c6<rfio^  the  worlds  see  on  Acts  xvii.  24,  and  J.  i.  9. 

18.  Looking  for  QirpoaBexifJi^evoi).  In  Pastorals  only  here. 
Comp.  Mk.  XV.  43 ;  L.  ii.  25  ;  xii.  86.  In  this  sense  not  in 
Paul.  Primarily,  to  receive  to  one^e  eelf^  admits  accept.  So 
L.  XV.  2 ;  Rom.  xvi.  2 ;  Philip,  ii.  29.  That  which  is  oc- 
eepted  in  faith,  is  awaited  expectantly. 

That  blessed  hope  (r^v  fuucapCav  tKwiSa).  The  phrase 
N.  T.^.    Moicdpio^  blesied^  very  often  in  the  GKwpels.     See  on 


Ch.  n.]  THE  EPISTLB  TO  TITUS.  845 

Matt.  y.  3.  In  Pastorals,  with  the  exception  of  this  passage, 
always  of  God.  In  Paul,  only  of  men,  and  so  usually  in  the 
Gospels.  'EXirtBa  hope^  the  object  of  hope.  Why  the  hope  is 
called  bletted^  appears  from  2  Tim.  iv.  8  ;  Philip,  iii.  20,  etc. 
Comp.  Jude  21,  and  1  Pet.  i.  18. 

And  the  glorious  appearing  Qfcai  hrufxlveiav  1%  B6^^. 
Kal  is  explanatory,  introducing  the  definition  of  the  character 
of  the  thing  hoped  for.  Looking  for  the  object  of  hope,  even 
the  appearing,  etc.  Gloriaui  appearing  is  a  specimen  of  the 
vicious  hendiadys  by  which  the  force  of  so  many  passages  has 
been  impaired  or  destroyed  in  translation.  Rend,  appearing 
of  the  glory. 

Of  the  great  Qod  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  (tou 
/AeydXov  Oeov  teal  aoinijpo^  ^fi&p  Xpurrov  'Ii/o-ofi).  For  Jettis 
Christ  rend.  Christ  Jestu.  M4ya^  great  with  Godj  N.  T.^,  but 
often  in  LXX.  According  to  A.V.  two  persons  are  indicated, 
God  and  Christ.  Rev.  with  others  rend,  of  our  great  Q-od  and 
Saviour  Christ  Jesus^  thus  indicating  one  person,  and  asserting 
the  deity  of  Christ.  I  adopt  the  latter,  although  the  argu- 
ments and  authorities  in  favour  of  the  two  renderings  are 
very  evenly  balanced.* 

14.  Qave  himself  for  us  (iSm/cev  iaxnhv  inrip  ^/i&v).  See 
on  1  Tim.  ii.  6,  and  comp.  Gal.  i.  4.  ^Tirip  on  behalf  of;  not 
instead  of. 

*  For  one  person  are  urged :  1.  That  the  two  appellations  ^t  and  ^vrijp 
are  incladed  under  a  single  article.  2.  That  ^w^p  with  li/iQw,  where  there 
are  two  appellaUves,  has  the  article  in  every  case,  except  1  Tim.  L  1 ;  and 
that  therefore  its  omission  here  indicates  that  it  is  taken  with  Bwv  under  the 
regimen  of  rou.  8.  That  ot  in  ver.  14  is  singular  and  refers  to  Christ,  indic- 
ating that  only  one  person  is  spoken  of  in  ver.  13.  4.  The  analogy  of  2  Pet. 
i.  1,  11 ;  iii.  18.  5.  The  declarations  concerning  Christ  in  Col.  i.  16 ;  2  Th. 
i.  7  ;  1  Pet.  iy.  18 ;  Col.  ii.  9.  For  two  persons  are  urged  :  1.  The  fact  thai 
^t  is  never  found  connected  directly  with  'Iifo-oOt  Xptrr^  as  an  attribute. 
2.  The  frequency  with  which  Ood  and  Christ  are  presented  in  the  N.  T.  as 
distinct  from  each  other,  as  having  a  common  relation  to  men  in  the  economy 
of  grace,  makes  it  probable  that  the  same  kind  of  union  is  intended  here,  and 
not  a  presentation  of  Christ  as  God.  3.  The  evident  reference  of  Btov  in  ver. 
11  to  God  the  Father.    4.  The  analogy  of  2  Th.  L  12. 


846  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  KBW  TESTAMENT.       [Gb.  JL 

Might  redeem  (XtnpwniTai).  Only  here,  L.  xxir.  21; 
1  Pet.  i.  18.  See  on  1  Tim.  ii.  6.  Neither  Xurpov  ranmnn^ 
XvrpwTi^  redemption^  nor  Xirrpwrrfi  redeemer  occur  in  Paul. 
He  has  the  figure  of  purchaee  (ayopdl^eaOai^  i^ayopd^&rOai), 
1  Cor.  vi.  20 ;  vii.  28 ;  Gal.  iii.  18 ;  iv.  5.  Comp.  Apoc.  ▼•  9 ; 
xiv.  8,  4 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  1. 

Iniquity  (avo/i/a?).  Only  here  in  Pastorals.  lit.  lawle^^- 
ne$8.     See  on  1  J.  iii.  4. 

Might  purify  (^icaBapCtrjf).  In  Pastorals  only  here.  Mostly 
in  Synoptic  Gospels  and  Hebrews.  In  Paul,  2  Cor.  vii.  1 ; 
Eph.  V.  26.     ^Class.     Often  in  LXX. 

A  peculiar  people  (\aov  wepiownov).  Aatk  people  only 
here  in  Pastorals.  In  Paul  ten  times,  always  in  citations. 
Most  frequently  in  Luke  and  Acts ;  often  in  Hebrews  and 
Apocalypse.  •  tlepioiKno^  N.  T.®.  A  few  times  in  LXX^ 
always  with  X<m(?.  See  Ex.  xix.  5 ;  xxiii.  22 ;  Dent.  vii.  6 ; 
xiv.  2  ;  xxvi.  18.  The  phrase  was  originally  applied  to  the 
people  of  Israel,  but  is  transferred  here  to  believers  in  the 
Messiah  —  Jews  and  Gentiles.  Comp.  1  Pet.  ii.  10.  H^mou- 
(ri09  is  from  the  participle  of  irepielvcu  to  be  over  and  above : 
hence  ireptovala  ahundance^  plenty,  Ueptovaio^  also  means 
po88e88ed  over  and  above^  that  is,  specially  selected  for  one's 
own  ;  exempt  from  ordinary  laws  of  distribution.  Hence 
correctly  represented  by  peculiar^  derived  from  peeulitimy  a 
private  purse^  a  special  acquisition  of  a  member  of  a  family 
distinct  from  the  property  administered  for  the  good  of  the 
whole  family.  Accordingly  the  sense  is  given  in  Eph.  i.  14, 
where  believers  are  said  to  have  been  eealed  ek  airoXvrpwrtP 
Ttj^  TrepiTTOii^aeoi)^  with  a  view  to  redemption  of  po88e88ion^  or 
redemption  which  will  give  pos8e88ion^  thus  =  acquisition.  So 
1  Pet.  ii.  9,  where  Christians  are  styled  \ab9  ek  irepnroCqaiv 
a  people  for  acquisition^  to  be  acquired  by  God  as  his  peculiar 
possession.  Comp.  1  Th.  v.  9 ;  2  Th.  ii.  14,  and  irepnroieiaOai 
to  acquire^  Acts  xx.  28.  The  phrase  fcaOapi^eiv  Xaov  to  purifjf 
the  people^  in  LXX,  Neh.  xii.  30 ;  Judith  xvi.  18. 


Gh.  m.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  847 

Zealous  ((i^Xflrn^y).  Lit.  a  zealot.  Comp.  Acts  xxi.  20 ; 
xxii.  3 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  18.  Only  here  in  Pastorals.  In  Paul, 
1  Cor.  xiv.  12 ;  Gal.  i.  14.  For  the  word  as  a  title,  see  on 
the  Canaanite^  Matt.  x.  4,  and  Mk.  iii.  18. 

Authority  (Ariray^).     See  on  1  Tim.  i.  1. 

Despise  (ir€pi4>pov€tm).  N.  T.^.  Occasionallj  in  Class. 
From  'rr€p\  beyond^  4>pov€iv  to  be  minded.  To  set  one's  self 
in  thought  beyond  ;  hence  contemn^  despise.  Comp.  1  Tim. 
iv.  12.  The  exhortation  is  connected  with  authority.  Titus 
is  to  claim  respect  for  his  office  and  for  himself  as  bearing  it. 


CHAPTER  ZZT. 

1.  Put  them  in  mind  ({nrofitfivrfiTKe  aiVrotk).  See  on 
2  Tim.  ii.  14,  and  on  v7r6fAvrfaiv  reminding^  2  Tim.  i.  6. 

Principalities  and  powers  Qi^^x^i:  i^owrUusi).  Omit  and. 
Principalities  which  are  authorities.  'Apx»7  beginning  =  that 
which  begins :  the  leader^  principality.  See  on  Col.  i.  16 ; 
Jude  6 ;  Acts  x.  11.  Only  here  in  Pastorals.  'E^vo*^ 
rights  authority.  See  on  Mk.  ii.  10;  J.  i.  12;  Col.  i.  16. 
Only  here  in  Pastorals.  For  the  combination  principalities 
and  powers^  see  on  L.  xx.  20. 

To  obey  magistrates  (ireiOapxeip)'  Comp.  Acts  v.  29, 82 ; 
xxvii.  21.  See  on  Acts  v.  29.  The  idea  of  nuMgistrates  is 
contained  in  the  word  itself  ;  but  it  is  quite  proper  to  render 
as  Rev.  to  be  obedient.     Rare  in  LXX. 

Ready  to  every  good  work  (wp^  '"'^^  Ipyop  iyaOhv  Jro/fAov? 
ehai).  The  phrase  N.  T.^.  'EtoZ/ao?  ready^  only  here  in 
Pastorals.  Comp.  iroifuurla  readiness  or  preparation^  Eph. 
vi.  16  (note). 

2.  No  brawlers  (ifidxov^).  Better  as  Rev.,  not  to  be  conr 
tentious.     See  on  1  Tim.  iii.  8.     Past^. 


848  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NBW  TESTAMENT.      [Ch.  IIL 

3.  Divers  —  pleasures  {ijSovak  iroiicCKavi).  'Hiovri  pleas- 
ure,  only  here  in  Pastorals.  ®P.  See  on  Jas.  iv.  1.  For 
iroiicCXai'i  divers^  see  on  2  Tim.  iii.  6. 

Malice  (^icatciif).  Only  here  in  Pastorals.  See  on  Jas.  i.  21. 
In  N.  T.  kokUi  is  a  special  farm  of  vice^  not  viciousness  in 
general,  as  Cicero,  Tusc.  iv.  15,  who  explains  by  "  vitioeitae^ 
a  viciousness  which  includes  all  vices."  Calvin,  on  Eph.  iv. 
32,  defines  as  ^^  a  viciousness  of  mind  opposed  to  humanity 
and  fairness,  and  commonly  styled  malignity. ^^  The  homily 
ascribed  to  Clement  of  Rome,  describes  KaKla  as  th.e  forerunner 
Qirpooiohropov)  of  our  sins  (x) .    Malice  is  a  correct  translation. 

4.  Kindness  Qxjprifrr&nff).  Only  here  in  Pastorals.  Else- 
where only  in  Paul.  See  on  Rom.  iii.  12,  and  on  easy^ 
Matt.  xi.  30. 

Love  ((f>iKavOp€nr(a').  Love  is  too  vague.  It  is  love  toward 
men;  comp.  ver.  2.  Only  here  and  Acts  xxviii.  2:  ifuXav- 
OpAirw^  kindly^  Acts  xxvii.  3  (note).  While  it  cannot  be  as- 
serted that  the  heretical  characteristics  noted  in  the  Pastoral 
Epistles  point  collectively  to  any  specific  form  of  error,  it  is 
true,  nevertheless,  that  certain  characteristics  of  the  economy 
of  grace  are  emphasised,  which  are  directly  opposed  to  Gnostic 
ideas.  Thus  the  exhortation  that  supplications  be  made  for 
all  men,  supported  by  the  statement  that  God  wills  that  all 
men  should  be  saved  and  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth 
(1  Tim.  ii.  1,  4),  is  in  the  teeth  of  the  Gnostic  distinction 
between  men  of  spirit  and  men  of  matter,  and  of  the  Gnostic 
principle  that  the  knowledge  (jhrlyiftn^i,^^  of  truth  was  only 
for  a  limited,  intellectual  class.  To  the  same  effect  is  the 
frequent  recurrence  of  aZZ,  for  all^  in  connection  with  the 
saving  and  enlightening  gifts  of  God  (1  Tim.  ii.  6 ;  iv.  10  ; 
vi.  13 ;  Tit.  ii.  11).  So  here  :  not  only  has  the  saving  grace 
of  God  appeared  unto  all  (ch.  ii.  11),  but  it  has  revealed  itself 
as  kindness  and  love  to  man  as  man. 

5.  Not  by  works  of  righteousness  which  we  have  done 
(pvK  i^  Ipywv  T&v  iv  Sitca^oavvrj  &  iiroiija-afiev).     Lit.  not  by 


Ch.  m.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TTTUS.  349 

wark%^  those  namely  in  righte<m$ne8»j  which  we  did.  The 
thought  is  entirely  Pauline.  'Ef  !pywv^  strictly,  out  of^  in 
consequence  of  works.  *£i^  hucaioavvrf  in  the  sphere  of  right- 
eousness; as  legally  righteous  men.  Comp.  £ph.  ii.  9.  We 
did:  emphatic.     Comp.  Rom.  x.  5;  Gal.  iii.  10, 12;  v.  3. 

According  to  his  mercy  (jcarit  ro  airov  ItKm).  The  phrase 
only  1  Pet.  i.  3.     Comp.  Rom.  xv.  9 ;  Eph.  ii.  4 ;  Jude  21. 

By  the  washing  of  regeneration  (hi^  Xovrpov  iraXivyeveo''' 
Uk^.  AovTp6v  only  here  and  Eph.  v.  26.  It  does  not  mean 
the  act  of  bathing,  but  the  bath,  the  laver.  HaXivyeveaCa  only 
here  and  Matt.  xix.  28,  where  it  is  used  of  the  final  restora- 
tion of  all  things.  The  phrase  laver  of  regeneration  distinctly 
refers  to  baptism,  in  connection  with  which  and  through 
which  as  a  medium  regeneration  is  conceived  as  taking  place. 
Comp.  Rom.  vi.  3-5.  It  is  true  that  nothing  is  said  of  faith; 
but  baptism  implies  faith  on  the  part  of  its  recipient.  It  has 
no  regenerating  effect  apart  from  faith ;  and  the  renewing  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  is  not  bestowed  if  faith  be  wanting. 

Renewing  (^avaKcuvwr&o^^.  Only  here  and  Rom.  xii.  2. 
Comp.  2  Cor.  v.  17.  Paul  has  avoKoivovv  to  renew,  2  Cor. 
iv.  16 ;  Col.  iii.  10 :  avcuccUvaun^  renewing,  Rom.  xii.  2. 
*Apcuc(UPi^€ip  to  renew,  only  Heb.  vi.  6.  The  connection  of 
the  genitive  is  disputed.  Some  make  it  dependent  on  Xovrpov 
bath,  so  that  the  bath  of  baptism  is  conceived  as  implying 
regeneration  and  renewing  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Others  con- 
strue with  renewing  only,  avcucaivdkreaf^  being  dependent  on 
&A;  through  the  laver  of  regeneration  and  (through)  the 
renewing,  etc.  The  former  seems  the  more  probable.  The 
phrase  renewing  of  the  Holy  Spirit  only  here.  In  N.  T.  the 
Spirit  or  the  Holy  Spirit  is  joined  in  the  genitive  with 
the  following  words :  comfort,  joy,  power,  love,  demonstration, 
manifestation,  earnest,  ministration,  fellowship,  promise,  fruit, 
unity,  sword,  sanctification. 

6.  Shed  (^f^€€v).  Or  poured  forth.  Only  here  in  Pas- 
torals.    Most  frequent  in  Apocalypse.     The  pouring  out  of 


850  WORP  STUDIES  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ck.  IIL 

the  Spirit  is  an  O.  T.  metaphor.  See  Joel  iii.  1,  2,  cit.  in 
Acts  ii.  17, 18  ;  Zech.  xii.  10.  In  Paul  the  verb  occurs  bat 
once,  of  shedding  blood,  Rom.  iii.  15,  cit. 

7.  Being  justified  QBucau^Odm-e:^.  In  Pastorals  only  here 
and  1  Tim.  iii.  16  (note).  See  Introd.  vi.  Justification  is 
conceived  as  taking  place  before  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit. 

By  his  grace  (r^  iicetvov  x^^'^O-  ^7  ^^^  grace  of  Jesus 
Christ.  See  Acts  xv.  11 ;  2  Cor.  viii.  9 ;  xiii.  14 ;  Rom.  v.  6 ; 
Gal.  i.  6. 

We  should  be  made  heirs  (jc\'qpov6fjLoi,  yanfO&fiai).  EXi^po- 
W/A09  heir  only  here  in  Pastorals.  A  favourite  idea  of  Paul. 
See  Rom.  iv.  13 ;  viii.  17  ;  Gal.  iii.  29.  Heirship  of  eternal 
life  is  the  result  of  justification.  So,  clearly,  Rom.  v.  It  is 
attested  and  confirmed  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  2  Cor.  v.  5; 
Eph.  i.  14. 

According  to  the  hope  of  eternal  life  (tear  ikiriSa  t<K^ 
aifovlov).  Const,  of  eternal  life  with  heirs^  and  rend,  heirs  of 
eternal  life  according  to  hope.  Comp.  Rom.  iv.  18 ;  v.  2 ; 
viu.  24 ;  Gal.  v.  6 ;  Col.  i.  6,  27 ;  Tit.  i.  2 ;  1  Pet.  i.  3 ; 
1  J.  iii.  2,  3. 

8.  Affirm  constantly  (Btafie/ScuovaOcu).  Past^.  See  on 
1  Tim.  i.  7.  Constantly^  not  continually^  but  uniformly  and 
consistently.  So  Book  of  Common  Prayer^  "  Collect  for  Saint 
John  Baptist's  Day,"  ^^  and  after  his  example  constantly  speak 
the  truth."     Rend,  affirm  steadfastly. 

Might  be  careful  (i<l>povTi^<o(nv).  N.  T.^.  Quite  often  in 
LXX.  Frequent  in  Class.  To  think  or  consider;  hence  to 
take  careful  thought,  ponder^  he  anxious  about. 

To  maintain  (irpotaraxrOai).  Mostly  in  Pastorals,  and 
usually  in  the  sense  of  ruling,  as  Rom.  xii.  8 ;  1  Th.  v.  12 ; 
1  Tim.  iii.  4,  5.     The  sense  here  is  to  he  forward  in.^ 

*  The  attempts  to  resolye  the  meaning  into  practise  are  mostly  suspicious. 
Of  the  four  examples  cited  by  Alf ord,  two  at  least,  Thucyd.  viiL  76,  and  Soph. 


Ch.  m.]  THE  EPI8TLB  TO  TITUS.  851 

Profitable  (ib^XiAui).  Past^  <>LXX.  Comp.lTim.iy.8; 
2  Tim.  iu.  16. 

9.  Foolish  questions,  etc.  See  on  2  Tim.  iL  28.  For 
genealoffies  see  on  1  Tim.  i.  4. 

Strivings  about  the  law  Cf^X^  voyLuci^^.  The  phrase 
N.  T.^.  Comp.  1  Tim.  i.  7.  No/tticfe  mostly  in  Luke. 
Everywhere  except  here  a  lawyer^  with  the  article  or  rW. 

Unprofitable  (Jani^XeU).     Only  here  and  Heb.  vii.  18. 

Vain  (^fuiTcUoi).  Only  here  in  Pastorals.  Twice  in  Paul, 
1  Cor.  iii.  20,  cit. ;  xv.  17  (note).  Very  frequent  in  LXX. 
The  sense  is  aimless  or  resuUless^  as  fidTaio^  euxfj  a  prayer 
which  cannot  obtain  fidfilment.  The  questions,  genei^ogies, 
etc.,  lead  to  no  attainment  or  advancement  in  godliness. 
Comp.  paroMiko^la  jangling^  1  Tim.  i.  6 :  fuxraioXdyoi  vain 
talkers^  ver.  10  :  iiaraiATrf;  vanity^  Rom.  viii.  20 ;  Eph.  iv.  17: 
ifiarauiBrja'ap  were  made  vain^  Rom.  i.  21 :  fidrrip  in  vain. 
Matt.  XV.  9. 

10.  A  man  that  is  an  heretic  (jupenic6v&vdpwrov).  'Aiper- 
iK(k  heretical^  N.  T.^.     For  aHpeai^  heresy  see  on  1  Pet.  ii.  1. 

Admonition  (vovOeaiop).  Only  here,  1  Cor.  x.  11 ;  Eph. 
vi.  4  (note).     See  on  vovOereiv  to  admonish.  Acts  xx.  81. 

11.  Is  subverted  {i^^arpafirrcu).  N.  T.^.  More  than 
turned  away  from  the  right  path :  rather,  turned  inside  out. 
Comp.  LXX,  Deut.  xxxii.  20. 

Sinneth  (afMfndpei).  See  on  1  J.  i.  9 ;  Matt.  i.  21,  and 
trespasses.  Matt.  vi.  14. 

meet,  080,  have  clearly  the  sense  of  taking  the  lead.  When  Plutarch  says 
of  Aspasia  o^  xovfdov  vpotrrQ^a  ipyaalat,  he  means  that  she  9uperintended  an 
unseemly  employment ;  she  was  at  the  head  of  an  establishment.  Notwith- 
standing all  criticisms  to  the  contrary,  the  Vulgate  was  on  the  right  track, 
bonis  operibui  praeesse. 


852  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THE  KBW  TB8TAMEKT.      [Cb.  IH 

Condemned  of  himself  (avT0icar<i«c/>iT09).  Better  as  Rev., 
sey'-condemned.     N.  T.«.     ^LXX,  oClass. 

12.  Nicopolis.  There  were  several  cities  of  this  name,  one 
in  Cilicia,  one  in  Thrace,  and  one  in  Epiros.  It  is  uncertain 
which  one  is  meant  here. 

To  winter  (wapaxeifida'ai).  Comp.  Acts  xzvii.  12; 
xxviii.  11 ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  6.  The  noon  wapaxei/Murla  mn- 
tering^  Acts  xxvii.  12. 

12.   Ours  (Jiii^poC).     Our  brethren  in  Crete. 

For  necessary  uses  (di  r^  hvatiKcJm  xp^lak).  The  phrase 
N.  T.^.  With  reference  to  whatever  occasion  may  demand 
them. 

Unfruitful  (SxapiroC).  Only  here  in  Pastorals.  In  Paul, 
1  Cor.  xiv.  14 ;  Eph.  v.  11.  Not  only  in  supplying  the  needs, 
but  in  cultivating  Christian  graces  in  themselves  by  acts  of 
Christian  service. 

15.  Them  that  love  us  in  the  faith  (Totk  ^XotWo?  i^^aov  h 
wltrrei).  Better,  in  faith.  The  phrase  N.  T.^.  ^iXeiv  to  hve^ 
only  here  in  Pastorals,  and  in  Paul,  only  1  Cor.  xvi.  22.  See 
on  &ydwfj  hve^  GkJ.  v.  22.     Const,  in  faith  with  that  lave  u$. 


LISTS  OP  WORDS  FOUND  ONLY  IN  THE  PASTORAL  EPI&. 
TLES,  AND  IN  THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES  AND  NOT  Dl 
PAUL'S  WRITINGS. 


PASTORALS  OMLT. 


dyvtta 

aipcTUcoc 
OMrxpojccpSi^ 

oMarayKCMiTOS 
^parrfi 

AMi{onrvpcii 

aF^p(iiroolOTl|f 

aytiiKOKOi 

<iyc«tuaxvvros 

dycxiXi^fiirTOt 

dyocnoc 
dyn&ar^i0ffuu 
dyriSfeatf 
dyrLXvrpor 

OVUiScVTOfi 

diro)8X7ros 

▼OL. 


dro8cicro( 

drpocnroc 

cunrorooc 
dirroxcM 
aMevrcM 
a^frofcaroicyHrof 


d^cAd>a0o( 

PXaP€p6t 

ydyypaim 
ycvcaAayia 
yA|S 

yvfuvurui 
ywaucdpu¥ 

tUPcXas,  M  Adj. 
IT.  — 88 


PASTORALS  AHD  NOT  IN  PAUL. 


alrCoL 

dyarpcra 

6mXafLpdpo§uu 

dyWOTVLCTOC 

dvoXctirw 
dTOrXowdUi 

Apviofuu 

Axfipurm 

piPffKos 
Ploi 

pX/dnn^vf§iOS 
PpaSwrn 

PvOZm 
yt^tpyit 

oc(nroTi|f 
fcvAoof 


ifurhrm 
ifiwXwm 

MBuns 
hnXofiPdtfoimfL 

cvuricoini 

MoTOfUU 

iwirtfidm 

€Upy€aCaL 

dfaiPuoL 
€Unpim 

Cwypim 
{Moyorlii 

AJtTMiiS 


^noyiof 


868 


854     WOSD6  FOUKD  OVLY  IK  PAOTORAI.  XPIBTLBS,  BTC. 


PASTOBAL8  ONLY. 


SiXoyof 
lyffpanff 


Irywot 
IXorror,  Madr. 


^voyycXXofuu  in 
sense  of  pro" 
fessing 

iwapKtm 

hrurrofiiim 

4rcpo&&urKaXc«i 
cv/uraSoro9 

vcoirvciMrrot 

mX/omSdffKnX/Qt 
foaroXcycyuu 


joanurraAji 


ICOIMiWJCIH 
IC^fUOf 

Koa/ums  (alt.  for 
Aoyiyiax^ 

/laroiaXayia 
fMLTttioXoyov 

fu^Smrc 

rc«rrcpiic({s 
rocrctt 


oLcoSccnrorcii 

o{fcou/>yoc 

6/AoXoyov/uimic 

^p^orofMii 

vd(poivo9 
warpoX^ 
ircpftOMnov  (din.) 


PA0TOBALB  AVD  KOT  IN  PAUI. 


MUCOVQi^fif 

MucoSpyot 

KOLTQltrTpO^flf 


MMT/CCIi 

«pinyc 
KTurfia 

Aaos  (in  Ftal  al- 
ways in  citn.) 
kUttm 
Xutr 
Aiar 
Xoc&pca 
Avrpoofuu 

/lopyop/rTf 

fiAXOfUU 

furaXofLfidim 
voiLti 

KO/AUCOC 
K0fU>8i&lO'JOlA0f 

6p€yofUU 
oauK 

iraAaTCiwjifii 
irapaSc;(Ofiitt 


vopcuooAovvtii 

froAipx^ 
vcp^cpyof 

vouttXot 
vaAwrcXi^v 
vpicr^vr^pior 
wfiarPvT€fiot 


wpocfuim 


ovaroXdCii 

<ITpaTUiT1|C 

rdxoor 

vyiaam 

vxt)fUfun7crjci* 

voTcpos 

^tXdpyvpot 


W0BD6  FOUND  ONLY  IN  PA8TOBAI.  EPISTLES,  ETC.      856 


PASTORALS  OKLT. 

PABTOBAU 

>  AKD  XOT  I 

WtfiWtifim 

vyuui^iiietaphor^ 

X-A-*^ 

X«*-r 

ical  use  of  the 

)W«4r 

jO»Mr<t 

wurT6ofuu 

pftiiicipleMat- 

vXcy/ia 

tributiTe 

WAI^KTlfS 

vopvmvrmm 

wopuTfm 

wpayftaria 

VWQ¥OUL 

wpavwaOioL 

WOr  U  Jl  AMTIC 

vpcxrpvnc 

vpoyoros 

WfiOKfAfia 

*.X«Jr^ 

T/MMrxXunf 

fvfrm 

ayn^^rjit 

^tXl^SoHK 

VKmuTfia 

^a<S0m 

<Frd/iaxos 

^lAitrttcm 

irrparoAoyiM 

^kSapo, 

^porW^ti 

inmipuK 

ir«*poWl 

XoXmi^ 

XPI^^MC 

fnif^f^ 

^ClI&A^ 

TcmtiyoMa 

M^Al^OI 

TCKForpo^cii 

TV^<VU 

Ttaflte  listoli»Te  bMo  nuide  dirtotly  fran  Mdolloii  Hid  CMai*i  Oonooid- 

anoe. 


A  LIST  OF  PHRASES  WHICH  OCCUB  ONLY  IN  THB 
PASTORAL  EPISTLES. 


Tpurr^  *hftnvt  ^  ikrU  4/m«f,  1  Tim. 

LL 
t4k¥0¥  l¥  wurrUf  1  Tim.  L  2. 
vofioi  jccrnou,  1  Tim.  L  9. 
^  vyuuvovoa  St&WKoXuLf  1  Tim.  L  10. 
TO  evayycXioy  r^  8o^  rou  fiaimpiov 

$€iwj  1  Tim.  i.  11. 
6  fuucdpioi  S€o9f  1  Tim.  L  11. 
vurros  6  Xoyoi,  1  Tim.  L  15. 
ftaxrrji  diro&>X7S  ^l^toc,  1  Tim.  L  15. 
vurrif  icoi  iyaBii  aw€i&rf(nSf  1  Tim. 

i.  19. 
wpSiTov  inamavy  1  Tim.  ii.  1. 
oi  iv  wrtpoxSf  I  Tim.  ii.  2. 
CIS  iwCyvwmy  ^rfituL^  iX$€Wy  1  Tim. 

ii  4. 
Koipois  iBCoKt  1  Tim.  ii.  6. 
&&urKaAoc  ^^vwv  (of  Paul),  1  Tim. 

ii.  7. 
l¥  wCarti  icoi  6\ri0€{tg.j  1  Tim.  ii.  7. 
iwaipcvrt^  oaiov^  X^ifi(Kf  1  Tim.  ii.  8. 
){«dpi9  opy^s  Koi  ScoAoyur/bUrtv,  1  Tim. 

ii.  8. 
jFywv  iv  vmTayjQ,  1  Tim.  iii.  4. 
ifLiriirrtiv  d^  Kpifia,  1  Tim.  iii.  6. 
TO  fiwmjpuiv  T^  wurrtuHf  1   Tim. 

iii.  9. 
Acos  $€cv  (of  the  church),  1  Tim. 

iii.  15. 
9Ti)Xos   icoi   iipaifofia  rij^  dXijStuKf 

1  Tim.  iii.  15. 
ttuauMff  l¥  wv€Vftan  (of  Christ), 

1  Tim.  iii  16. 


hf  wrr€fi(H9  KKUfokt  1  Tim.  It.  L 
d^iOTocrAu  r$f  iriOTCtis,  1  Tim.  It.  L 

vvF  (with  an  article  and  adjeetiTelj, 

as  6  vvkoIcuf;  {«^  r^  rw),  1  Tim. 

iv.  8;  vi.  7. 
Smun  (with  an  article  and  adjeo- 

tively,  as  t^«  Srrmi  xipas)f  1  Tim. 

V.  3. 
6fM)i,p^  dvo&Sowu,  1  Tim.  ▼.  4. 
ixuv  Kpi/m,  1  Tim.  ▼.  12. 
^icXcicTOi  a77eXo^  1  Tim.  ▼.  21. 
XttyMS  wpoKpifiaTois,  1  Tim.  ▼.  21. 
wpo€px€<r&(u  vyuurovcn  Aayocf,  1  Tim. 

vi.  3. 
^  tear  €la4p€UM¥  fiAurmXuk,  1  Tim. 

vi.  3. 
dvOpiinroq  $€ovy  1  Tim.  vi.  11. 
dyioviCttrOai  rov  koAof  dywyo,  1  Tim. 

vi.  12. 
ofjuokoytiv  rrp^  koX^v  6fiaAoyiaF,  1  Tim. 

vi.  12. 
fiapTvp€iv  rrp^  koX^  h/McXoyiw,  1  Tim. 

vi.  13. 
Swd/omii  (of  God),  1  Tim.  vi.  15. 
01  icvpi€vovr€i  for  Kvpun,  1  Tim.  vL  15. 
iX€iv  dAiKuruiv,  1  Tim.  vL  16. 
dirocrroXoc    icara — ,    1    Tim.  L   1; 

2  Tim.  i.  1 ;  Tit  i.  1. 
^irayycAox  {oi^,  2  Tim.  L  1. 
diro  wpoy6¥W¥,  2  Tim.  L  3. 
iv  KoBapf  fnrvtiinjtntt  1  Tim.  iiL  0; 

2  Tim.  i.  3. 


PHBA8B8  OCCUBBIKG  OlOiY  IK  PA8T0BAL  EPISTLfeS.     857 


vfinrif  hffKtftm^t  2  Tim.  L  & 
KX^tns  dySoL,  2  Tim.  L  9. 

i2. 
<nin^4  ^  XpuFTf  lipoS^  S  Tim. 

iLlO. 
Hyi^  Ixciv,  2  Tim.  ii  17. 
etfibaoi  roS  0coC  2  Tim.  iL  10. 
4  rov  Sio^oXou  vayis,  2  Tim.  iL  28. 
Tovro  ytycMTicc,  2  Tim.  iiL  1. 
iuoKw  (in  sense  of  persecute),  2  Urn. 

iiL  12. 
wpoKownof  M  ri  xfip^^  ^  ^^^^ 

iiL  13. 
Icpa  ypdfLfiarOf  2  Tim.  iii.  15. 
lavrois      litindpciSEir     &&uricdCXav$y 

2  Tim.  iy.  3. 
K¥ffi6fjuafoi  r^  dmn^,  2  Tim.  W,  8.. 


i  r^f  SiNauKTMnis  orc^oroc,  2  Tim. 
iv.8. 

ToSc  ^yaanfK6a'i  rijjr  hn^iamav  cd^roS^ 
2  Tim.  iy.  8. 

vopayiMfUtt  (in  the  sense  of  strid- 
ing by  m  a  friend),  2  Tim.  ir.  18. 

mra  mmf^  vumyy  Tit.  L  4. 

ocavroy  vop^^coAu,  Tit.  iL  7. 

i  If  Ivayr^,  Tit.  iL  8. 

WQffU9  vumy  cyocucyvcFAu  oyoAfi^ 
Tit  ii.  10. 

TJ^  iAautritaXtw  Koafut^^  Tit.  iL  10. 

4  X^i^  ^  ^^  <r«M^/M0f9  Tit.  iL  IL 

Koofuxou  imOvfiiu,  Tit.  iL  12. 

4  fuucopMi  IXir^s,  Tit.  iL  18. 

6  ficyas  0c^,  Tit  iL  18. 

fidxau.  vofwoai.  Tit  iiL  9. 

o2  ^lAovFrcs  ^/iSs  Ir  v^rro.  Tit  iiL  1& 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREW& 


INTRODUCTION. 


**  Who  wrote  the  Epistle  God  only  knows."  Such  was  the 
verdict  of  Origen,  and  modem  criticism  has  gotten  no  farther. 
That  it  is  not  the  work  of  Paul  is  the  almost  unanimous  judg- 
ment of  modern  scholars.  Its  authenticity  as  a  Pauline  writ- 
ing has  been  challenged  from  the  earliest  times.  In  the 
Eastern  church,  both  Clement  and  Origen  regarded  the 
Greek  Epistle  as  Paul's  only  in  a  secondary  sense ;  Clement 
holding  that  it  was  written  by  Paul  in  Hebrew  and  translated 
by  Luke.  Origen  knew  only  that  some  held  Clement  of  Rome 
and  some  Luke  to  be  the  author.  Its  position  and  designation 
in  the  Peshitto  Version  shows  that  it  was  regarded  as  not 
strictly  one  of  Paul's  epistles,  but  as  an  appendix  to  the  col- 
lection. Eusebius's  testimony  is  inconsistent.  He  holds  a 
Hebrew  original,  and  a  translation  by  Clement,  and  cites  the 
letter  as  Pauline  (^H.E.  88).  Again,  he  expressly  classifies 
it  with  antilegomena  (vi.  13)  ;  but  in  iii.  25  he  evades  the 
question,  naming  the  Pauline  Epistles  as  Juymoloffumena^  but 
without  stating  their  number. 

In  the  West  the  epistle  was  known  to  Clement  of  Rome, 
who  frequently  quotes  it,  but  without  naming  the  author. 
The  Pauline  authorship  was  expressly  denied  by  Hippolytus  : 
the  Muratorian  Canon  does  not  mention  it,  and  reckons  only 
seven  churches  to  which  Paul  wrote :  TertuUian  in  Africa 
apparently  knew  nothing  of  a  Pauline  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews, 
but  spoke  of  an  Epistle  of  Barnabas  to  the  Hebrews.  It  was 
not  recognised  by  Cyprian.  From  the  fourth  century  its 
canonical  authority  was  admitted  in  the  West,  partly  on 

S61 


862      DTTBODUCnON  TO  THE  EPI8TLB  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 

the  assumption  pf  its  Pauline  authorship ;  but  the  influ- 
ence of  the  earlier  suspicion  remained,  and  Jerome  declared 
that  the  custom  of  the  Latins  did  not  receive  it  as  St.  Paulas. 
Augustine  agreed  substantially  with  Jerome.  It  was  author* 
ised  as  canonical  by  two  councils  of  Carthage  (897,  419  A.D.); 
but  the  language  of  the  former  council  was  peculiar :  ^^  Thir- 
teen Epistles  of  Paul,  and  one  of  the  same  to  the  Hebrews." 
The  decree  of  the  latter  council  was  ^^  fourteen  Epistles  of 
Paul." 

From  this  time  the  canonical  authority  and  authorship  of 
the  epistle  were  generally  accepted  until  the  age  of  the 
Reformation,  when  the  old  doubts  were  revived  by  Cajetan 
and  Erasmus.  The  council  of  Trent  (1645-1568)  decreed 
fourteen  Pauline  Epistles ;  yet  different  views  have  been 
current  among  Roman  Catholic  theologians,  as  Bellarmine, 
Estius,  and  others.  Luther  denied  the  Pauline  authorship, 
and  placed  the  epistle  along  with  James,  Jude,  and  the  Apoc- 
alypse, after  *Hhe  right-certain,  main  books  of  the  New 
Testament."  Melanchthon  treated  it  as  anonymous.  The 
Magdeburg  Centuriators  (1559-1574)  denied  that  it  was 
Paul's,  as  did  Calvin.  Under  Beza's  influence  it  was  separ- 
ated from  the  Pauline  letters  in  the  Grallican  Confession 
(1571).  The  Belgic  and  Helvetic  Confessions  declared  it 
Pauline.  The  hypothesis  of  the  Pauline  authorship  was  con- 
clusively overthrown  by  Bleek  in  1868. 

The  conclusion  of  modem  scholarship  rests  upon : 
(1)  The  Style  and  Diction.  —  While  Paul's  style  is 
marked  by  frequent  irregularities,  anacolutha,  unclosed  par- 
entheses, and  mixed  metaphors,  this  epistle  is  written  in  a 
flowing,  symmetrical,  and  artistically  elaborated  style.  The 
difference  is  as  marked  as  that  between  a  chapter  of  Gibbon 
and  one  of  Sartor  Resartus.  The  rhetorical  art  of  Hebrews 
appears  in  the  careful  arrangement  of  the  words,  the  rhyth- 
mical structure  of  sentences,  and  the  sonorous  compounds. 
The  paragraphs  are  sometimes  arranged  in  a  regular  series  of 
premises  and  conclusions,  with  parentheses  which  do  not  lose 
their  connection  with  the  main  topic,  while  the  whole  is 
developed  in  regular  sequence,  without  anacolutha. 


intboduction  to  thb  epistlb  to  the  hebrews.    368 

(2)  The  Methods  op  Thought  and  the  Points  of 
View.  —  These  differ  from  those  of  the  Pauline  Epistles. 
The  two  do  not  materially  disagree.  They  reach,  substan« 
tially,  the  same  conclusions,  but  by  different  processes  and 
from  different  positions.  The  points  of  emphasis  differ. 
Topics  which,  in  the  Pauline  letters,  are  in  the  foreground, 
in  Hebrews  fall  into  the  shade  or  are  wholly  passed  over, 
(a)  The  conception  of  faith.  In  Paul,  faith  is  belief  in  Jesus 
Christ  as  a  means  of  justification,  involving  a  sharp  oppo- 
sition to  the  works  of  the  law  as  meriting  salvation.  In 
Hebrews,  faith  is  trust  in  the  divine  promises  as  distin- 
guished from  seeing  their  realisation,  a  phase  of  faith  which 
appears  rarely  in  Paul.  Both  agree  that  faith  is  the  only 
true  medium  of  righteousness  ;  but  Hebrews  sets  forth  two 
great  factors  of  faith,  namely,  that  God  t«,  and  that  he  is  a 
rewarder  of  them  which  diligently  seek  him. 

(i)  The  mode  of  presenting  the  contrcist  between  the  covenant 
of  worke  and  the  covenant  of  grace  through  faith.  Both  Paul 
and  the  author  of  Hebrews  recognise  a  relation  and  connection 
between  the  two  covenants.  The  one  prefigures  and  pre- 
pares the  way  for  the  other.  The  Christian  church  is  "  the 
Israel  of  God,"  "  the  people  of  God,"  "  the  seed  of  Abraham." 
Both  teach  that  forgiveness  of  sin  and  true  fellowship  with 
God  cannot  be  attained  through  the  law,  and  that  Christian- 
ity represents  the  life-giving  Spirit,  and  Judaism  the  letter 
which  killeth.  Both  assert  the  abrogation  of  the  old  coven- 
ant by  Christ.  Paul,  however,  views  Judaism  almost  entirely 
as  a  law  to  be  fulfilled  by  men  ;  while  our  writer  regards  it 
as  a  system  of  institutions  designed  to  represent  a  fellowship 
between  God  and  his  worshippers.  Paul,  accordingly,  shows 
that  the  law  cannot  put  man  into  right  relation  with  God, 
because  man  cannot  fulfil  it ;  while  Hebrews  shows  that  the 
institutions  of  the  old  covenant  cannot,  by  reason  of  their 
imperfection,  establish  a  real  fellowship  with  God.  To  Paul, 
the  reason  why  the  old  covenant  did  not  satisfy  lay,  not  in 
the  law,  which  ^^  is  holy  and  just  and  good,"  but  in  the  rela- 
tion of  man  to  the  law,  as  unable  to  fulfil  its  demands.  It 
oannot  effect  justification,  and  it  works  to  make  man  con- 


864     IKTBODUCnON  TO  THE  EPI8TIJE  TO  THB  HEBBKW8. 

Bcious  of  his  sin,  and  to  drive  him  to  the  true  source  of  right- 
eousness. To  our  writer  the  reason  is  to  be  sought  in  the 
fact  that  the  atoning  and  purifying  institutions  of  the  law 
cannot  remove  the  sins  which  prevent  fellowship  with  Grod. 

From  Paul's  point  of  view  he  might  have  been  expected  to 
show  that,  in  the  Old  Testament  economy,  it  devolved  on  the 
sacrificial  institution,  centred  in  the  high-priesthood,  to  meet 
the  want  which  was  not  met  by  legal  obedience.  To  his 
assertion  that  men  could  not  fulfil  the  demands  of  the  law,  it 
might  have  been  answered  that  the  sacrifices,  not  in  being 
works  of  the  law,  but  in  being  ordained  by  God  himself  as 
atonements  for  sin,  changed  men's  defective  righteousness  into 
a  righteousness  which  justified  them  before  God.  But  Paul 
does  not  meet  this.  He  nowhere  shows  the  insufficiency  of 
the  Old  Testament  sacrifices.  He  does  not  treat  the  doctrine 
of  the  high-priesthood  of  Christ.  He  regards  the  system  of 
sacrifices  less  as  a  divinely-ordained  means  of  atonement  than 
as  a  work  performed  by  men,  and  therefore  in  the  line  of 
other  works  of  the  law. 

This  gap  is  filled  by  the  writer  to  the  Hebrews,  in  showing 
that  the  ceremonial  economy  did  not  and  could  not  effect 
true  fellowship  with  God.  He,  no  doubt,  perceived  as  clearly 
as  Paul  that  the  observance  of  the  ritual  was  of  the  nature 
of  legal  works  ;  but  he  speaks  of  the  ritual  system  as  only  a 
presumed  means  of  grace  intended  to  define  and  enforce  the 
idea  of  fellowship  with  God,  and  to  give  temporary  comfort 
to  the  worshipper,  but  practically  impotent  to  institute  and 
maintain  such  fellowship  in  any  true  and  deep  sense.  There- 
fore he  emphasises  the  topic  of  the  priesthood.  He  dwells 
on  the  imperfect  and  transient  nature  of  the  priestly  office  : 
he  shows  that  the  Levitical  priesthood  was  only  a  foreshadow- 
ing of  a  better  and  permanent  priesthood.  Christ  as  the 
great  high  priest,  who  appears  nowhere  in  the  Pauline  Epis- 
tles, is  the  central  figure  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  He 
treats  of  the  ritual  system  and  its  appliances  as  mere  types 
of  an  enduring  reality  :  he  characterises  the  whole  body  of 
Levitical  ordinances  and  ceremonies  as  fleshly  ;  and  through 
all  nms  the  one,  sad  note,  accentuated   again   and  againt 


INTBODUCnOK  TO  THB  KPI8TLB  TO  THB  HEBREWS.      365 

^  they  can  never  take  away  sins  : ''  ^*  they  can  never  make  the 
comers  thereunto  perfect:''  **they  are  mere  ordinances  of 
the  flesh,  imposed  until  the  time  of  reformation/' 

(c)  The  view  of  the  condition  in  which  the  eubject  of  the 
law' 9  dominion  is  placed.  To  Paul  it  is  a  condition  of  bond- 
age, because  the  law  is  a  body  of  demands  which  man  must 
fulfil  (Rom.  vii.).  To  our  writer  it  is  a  condition  of  unsat- 
isfied longing  for  forgiveness  and  fellowship,  because  of  the 
insufficiency  of  the  ritual  atonement.  Accordingly,  Hebrews 
points  to  the  satisfaction  of  this  longing  in  Christ,  the  great 
high  priest,  perfecting  by  one  offering  those  who  are  being 
sanctified,  purging  the  conscience  from  dead  works  to  serve 
the  living  God.  Paul  points  to  the  fact  that  Christ  has  put 
an  end  to  the  tyranny  of  the  law,  and  has  substituted  freedom 
for  bondage.  The  conception  of  freedom  does  not  appear  in 
Hebrews.  Neither  iKevOepo^^  ikevOepia,  nor  ikeuOepovv  occur 
in  the  epistle. 

(i)  The  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  of  Ohriet.  This  emerges 
eveiywhere  in  Paul's  epistles.  There  is  but  one  allusion  to 
it  in  Hebrews  (xiii.  20),  although  it  is  implied  in  the  doctrine 
of  Christ's  high-priesthood,  he  being  a  priest  ^*  according  to 
the  power  of  an  indissoluble  life  "  (vii.  16). 

(e)  The  Gentilee.  There  is  no  mention  of  the  Grentiles  in 
relation  to  the  new  covenant,  a  topic  which  constantly  recurs 
in  Paul. 

(/)  Sin.  Sin  is  not  treated  with  reference  to  its  origin 
as  by  Paul.  The  vocabulary  of  terms  for  sin  is  smaller  than 
in  the  Pauline  writings. 

(ff)  Repentance.  The  denial  of  the  possibility  of  repentance 
after  a  lapse  (vi.  4-6,  comp.  x.  26-29)  is  not  Pauline. 

(8)  The  Use  op  Divine  Titles.  —  Kvpto^  lord^  very 
common  in  Paul,  is  comparatively  rare  in  Hebrews.  Simi- 
larly, 'Ii^tf-ofi?  Xpiffirk  Jesus  Christy  which  occurs  thirty  times 
in  Romans  alone.  Xpumk  'Ii^o-oi)?,  which  is  characteristically 
Pauline,  does  not  appear  at  all,  neither  does  asrriip  satriour, 
which  is  found  in  Ephesians  and  Philippians. 

(4)  The  General  Scheme  of  Treatment. — This  is 
broader  than  that  of  Paul,  viewing  man  not  only  in  bis 


366      INTBODUCTIOK  TO  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 

relation  to  the  law,  but  to  God's  original  ideal,  and  to  the 
harmony  with  God's  entire  economy  in  nature  and  revelation. 
Man,  nature,  history,  alike  illustrate  the  incarnation.  The 
Son  of  God,  through  whom  the  worlds  were  made,  is  the  heir 
of  all  things,  and,  as  creator  and  heir,  interprets  all  life.  He 
not  only  creates,  but  bear$  on  all  things  by  the  word  of  his 
power  toward  the  consummation — complete  harmony  with  the 
divine  archetype.  As  high  priest  he  makes  God  and  man  at 
one  in  every  sphere  of  being.  He  stands  for  the  solidarity  of 
humanity.  He  is  not  perfected  without  the  community  of  sons 
(xi.  40).     He  is  himself  a  son,  a  partaker  of  human  nature. 

With  Paul,  the  law  is  chiefly  a  law  of  ordinances  to  be 
replaced  by  the  gospel.  It  is  abolished  in  Christ.  It  cannot 
be  perfectly  observed.  It  generates  the  knowledge  of  sin. 
It  cannot  generate  righteousness.  Christianity  is  a  manifesta- 
tion of  the  righteousness  of  God  apart  from  the  law.  Faith 
is  counted  for  righteousness  to  him  that  worketh  not  but  be- 
lieveth.  The  law  works  wrath,  and  is  unto  death.  It  is  sub- 
sidiary, with  a  special  view  to  the  concrete  development  of  sin. 

Equally  our  epistle  shows  the  insufficiency  of  the  law  to 
reconcile  men  to  God,  but  in  a  different  way.  Paul  emphas- 
ises the  substitution  of  the  gospel  for  the  law:  Hebrews 
the  germ  of  a  saving  economy  contained  in  the  law,  and  the 
necessity  of  its  development  by  the  gospel.  Paul  does  not 
overlook  the  fact  that  the  law  was  our  pedagogue  to  bring 
us  to  Christ,  but  he  does  not  show  how,  as  our  writer  does. 
The  latter  emphasises  the  xmity  of  the  divine  plan,  shows  how 
the  Levitical  institutions  pointed  forward  to  Christ,  and  how 
the  heavenly  archetype  was  foreshadowed  in  the  ritual  system. 
With  all  Paul's  strong  assertion  of  the  holiness  of  the  law,  he 
never  dwells  on  it  with  the  sad  tenderness  for  the  vanishing 
system  which  marks  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  With  Paul 
the  break  with  the  law  was  sharp  and  complete.  The  law, 
as  a  champion  of  which  he  had  been  a  persecutor  of  Christ, 
is  thrown  into  sharp  relief  against  Christ  and  the  gospel. 
With  James  and  Peter  the  case  was  different.  It  would  not 
be  strange  if  some  writing  should  issue  from  their  circle  as 
^the  last  voice  of  the  apostles  of  the  circumcision,''  content- 


INTBODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.      867 

plating  with  affectionate  sympathy  that  through  which  they 
had  been  led  to  see  the  meaning  of  the  gospel,  and  finding  in 
it  *^a  welcome,  though  imperfect  source  of  consolation, 
instead  of  a  crushing  burden,  as  in  Paul's  case"  (Westcott). 

(5)  The  Personal  Authority  of  the  Writer  ib 
WHOLLY  IN  THE  BACKGROUND.  —  This  is  in  marked  con- 
trast with  the  epistles  of  Paul.  He  appears  to  place  himself 
in  the  second  generation  of  believers  to  whom  the  salvation 
preached  by  Chiist  had  been  certified  by  ear- witnesses ;  while 
Paul  refuses  to  be  regarded  as  a  pupil  of  the  apostles,  and 
claims  to  have  received  the  gospel  directly  from  the  Lord, 
and  to  have  been  certified  of  it  by  the  Spirit. 

If  Paul  was  not  the  author,  who  was  ?  One  claim  is  about 
as  good  as  another,  and  no  claim  has  any  substantial  support. 
That  of  ApoUos  is  founded  solely  upon  Acts  xviii.  24  f.  ; 
1  Cor.  i.  12  ;  ii.  4  ff.  The  most  that  can  be  deduced  from 
these  is  that  ApoUos  might  have  written  it.  There  is  no  evi- 
dence that  he  wrote  anything,  and  that  he  was  learned  and 
mighty  in  the  Scriptures  might  easily  have  been  true  of  others. 
Some  modern  critics  incline  to  Barnabas,  on  the  strength  of 
the  words  of  TertuUian  alluded  to  above,  but  this  is  as  unsat- 
isfactory as  the  rest. 

As  regards  the  de$tination  of  the  epistle,  we  are  equally  in 
the  dark.  By  ecclesiastical  writers  from  the  earliest  time  it 
is  cited  under  the  title  to  the  Hcbrewn^  a  fact  which  is  entitled 
to  some  weight.  It  is  evidently  addressed  to  a  definite  circle 
of  readers,  and  that  circle  could  hardly  have  been  a  mixed 
church  of  Jews  and  Gentiles,  since  it  would  have  been  impos- 
sible in  that  case  for  the  letter  to  avoid  allusions  to  the  rela- 
tions between  the  two,  whereas  it  contains  no  allusion  to 
Gentile  Christians. 

An  hypothesis  which  has  obtained  considerable  currency  in 
modem  criticism  is,  that  the  epistle  was  not  addressed  to 
Jewish  Christians  at  all,  but  to  Gentile  Christians,  as  a  warn- 
ing against  relapsing  into  heathenism,  by  showing  them  from 
the  Old  Testament  the  superiority  of  Christianity  to  Judaism.* 

•  So  Pfleiderer,  yon  Soden,  Jtilicher,  Weizsttcker,  McGiffert 


868      INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 

But  this  hypothesis  presents  formidable  difficulties.  This 
would  seem  to  be  a  roundabout  way  of  impressing  Gentiles 
with  the  superior  claims  of  Christianity.  It  would  appear  to 
have  been  the  more  natural  course  to  institute  a  direct  com- 
parison between  Christianity  and  paganism.  See  on  ch.  xiii. 
7-15. 

It  is  true  that  Gentile  Christians  were  familiar  with  the 
Old  Testament,  and  that  Paul's  epistles  to  Gentile  readers 
contain  frequent  allusions  to  it ;  and,  further,  that  Clement 
of  Rome,  in  his  epistle  to  the  Gentile  church  at  Corinth, 
makes  much  use  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  and  cites 
freely  from  the  Old  Testament.  But  to  illustrate  one's 
thoughts  and  arguments  by  occasional  references  to  the  Old 
Testament  is  a  very  different  thing  from  drawing  out  an 
elaborate  argument  on  the  basis  of  a  contrast  between  a  new 
and  an  older  order,  designed  to  show,  not  only  that  the 
new  is  superior  to  the  old,  but  that  the  new  is  enfolded  in  the 
old  and  developed  from  it.  To  this  there  is  no  parallel  in 
the  New  Testament  in  writings  addressed  to  Gentiles.  It 
would  have  been  superfluous  to  prove,  as  this  epistle  does» 
that  the  old  order  did  not  satisfy.  The  Gentiles  never  sup- 
posed that  it  did. 

Moreover,  in  almost  every  case  of  Paul's  allusion  to  the 
Jewish  institutions,  the  reference  is  called  out  by  some  fea- 
ture of  the  Mosaic  economy  which  lay  directly  in  his  track 
and  compelled  him  to  deal  with  it.  Thus,  in  Romans,  he  is 
forced  to  discuss  the  doctrine  of  salvation  by  faith  with  ref- 
erence to  the  Jewish  doctrine  of  salvation  by  the  works  of 
the  law.  The  Galatians  had  been  tempted  by  Judaising  emis- 
saries to  return  to  the  law  of  circumcision.  In  Corinth,  Paul's 
authority  and  teaching  had  been  assailed  by  Jewish  aggres- 
sors. In  Philippians  we  have  no  allusion  to  the  law  until 
the  writer  comes  to  deal  with  *'  the  dogs,"  "  the  evil  workers," 
"the  concision."  In  Colossians,  Jewish  ceremonialism  is  a 
distinct  factor  of  the  heresy  which  is  attacked ;  but  nowhere 
in  Paul's  epistles  is  there  a  didactic  development  of  a  thesis 
from  the  point  of  view  of  the  Old  Testament  economy  col- 
lectively. 


INTBODUCTIOK  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.      869 

The  same  remarks  will  apply  to  the  case  of  Clement  of 
Rome.  In  his  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  there  are  about 
twenty  allusions  to  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  or  quotations 
from  it.  Two  of  these  relate  to  the  majesty  of  God;  one  to 
Christ  as  high  priest ;  in  two  or  three  there  is  a  mere  imita- 
tion of  the  phraseology  of  Hebrews,  and  the  most  of  the  pas- 
sages are  practical  exhortations  to  the  cultivation  of  moral 
virtues,  enforced  by  allusions  to  the  Old  Testament  worthies. 
Any  of  these  passages  might  have  occurred  in  an  address  to 
either  Jews  or  Gentiles.  They  prove  nothing  as  to  the  point 
in  question.  If  we  did  not  know  from  other  sources  that 
Clement's  epistle  was  addressed  to  a  Gentile  church,  we 
could  not  infer  that  fact  from  these  quotations  and  allusions. 
Moreover,  Clement's  fondness  for  the  Old  Testament  and  the 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  is  easily  explained,  if,  as  there  is  very 
good  reason  for  believing,  Clement  himself  was  of  Jewish 
origin,  a  Hellenist.* 

The  whole  argument  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  is  tech- 
nieaUy  Jewish,  and  not  of  a  character  to  appeal  to  Gentile 
readers.  The  argiunent,  for  example,  for  the  superiority  of 
Christ  to  the  angels,  would  have  much  force  addressed  to 
Jews,  since  the  doctrine  of  the  communication  of  the  Mosaic 
revelation  through  the  ministration  of  angels  was  a  familiar 
tradition.  Between  the  writer  and  Jewish  readers  there  would 
be  no  question  as  to  the  angelic  mediation  of  the  Sinaitic 
legislation;  but  the  point  would  have  no  interest  and  no 
pertinency  for  the  average  Gentile.  The  Jew  would  readily 
apprehend  that  no  theophany  is  a  direct  manifestation  of  God 
to  the  physical  sense.  The  Gentile  mode  of  thought  would 
be  the  other  way.  The  Jew  would  understand  that  angels 
were  the  administrators  of  the  old  covenant,  and  would 
instinctively  catch  the  turn  of  the  whole  argument  to  the 
effect  that  with  the  exaltation  of  Christ  the  angelic  sway  of 
the  old  dispensation  ceased. 

The  same  thing  might  be  said  of  the  doctrine  of  the  high- 
priesthood  of  Christ.    If  this  was  a  point  to  make  with  Gen- 

•  See  Ligfatfoot'8  ClemefU  of  JSome,  VoL  L,  p.  600. 
VOL.  rr. — 24 


870      INTBODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWB. 

tiles,  it  is  strange  that  Paul  nowhere  alludes  to  it ;  and  what 
did  the  Gentile  care  about  Melchisedec  or  the  relation  of 
Christ^s  priesthood  to  his? 

It  is  indeed  true  that,  in  the  practical  warnings  of  the 
epistle,  nothing  is  directly  said  about  apostasy  to  Judaism ; 
but  the  admonitions  are  enforced  by  distinctively  Jewish 
references,  as,  for  example,  the  warning  against  failure  to 
enter  into  God's  rest,  which  is  pointed  by  the  example  of  the 
Israelites  in  failing  to  enter  Canaan.  Would  a  writer  have 
said  to  a  Gentile  convert  that,  in  case  of  his  committing 
wilful  sin,  there  was  no  expiation  for  him?  But  he  might 
properly  say  to  a  Jewish  Christian,  who  was  tempted  to 
return  to  Judaism  :  ^^  If  you  abandon  Christ,  and  return  to 
Judaism,  you  have  no  more  sacrifice  for  sins.  Your  whole 
system  of  Levitical  sacrifices  is  abolished.  It  is  Christ  or 
nothing." 

It  is  very  strongly  urged  that  the  warning  against  depart- 
ing from  the  living  God  (iii.  12)  might  very  properly  be 
given  to  Gentiles  as  against  a  relapse  into  heathenism,  while 
it  would  be  utterly  inappropriate  to  a  Jewish  Christian, 
because  the  living  God  is  common  to  both  Jews  and  Christ- 
ians ;  and  a  relapse  into  Judaism  could  not,  therefore,  be  a 
departure  from  the  living  God.  But  the  objection  overlooks 
the  intent  of  the  whole  epistle,  which  is  to  show  that  the 
living  God  of  the  Jewish  economy  has  revealed  himself  in 
the  Christian  ecojic/my,  thereby  superseding  the  former.  It 
is  the  God  of  the  Christian  dispensation  who  is  commended 
to  the  readers;  the  living  God  under  a  new  and  grander 
manifestation  of  life.  God  who  spake  by  the  prophets,  now 
speaks  by  his  Son,  the  efifulgence  of  his  glory  and  the  very 
image  of  his  substance.  To  go  back  to  the  old  economy  of 
types  and  shadows,  the  economy  of  partial  access  to  God, 
would  be  literally  to  depart  from  the  living  God.  It  would 
oe,  practically,  to  deny  him  as  a  living  God,  by  denying  all 
development  and  expansion  in  his  revelation  of  his  own  life, 
and  confining  that  revelation  to  the  narrow  limits  of  the 
Mosaic  system ;  in  other  words,  to  identify  the  living  God 
with  the  dead  system.    To  depart  from  Christ,  the  Life,  and 


INTBODCJCTION  TO  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEW8       871 

to  seek  the  God  of  the  Old  Testament  revelation,  would  be 
to  fall  back  from  a  living  to  a  dead  God. 

Again,  it  is  claimed  that  the  words  at  the  beginning  of 
Chapter  VI.  could  not  be  properly  addressed  to  Jewish  Christ- 
ians :  that  only  a  heathen  would  need  to  lay  such  a  founda- 
tion on  his  first  acceptance  of  Christ.  On  the  contrary,  all 
the  points  here  enumerated  would  have  had  to  be  expounded 
to  a  Jew  on  becoming  a  Christian.    See  notes  on  that  passage. 

A  still  more  difficult  question  is  the  local  destination  of  tiie 
epistle.  By  those  who  supposed  it  to  be  the  work  of  Paul, 
attempts  were  made  to  place  this  destination  within  the  circle 
of  Paul's  recorded  missionary  labours ;  and  it  was  accordingly 
assigned  to  almost  every  place  visited  or  supposed  to  have  been 
visited  by  him,  —  Macedonia,  Corinth,  Antioch,  Spain,  etc. 

A  plausible  hypothesis  assigned  its  destination  to  Jewish 
Christians  in  Alexandria.  This  was  based  on  the  fact  that 
the  Muratorian  Canon  (170-210),  while  omitting  Hebrews, 
notes  an  Epistle  to  the  Alexandrians  (^Ad  AUxandrinoB).  It 
was  argued  that,  since  the  Canon  contains  a  list  both  of  Paul's 
genuine  epistles  and  of  those  falsely  ascribed  to  him,  and 
since  Hebrews  is  not  mentioned,  the  Alexandrian  epistle  can 
mean  only  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  It  was  further  urged 
that  Alexandria  had,  next  to  Jerusalem,  the  largest  resident 
Jewish  population  in  the  world,  and  that  at  Leontopolis  in 
Egypt  was  another  temple,  with  the  arrangements  of  which 
the  notices  in  Hebrews  corresponded  more  nearly  than  with 
those  of  the  Jerusalem  temple.*  Moreover,  the  Alexandrian 
character  of  the  phraseology  of  the  epistle  was  supposed  to 
point  to  Alexandrian  readers. 

But,  (a)  We  have  no  positive  history  of  the  church  in 
Egypt  in  apostolic  times,  (i)  Although  there  are  numerous 
notices  of  the  epistle  by  early  Alexandrian  writers,  there  is 
no  hint  of  its  having  been  addressed  to  their  own  church. 
{e)  In  the  Muratorian  Canon  the  Epistle  to  the  Alexandri- 
ans is  distinctly  stated  to  be  a  forgery  in  the  name  of  Paul. 

•  This  temple  wm  founded  b.o.  lSO-146  by  Onias,  ooe  of  the  hig^-prieetiy 
fftmily.  The  building  wm  a  deserted  temple  of  Paaht,  the  cat^goddeH.  A 
^ascription  is  given  by  Josephus  B,  J.  viL  10,  3 ;  Ceml.  4p.  iL  % 


872     IKTBODUCTION  TO  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HSBBKW8. 

((2)  It  cannot  be  shown  that  the  temple  at  Leontopolis  exer* 
cised  the  same  power  over  the  Alexandrian  Jews  as  the  temple 
at  Jerusalem  did  over  the  Palestinian  Jews.  Even  in  Egypt 
the  Jerusalem  temple  was  recognised  as  the  true  centre  of 
worship.  Moreover,  the  Christian  church  at  Alexandria  was 
a  mixed  church,  (e)  The  furniture  of  the  temple  at  Jeru- 
salem was  more  like  that  of  the  tabernacle  described  in 
Hebrews  than  that  of  the  Egyptian  temple. 

A  widely-accepted  view  is  that  the  epistle  was  addressed 
to  Jewish  Christians  in  Palestine  and  Jerusalem.  Unmixed 
Jewish-Christian  churches  were  to  be  found  nowhere  else ;  and 
only  there  would  there  be  likely  to  exist  that  attachment  to  the 
old  worship  which  is  assumed  in  the  epistle,  while  it  treats 
only  incidentally  of  those  rites  to  which,  in  the  Dispersion, 
the  greatest  importance  was  naturally  assigned — ablutions, 
etc.  The  claim  that  the  epistle  was  addressed  to  Rome 
involves  a  mixed  church.  The  Roman  church  became  more 
Gentile  after  Paul's  residence  in  Rome.  On  the  assumption 
that  Jewish  Christians  were  addressed,  it  is  difficult  to  account 
for  the  Roman  destination,  unless  the  letter  was  intended  for 
a  distinct  circle  of  Jewish  Christians  in  Rome,  which  is  not 
impossible.  That  the  epistle  was  used  by  Clement  proves 
nothing.  The  phrase  cunrd^ovrcu  vfia^  oi  airh  r^  'IroX/o?  they 
from  Italy  scUtUe  you  might  seem  to  point  to  Rome  as  the  resi- 
dence of  the  parties  saluted ;  but  that  is  by  no  means  certain. 
The  meaning  of  the  expression  must  first  be  settled.  It  may 
mean  "  those  in  Italy  send  greeting  from  Italy,"  or,  "  those 
who  are  from  Italy  (whose  home  is  there,  but  who  are  now 
with  me)  send  greeting  to  you  (whoever  may  be  addressed)." 
The  latter  meaning  is  the  more  probable ;  but  on  that  suppo- 
sition the  words  afford  no  reliable  indication  of  the  residence 
of  those  addressed.  They  mean  merely  that  certain  Italians 
in  the  writer's  company  greet  the  writer's  correspondents, 
who  may  have  been  in  Palestine,  Asia,  or  Egypt.* 

*  An  able  defence  of  the  Roman  hypothesiB  may  be  foond  in  R^ville,  Let 
Originei  de  V^pUeopat.  While  these  sheets  are  going  through  the  press, 
I  hare  received  the  first  number  of  Preuschen's  ZtiUehrift  /Ur  die  neutesi. 
WUtenaehftft  und  die  Kunde  dee  UrchristenihuvMt  containing  Hamack*a 


INTBODUCTIOK  TO  THB  EPISTLB  TO  THB  HEBREWS.      878 

The  Palestinian  hypothesiB  is  not  free  from  difficulty.  It 
appears,  at  first  sight,  unlikely  that  the  author  would  have 
written  in  Greek  to  Palestinian  Jewish  Christians,  whose 
language  was  Aramaic,  and  would  have  used  the  Septuagint 
exclusively  in  citations  from  the  Old  Testament.  Neverthe- 
less, Greek  was  understood  and  spoken  in  Palestine :  many 
Greek-speaking  Jews  resided  in  Jerusalem  (Acts  vi.  9),  and 
there  were  in  that  city  synagogues  of  the  Cyrenians  and  Alex- 
andrians, in  which  Greek  and  the  Septuagint  would  certainly 
be  used.  The  Hellenists  were  numerous  and  influential 
enough  to  carry  their  point  in  the  matter  of  ministration  to 
their  widows  (Acts  vi.  Iff.).  Finally,  it  is  not  impossible 
that  the  writer  of  the  epistle  was  not  sufficiently  acquainted 
with  Aramaic  to  write  effectively  in  that  language. 

The  decisive  settlement  of  the  date  of  the  epistle  is  practic- 
ally given  up  by  critics.  The  most  that  can  be  done  is  to 
try  and  fix  approximately  the  limits  within  which  the  compo- 
sition was  possible.*  Only  one  point  is  definitely  fixed.  It 
must  have  been  written  before  Clement's  Epistle  to  the  Corin- 
thians (95).  If  addressed  to  Jewish  Christians,  or  indeed  to 
Gentiles,  it  is  highly  probable  that  it  was  written  before  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem  (70),  since  it  is  most  unlikely  that 
the  writer  would  have  omitted  all  allusion  to  an  event  which 
furnished  such  a  striking  confirmation  of  his  teaching.  This 
probability  would  be  strengthened  if  it  could  be  proved  that 
the  Jewish  sacrifices  were  still  being  offered  at  the  time  when 
the  epistle  was  composed :  but  this  cannot  be  conclusively 


ingenious  paper,  Probabilia  iiber  die  Adresse  und  den  Verfas$er  dee  Hehrder- 
briefs.  He  holds  that  the  epistle  was  addressed  to  a  Christian  coinmonity — 
a  house-church  in  Rome :  that  it  was  written  by  Aquila  and  Prisca,  princi- 
pally by  the  latter,  and  that,  so  far  from  being  addressed  especially  to  Hebrew 
Christians,  it  entirely  ignores  the  difference  between  Hebrews  and  Gentiles. 

•The  results  of  even  this  attempt  vary  considerably.  Bleek,  6S-69: 
LOnemann,  65-67  :  Riehm,  64-^ :  Ebrard,  end  of  62  :  De  Wette,  68-67 : 
Tholuck  and  Wieseler,  about  64 :  Alford,  68-70 :  Salmon,  before  63 :  West- 
oott,  64-67:  Jtilicher,  not  before  70:  Weiss,  near  67:  Hamack,  66-06: 
McOiffert,  81-06.  One  of  the  fairest  and  ablest  discussions  is  by  Hamack, 
Chronologie  der  aUchrietliehen  LiUeratur.  Jtilicher's  discussion,  in  his  JEVii- 
leitung  in  doe  Neue  Testament^  will  also  repay  study. 


S74     INTRODUOTION  TO  THX  JBFUITJLJB  TO  THX  HKBBSW8. 

shown.  *rhe  use  of  the  present  tense  in  viii.  4  ff. ;  ix.  6,  9; 
X.  1  ff . ;  xiii.  10  ff .,  is  not  decisive.  Attempts  to  identify  the 
persecution  alluded  to  in  x.  2  are  the  merest  guess-work.  To 
refer  it  to  the  Neronian  persecution  (64)  is  to  assume  that  it 
was  addressed  to  Rome,  and  is,  therefore,  to  beg  the  question. 
The  reference  of  x.  86  and  xii.  8  to  the  persecution  of  Domitian 
(95),  is  utterly  without  foundation,  to  say  nothing  of  the 
fact  that  it  is  not  certain  that  those  two  passages  refer  to 
persecution  at  alL  Against  a  date  near  95  is  the  use  of  the 
epistle  by  Clement,  unless  the  Roman  address  can  be  proved. 
Otherwise,  some  time  would  be  required  for  it  to  obtain 
such  currency  and  recognition  as  would  account  for  Clement's 
familiarity  with  it.  Against  a  very  late  date  is  also  the  fact 
that  Timothy  Appears  as  an  active  evangelist,  which  could 
hardly  have  been  the  case  if  the  letter  was  written  as  late 
as  90.  Against  a  very  early  date  is  the  admitted  &ct  that  a 
second  generation  of  Christians  is  addressed  ;  and  that  the 
references  to  persecution  apparently  point  to  a  comparatively 
distant  time.  If  we  are  to  lay  stress  on  the  omission  of  all 
reference  to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  as  I  think  we  must 
do,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  epistle  was  written  not  far  from  67. 

There  is  no  reason  for  disputing  the  author's  acquaintance 
with  the  writings  of  Paul,  as  there  is  none  for  asserting  his 
dependence  upon  them.  There  are  lexical  resemblances  and 
resemblances  in  thought  and  phrasing,  but  nothing  to  show 
that  the  writer  of  Hebrews  drew  upon  Paul  to  any  consider* 
able  extent.  The  coincidences  with  (xalatians  which  are 
pointed  out  are  superficial,  and  may  be  fairly  traced  to  com- 
mon Jewish  ideas  with  which  both  writers  were  familiar.  As 
to  Romans,  Epbesians,  and  Corinthians,  the  resemblances  are, 
in  a  number  of  cases,  due  to  quotation  from  the  same  source  ; 
in  other  cases  they  occur  in  warnings  from  the  example  of  the 
Israelites  ;  in  others  again  there  is  a  coincidence  of  a  current 
phrase,  such  as  "if  God  permit,"  which  any  author  might  use. 
In  some  other  instances  cited  the  resemblance  is  too  remote 
to  be  significant. 

As  to  the  influence  of  PhUo,  we  may  freely  admit  the  evi* 
deuces  of  the  writer's  Alexandrian  training,  and  the  possibilityi 


nrrRODucTiON  to  thb  kpibtlb  to  thb  hebbkws.    375 

perhaps  probability,  of  bis  acquaintance  with  Philo's  writ- 
ings.* The  epistle  does  exhibit  certain  points  of  resemblance 
to  Philo,  such  as  similar  forms  of  quotation,  similar  use  of  Old 
Testament  passages  and  narratives,  and  statements  like  those 
of  Philo,  such  as  those  respecting  the  sinlessness  of  the  Logos- 
Priest,  the  heavenly  home  of  the  patriarchs,  and  the  X/joi 
TOfAetk  the  dividing  word  (iv.  12) :  but  Philo's  meaning  differs 
radically  from  that  of  the  epistle.  Our  writer's  Christology 
has  no  affinity  with  that  of  Philo.  On  certain  leading  topics, 
such  as  the  two  ages  of  the  world,  the  mediation  of  the  law 
by  angels,  the  Sabbath-rest,  the  heavenly  sanctuary,  and  the 
heavenly  Jerusalem,  he  exhibits  more  affinity  with  Palestinian 
than  with  Alexandrian  thought.  The  most  tiiat  can  be  claimed 
is  that  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  returns  echoes  of  Philo,  and 
exhibits  formal  and  limited  resemblances  to  him.f 

*  Although  critics  are  not  nnuiimoos  <m  this  point.  It  it  diqmted  \gf 
Tholnck,  Riehm,  and  "VHcMler,  and  Weias  ia  eridently  indined  to  agrae  with 
them. 

t  A  yalnahle  diaenarion  ol  the  aol^eot  ia  that  ol  Biahm,  lAkuhtgrfg  dto 
BebnerM^  |S7. 


LITERATURE. 


There  is  a  want  of  good  commentaries  in  English,  The  jmh 
•ipal  ones  are : 

H.  Alf  ordy  in  his  Greek  Testament. 

B.  F.  Westcott,  The  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  Greek  Text  foUk 
Notes  and  Essays. 

A.  B.  Bruce,  The  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews. 

English  Translations  of  LUnemann  and  Delitzsch. 

E.  Bendall,  The  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews. 

G.  Milligan,  The  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  wUh  OrUuxd  IntrodwHtnL 

In  Grerman  are : 

Fried.  Bleek,  Der  Hebrderbrief  erkldrL 

Fr.  Delitzsch,  Kommentar  zum  Briefe  an  die  Hebrder. 

A.  Tholuck,  Kommentar  zum  Briefe  an  die  Hebrder. 
H.  A.  Ebrard,  Kommentar  uber  den  Hebrderbrief. 
G.  LUnemann,  in  the  Meyer  series. 

W.  M.  L.  De  Wette,  in  Kurzgefasstes  exegetisches  Handbueh  turn 
Neuen  Testament, 

B.  Weiss,  Kritisch-exegetisch  Handbueh  uber  den  Brief  an  die 
Hebrder,    Issued  as  an  alternate  of  LUnemann  in  Meyer. 

On  the  doctrinal  aspects  of  the  epistle : 

Ed.   Reuss,  UEpUre  aux  H4breux.    Essai  d?une   Traduction 
Nouvdle,  a/ccompagn^  d'un  Commentaire  ThMogique, 
Ed.  K.  A.  Riehm,  Der  Lehrbegriff  des  Hebrderberbriefes. 
Eug.  M^n^goz,  La  Thedogie  de  VEpitre  aux  H^breux. 

There  may  also  be  noted : 

K.  Wieseler,  Uhtersuchung  Uber  den  Hebrderbrief,  namentUck 
seinen  Verfasser  und  seine  Leser, 

J.  H.  R.  Biesenthal,  Epistola  Pauli  ad  Hebraeos,  cum  Baibbmio^ 
Commentario, 

Theo.  Zahn,  Einleitung  in  das  Netie  Testament,  f  47. 

376 


THE  EPISTLE  TO   THE   HEBREWS. 


CHAPTER  I. 


Theme  of  the  Epistle.  — God  has  given  a  revelation  of 
salvation  in  two  stages.  The  first  was  preparatory  and  tran- 
sient, and  is  completed.  The  second,  the  revelation  through 
Jesus  Christ,  is  final.  The  readers  who  have  accepted  this 
second  revelation  are  warned  against  returning  to  the  econ- 
omy of  the  first. 

1.    Qod.    Both  stages  of  the  revelation  were  given  by  God. 

At  sundry  times  (v-oXv/iepik}.  Rend,  in  many  parts. 
N.  T.^.  ^LXX,  but  irokuiuprfi  Wisd.  vii.  22.  In  the  first 
stage  of  his  revelation,  God  spake,  not  at  ance^  giving  a  com- 
plete revelation  of  his  being  and  will ;  but  in  many  separate 
revelations,  each  of  which  set  forth  only  a  portion  of  the  truth. 
The  truth  as  a  whole  never  comes  to  light  in  the  O.  T.  It 
appears  fragmentarily,  in  successive  acts,  as  the  periods  of 
the  Patriarchs,  Moses,  the  Kingdom,  etc.  One  prophet  has 
one,  another  another  element  of  the  truth  to  proclaim. 

In  divers  manners  (iroXinpoTrw).  Rend,  in  many  ways. 
N.  T.^.  LXX,  4  Mace.  iii.  21.  This  refers  to  the  diflference 
of  the  various  revelations  in  contents  and  form.  Not  the  dif- 
ferent ways  in  which  God  imparted  his  revelations  to  the 
prophets,  but  the  different  ways  in  which  he  spoke  by  the 
prophets  to  the  fathers :  in  one  way  through  Moses,  in  another 
through  Elijah,  in  others  through  Isaiah,  Ezekiel,  etc.  At 
the  founding  of  the  Old  Testament  kingdom  of  God,  the 

877 


878  WORD  8TUDIB8  IN  THE  NBW  TESTAMENT.         [Gh.  L 

character  of  the  revelation  was  elementary :  later  it  was  of 
a  character  to  appeal  to  a  more  matured  spiritual  sense,  a 
deeper  understanding  and  a  higher  conception  of  the  law. 
The  revelation  differed  according  to  the  faithfulness  or 
unfaithfulness  of  the  covenant-people.  Comp.  £ph.  iii.  10, 
the  many-tinted  wisdom  of  Q-od^  which  is  associated  with  this 
passage  by  Clement  of  Alexandria  (^Strom.  i.  4, 27).  "  Fitly, 
therefore,  did  the  apostle  call  the  wisdom  of  God  many- 
tinted^  as  showing  its  power  to  benefit  us  in  many  parts  and 
in  many  ways.^* 

Spake  (XaXi^a9).  See  on  Matt,  xxviii.  18.  Often  in  the 
Epistle  of  the  announcement  of  the  divine  wiU  by  men,  as 
vii.  14 ;  ix.  19 :  by  angeU^  as  ii.  2 :  by  God  himeeJf  or  Christy 
as  ii.  8 ;  v.  5 ;  xii.  25.  In  Paul,  almost  always  of  men  :  once 
of  Christ,  2  Cor.  xiii.  8 :  once  of  the  Law,  personified,  Ronu 
iii.  9. 

In  time  past  (irdXai).  Better,  of  old.  The  time  of  the 
Old  Testament  revelation.  It  indicates  a  revelation,  not 
only  given,  but  completed  in  the  past. 

Unto  the  fathers  (roU  irarpda-iv).  Thus  absolutely, 
J.  vii.  22 ;  Rom.  ix.  5 ;  xv.  8.  More  commonly  with  your 
or  our. 

By  the  prophets  (^  T0i9  'irpw\>rfr<ui).  Rend,  ^^in  the 
prophets,"  which  does  not  mean  in  the  collection  of  prophetic 
writings^  as  J.  vi.  45 ;  Acts  xiii.  40,  but  rather  in  the  prophets 
themselves  as  the  vessels  of  divine  inspiration.  God  spake  in 
them  and /rom  them.  ThusPhilo:  "The  prophet  is  an  inter- 
preter,  echoing  from  within  (Jviodev)  the  sayings  of  God'' 
(2>«  Praemiis  et  Foenis,  §  9) 

2.  In  these  last  times  (^'  iaxdrov  r&v  fiiup&v  rovmv). 
Lit.  at  the  last  of  these  days.  The  exact  phrase  only  here  ; 
but  comp.  1  Pet.  v.  20  and  Jude  18.  LXX,  hr*  iaxdrov  t&p 
fitup&v  at  the  last  of  the  days.  Num.  xxiv.  14 ;  Deut.  iv.  80; 


Cb.  L]  the  epistle  to  the  HEBREWS.  879 

Jer.  xxiii.  20 ;  xxv.  18 ;  Dan.  x.  14.  The  writer  conceives 
the  history  of  the  world  in  its  relation  to  divine  revelation  as 
falling  into  two  great  periods;  The  first  he  calls  at  fiiiipou, 
atnai  these  days  (i.  2),  and  o  tccupcfi  6  ivtarriKm  the  present 
season  (ix.  9).  The  second  he  describes  as  iccupb^  Bto^wreot^ 
the  season  of  reformation  (ix.  10),  which  is  6  tcaipb^  6  fA^Wmp 
the  season  to  come:  comp.  17  oUovfUvrf  17  /i^Wovaa  the  world  to 
come  (ii.  5)  ;  fAdXkwv  alAv  the  age  to  come  (vi.  5) ;  wi>a%  1} 
lUXkovca  the  city  to  come  (xii.  14).  The  first  period  is  the 
period  of  the  old  covenant ;  the  second  that  of  the  new  cove- 
nant. The  second  period  does  not  begin  with  Christ's  first 
appearing.  His  appearing  and  public  ministry  are  at  the  end 
of  the  first  period  but  still  wi^in  it.  The  dividing-point 
between  the  two  periods  is  the  (nnniXua  rod  al&vo^  the  con^ 
summation  of  the  age^  mentioned  in  ix.  26.  This  does  not 
mean  the  same  thing  9A  atthe  last  of  these  days  (i.  2),  which 
is  the  end  of  the  first  period  denoted  by  these  days^  but  the 
conclusion  of  the  first  and  the  beginning  of  the  second  period, 
at  which  Christ  appeared  to  put  away  sin  by  the  saciifice  of 
himself.  This  is  the  end  of  the  iccupii^  iv^arfiicA;  the  present 
season:  this  is  the  limit  of  the  validity  of  the  old  sacrificial 
ofiFerings  :  this  is  the  inauguration  of  the  time  of  r^ormation. 
The  phrase  iir  iaxdrov  r&v  ^fi£p&p  tovtodv  therefore  signifies, 
in  the  last  days  of  the  first  period,  when  Christ  was  speaking 
on  earth,  and  before  his  crucifixion,  which  marked  the  begin- 
ning of  the  second  period,  the  better  age  of  the  new  covenant. 

Hath  spoken  unto  us  (p^dXTfo-ep  ^fuv).  Rend,  spake^ 
referring  to  the  time  of  Christ's  teaching  in  the  flesh.  To  us 
God  spake  as  to  the  fathers  of  old. 

By  his  son  (iv  i/t^).  Lit.  in  a  son.  Note  the  absence  of 
the  article.  Attention  is  directed,  not  to  Christ's  divine  per- 
sonality, but  to  his  filial  relation.  While  the  former  revela- 
tion was  given  through  a  definite  class,  the  prophets,  the  new 
revelation  is  given  through  one  who  is  a  son  as  distinguished 
from  a  prophet.  He  belongs  to  another  category.  The  reve- 
lation was  a  son-revelation.    See  ch.  ii.  10-18.    Christ's  high 


380  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Cb.  I. 

priesthood  is  the  central  fact  of  the  epistle,  and  his  sonship 
is  bound  up  with  his  priesthood.  See  ch.  v.  5.  For  a  simi- 
lar use  of  vuk  acm,  without  the  article,  applied  to  Christ,  see 
ch.  iii.  6;  v.  8;  vii.  28. 

Whom  he  hath  appointed  heir  of  all  things  (iv  tOff/ce^ 
tc\T)pov6fjLov  irdtnwv).  For  idrftcev  appointed^  see  on  J.  xv.  16. 
For  tc\T)pov6fAo^  heir^  see  on  inheritance^  1  Pet.  i.  4 ;  and  comp. 
on  Christ  as  heir,  Mk.  xii.  1-12.  God  eternally  predestined 
the  Son  to  be  the  possessor  and  sovereign  of  all  things. 
Comp.  Ps.  Ixxxix.  28.  Heirship  goes  with  sonship.  See 
Rom.  viii.  17;  Gal.  iv.  7.  Christ  (Utained  the  messianic 
lordship  through  incarnation.  Something  was  acquired  as 
the  result  of  his  incarnation  which  he  did  not  possess  before 
it,  and  could  not  have  possessed  without  it.  Equality  with 
God  was  his  birthright ;  but  out  of  his  human  life,  death, 
and  resurrection  came  a  type  of  sovereignty  which  could  per- 
tain to  him  only  through  his  triumph  over  human  sin  in  the 
flesh  (see  ver.  3),  through  his  identification  with  men  as  their 
brother.  Messianic  lordship  could  not  pertain  to  his  prein- 
camate  state :  it  is  a  matter  of  function,  not  of  inherent  power 
and  majesty.  He  was  e»$evtiaUy  Son  of  God ;  he  must  became 
Son  of  man. 

By  whom  also  he  made  the  worlds  (&'  oi  ical  hroirjaev 
T0V9  al&va^).  AaA  commonly  expresses  secondary  agency; 
but,  in  some  instances,  it  is  used  of  God^s  direct  agency.  See 
1  Cor.  i.  1 ;  2  Cor.  i.  1 ;  Gal.  iv.  7.  Christ  is  here  repre- 
sented as  a  mediate  agency  in  creation.  The  phrase  is,  clearly, 
coloured  by  the  Alexandrian  conception,  but  difters  from  it  in 
that  Christ  is  not  represented  as  a  mere  instrument,  a  passive 
tool,  but  rather  as  a  cooperating  agent.  "  Every  being,  to 
reach  existence,  must  have  passed  through  the  thought  and 
will  of  the  Logos  "  (Godet) ;  yet  "  the  Son  can  do  nothing 
of  himself  but  what  he  seeth  the  Father  doing"  (J.  v.  19). 
With  this  passage  Col.  i.  16  should  be  studied.  There  it  is 
said  that  all  things,  collectively  (tA  Trai^a),  were  created  in 
him  (iv  avT^^  and  through  him  (hC  airrov  as  here).     The 


ch.  l]  the  epistle  to  the  hebbews.  881 

former  expresaion  enlarges  and  completes  the  latter.  Ai* 
airrov  represents  Christ  as  the  mediate  instrument.  'Ev 
airr^  indicates  that  *^  all  the  laws  and  purposes  which  guide 
the  creation  and  government  of  the  universe  reside  in  him, 
the  Eternal  Word,  as  their  meeting-point."  *  Comp.  J.  i.  8 ; 
1  Cor.  viii.  6.  For  tov9  al&va^  the  warld$^  see  additional  note 
on  2  Th.  i.  9.  Rend,  for  by  whom  also  he  made^  by  whom 
he  also  made.  The  emphasis  is  on  made^  not  on  worlds :  on 
the  fact  of  creation^  not  on  what  was  created.  In  the  writer's 
thought  heirship  goes  with  creation.  Christ  is  heir  of  what 
he  made,  and  because  he  made  it.  As  vdvrwv^  in  the  pre- 
ceding clause,  regards  all  things  taken  singly,  al&va^  regards 
them  in  cycles.  *Ai&va^  does  not  mean  times^  as  if  represent- 
ing the  Son  as  the  creator  of  all  time  and  times,  but  creation 
unfolded  in  time  through  successive  aeons.  All  that,  in  suc- 
cessive periods  of  time,  has  come  to  pass,  has  come  to  pass 
through  him.  Comp.  1  Cor.  x.  11 ;  Eph.  iii.  21 ;  Heb.  ix.  26 ; 
1  Tim.  i.  17 ;  LXX,  Tob.  xiii.  6, 10 ;  Eccl.  iii.  11.  See  also 
Clement  of  Rome,  Ad  Corinth,  xxxv,  o  Srffuovpyb^  teal  irarifp 
T&v  aUavfov  the  Creator  and  Father  of  the  ages.  Besides  this 
expression,  the  writer  speaks  of  the  world  as  /cdafAO^  (iv.  8 ; 
X.  5)  ;  i}  olxovfUinf  (i.  6),  and  r^  irdvra  (i.  8). 

3.  Being  (tbv).  Representing  absolute  being.  See  on  J.  i.  1. 
Christ's  absolute  being  is  exhibited  in  two  aspects,  which 
follow : 

The  brightness  of  his  glory  (awavyaafia  r^  S6^  atrrov). 
Of  God*s  glory.  For  brightness  rend,  effulgence.  ^Airavyaafia^ 
N.T.<>.  LXX,  only  Wisd.  vii.  26.  ®Class.  It  is  an  Alexan- 
drian word,  and  occurs  in  Philo.f  Interpretation  is  divided 
between  effulgence  and  reflection.  %    Effulgence  or  outraging 

*  Lightfoot,  on  Col.  i.  16. 

t  See  />«  Concupi9C.  xi :  De  Opif.  Mund.  §  li :  2>«  Plant.  No.  §  xli. 

t  Effulgence  is  the  rendering  of  the  Greek  fathers  and  of  the  majority  d 
modem  interpreters.  The  few  instances  of  the  word  elsewhere  give  little 
help  toward  a  decision,  since  in  most  if  not  all  of  them  the  meaning  is  dis- 
puted. The  reader  will  do  well  to  consult  Theodoret  on  this  passage ; 
Athanasius,  Contra  Arianoa,  Orat.  ii ;  Origen  on  John  xxxii.  18,  and  Horn. 


882  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Oh.  L 

accords  better  with  the  thought  of  the  passage ;  for  the  writer 
is  treating  of  the  preincamate  Son ;  and,  as  Alford  justly 
remarks,  ^^  the  Son  of  God  is,  in  this  his  essential  majesty,  the 
ea:preB9ion  and  the  sole  expression  of  the  divine  light ;  not,  as 
in  his  incarnation,  its  reflection.  **  The  consensus  of  the  Gre^ 
fathers  to  this  effect  is  of  great  weight.  The  meaning  then 
is,  that  the  Son  is  the  outraying  of  the  divine  glory,  exhibit- 
ing in  himself  the  glory  and  majesty  of  the  divine  Being. 
"  God  lets  his  glory  issue  from  himself,  so  that  there  arises 
thereby  a  light4>e%ng  like  himself"  (Weiss).  AJfa  ghry  is 
the  expression  of  the  divine  attributes  collectively.  It  is  the 
unfolded  fulness  of  the  divine  perfections,  differing  from 
IJLop^  0€ov  farm  of  God  (Philip,  ii.  6),  in  that  fiop4>v  is  the 
immediate,  proper,  personal  investiture  of  the  divine  essence. 
Arffa  is  attached  to  deity  :  iJLop^  is  identified  with  the  inmost 
being  of  deity.  AJfa  is  used  of  various  visible  displays  of 
divine  light  and  splendour,  as  Exod.  xxiv.  17  ;  Deut.  v.  24 ; 
Exod.  xl.  34  ;  Num.  xiv.  10  ;  xv.  19,  42 ;  Ezek.  x.  4 ;  xliii. 
4,  5 ;  i.  28 ;  iii.  23 ;  Lev.  ix.  23,  etc.  We  come  nearer  to 
the  sense  of  the  word  in  this  passage  in  the  story  of  Moseses 
vision  of  the  divine  glory,  Exod.  xxxiii.  18-23 ;  xxxiv.  5,  7. 

The  express  image  of  his  person  (xopoucriip  r^  vTroo-- 
Too-eoK  auTov),  Rend,  the  very  image  (or  impress)  of  his  sub- 
stance.  The  primary  sense  of  vTrrfoTcwtv  svhstance  is  something 
which  stands  underneath  ;  foundation^  ground  of  hope  or  confi- 
dence, and  so,  assurance  itself.  In  a  philosophical  sense,  sub- 
stantial nature  ;  the  real  nature  of  anything  which  underlies 
and  supports  its  outward  form  and  properties.  In  N.  T., 
2  Cor.  ix.  4 ;  xi.  17  ;  Heb.  iii.  14  ;  xi.  1,  signifying  in  every 
instance  ground  of  confidence  or  confidence.  In  LXX,  it  rep- 
resents fifteen  different  words,  and,  in  some  cases,  it  is  hard 
to  understand  its  meaning,  notably  1  Sam.  xiii.  21.  In  Rutli 
i.  12 ;  Ps.  xxxvii.  8  ;  Ezek.  xix.  5,  it  means  ground  of  hope: 
in  Judg.  vi.  4 ;  Wisd.  xvi.  21,  sustenance :  in  Ps.  xxxviii.  5 ; 

on  Jer,  iz.  4 ;  Chrysostom,  Horn,  li.  2.  See  also  Riehm,  Lehrbegriff  dc$ 
Hebrderbriefes,  278,  300,  408,  412. 


Ch.  I.]  THS  BPISTLE  TO  THB  HEBREWS.  883 

cxxxviii.  15,  the  substance  or  material  of  the  human  frame:  in 
1  Sam.  xiii.  23;  Ezek.  xxvi.  11,  an  otUpoet  or  garrison:  in 
Deut.  xi.  6 ;  Job  xxii.  20,  possessions.  The  theological  sense, 
person^  is  later  than  the  apostolic  age.  Here,  substantial 
nature^  essence.  X^apcucr^p  from  ^^apcuro-cii/  to  engrave  or 
inscribe^  originally  a  graving-tool ;  also  the  die  on  which  a 
device  is  cut.  It  seems  to  have  lost  that  meaning,  and  always 
signifies  the  impression  made  by  the  die  or  graver.  Hence, 
mark^  stamp^  as  the  image  on  a  coin  (so  often)  which  indicates 
its  nature  and  value,  or  the  device  impressed  by  a  signet. 
N.  T.^.  LXX,  Lev.  xiii.  28 ;  2  Mace.  iv.  10 ;  4  Mace.  xv.  4. 
The  kindred  x^^yt^^''^^^^  Acts  xvii.  29  ;  Apoc.  xiii.  16, 17. 
Here  the  essential  being  of  God  is  conceived  as  setting  its 
distinctive  stamp  upon  Christ,  coming  into  definite  and  char- 
acteristic expression  in  his  person,  so  that  the  Son  bears  the 
exact  impress  of  the  divine  nature  and  character. 

And  upholding  all  things  (j^ptov  re  rh  irdvra^.  Rend. 
maintaining.  Upholding  conveys  too  much  the  idea  of  the 
passive  support  of  a  burden.  ^^The  Son  is  not  an  Atlas,  sus- 
taining the  dead  weight  of  the  world  "  (quoted  by  Westcott). 
Neither  is  the  sense  that  of  ruling  or  guiding^  as  Philo  (JPe 
Cherub.  §  xi),  who  describes  the  divine  word  as  "  the  steers- 
man and  pilot  of  the  all.*'  It  implies  sustaining^  but  also 
movement.  It  deals  with  a  burden,  not  as  a  dead  weight,  but 
as  in  continual  movement ;  as  Weiss  puts  it,  ^^  with  the  all  in 
all  its  changes  and  transformations  throughout  the  aeons.'' 
It  is  concerned,  not  only  with  sustaining  the  weight  of  the 
universe,  but  also  with  maintaining  its  coherence  and  carry- 
ing on  its  development.  What  is  said  of  God,  Col.  i.  17,  is 
here  said  or  implied  of  Christ :  tA  irdvra  iv  airr^  ouviarqKev 
all  things  (collectively,  the  universe)  consist  or  maintain  their 
co?ierence  in  him.  So  the  Logos  is  called  by  Philo  the  bond 
{Sea/jw)  of  the  universe;  but  the  maintenance  of  the  coherence 
implies  the  guidance  and  propulsion  of  all  the  parts  to  a 
definite  end.  All  things  (tA  irdvrd)  collectively  considered ; 
the  universe  ;  all  things  in  their  unity.  See  ch.  ii.  10 ;  Rom. 
viii.  32 ;  xi.  86 ;  1  Cor.  viii.  6 ;  Eph.  i.  10 ;  Col.  i.  16. 


484  WOBD  STTDCBB  Cf  THE  NEW  TEBTAMESTT.         [Gb.1 

By  the  word  of  his  power  (r^  jnnum  tQ?  Swd^tm  oBmS). 
The  phrase  N.  T.^.,  but  comp.  L.  L  37,  and  see  note.  Tke 
ward  is  that  in  which  the  Son^s  power  manifests  itself.  'AtrroS 
Mm  refers  to  Christ.  Nothing  in  the  context  suggests  any 
other  reference.  The  world  was  called  into  being  by  the 
word  of  God  (ch.  xi.  8),  and  is  maintained  by  him  idio  is 
^the  very  image  of  God^s  substance.** 

When  he  had  by  himself  purged  our  sins  (ca^oyM^/ior 
r&p  afiopri&p  woirfirdfLiPo^y,  Omit  by  himself;  ^  yet  a  similar 
thought  is  implied  in  the  middle  voice,  iroii;o'a/ccvo9,  which 
indicates  that  the  work  of  purification  was  done  by  Christ 
personally^  and  was  not  something  which  he  caused  to  be  dans 
by  some  other  agent.  Purged^  lit.  having  made  purification. 
The  phrase  N.  T.^.  LXX,  Job  vii.  21.  KaJBapurfJuk  purifiosh 
tion  occurs  in  Mark,  Luke,  John,  2d  Peter,  ^P.,  and  only  here 
in  Hebrews.  The  verb  KoBapC^uv  to  purify  is  not  often  used 
in  N.  T.  of  cleansing  from  sin.  See  2  Cor.  vii.  1 ;  1  J.  i.  7, 9. 
Of  cleansing  the  conscience^  Heb.  ix.  14.  Of  cleansing 
meats  and  vessels^  Matt,  xxiii.  25, 26 ;  Mk.  vii.  19  ;  Acts  x.  15 ; 
xi.  9.  Of  cleansing  the  hearty  Acts  xv.  9.  The  meaning 
here  is  cleansing  of  sins.  In  the  phrase  *^  to  cleanse  from 
sin,"  always  with  airhfrom.  In  carrying  on  all  things  toward 
their  destined  end  of  conformity  to  the  divine  archetype,  the 
Son  must  confront  and  deal  with  the  fact  of  sin,  which  had 
thrown  the  world  into  disorder,  and  drawn  it  out  of  Grod*s 
order.  In  the  thought  of  making  purification  of  sins  is 
already  foreshadowed  the  work  of  Christ  as  high  priest, 
which  plays  so  prominent  a  part  in  the  epistle. 

Sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  the  majesty  on  high  {iK4$- 
Loeviv  Se^ia  rrj^  fieyaXeoavvij^  iv  in^Xoh^.  Comp.  Ps.  ex.  1 ; 
ch.  viii.  1 ;  x.  12  ;  xii.  2 ;  Eph.  i.  20 ;  Apoc.  iii.  21.  The 
verb  denotes  a  »olemn^  formal  act ;  the  assumption  of  a  posi- 
tion of  dignity  and  authority.  The  reference  is  to  Christ's 
ascension.    In  his  exalted  state  he  will  still  be  bearing  on  all 

*  Tbs  A.  V.  follows  the  T.  B.  <('  ^avroO,  which  is  a  gloss. 


Cb.  I.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  885 

things  toward  their  consummation,  still  dealing  with  sin  as 
the  great  high  priest  in  the  heavenly  sanctuary.  This  is 
elaborated  later.  See  ch.  yiii ;  ix.  12  ff .  MeyaXMowrj  maj- 
e9ty^  only  here,  ch.  yiii.  1 ;  Jude  25.  Quite  often  in  LXX. 
There  is  suggested,  not  a  contrast  with  his  humiliation,  but 
his  resumption  of  his  original  dignity,  described  in  the  for- 
mer part  of  this  verse.  'Ei/  v^Xofe,  lit.  in  the  high  pUiceM. 
Const,  with  sat  daum^  not  with  majesty.  The  phrase  N.  T.^. 
LXX,  Ps.  xcii.  4 ;  cxii.  5.  'Ey  roU  in^Caroi^  in  the  highest 
(places^  in  the  Gospels,  and  only  in  doxologies.  See  Matt. 
xxi.  9 ;  Mk.  xi.  10 ;  L.  ii.  14.  ^Ev  roh  hrovpavloL^  in  the 
heavenly  (^places^y  only  in  Eph.  See  i.  8,  20 ;  ii.  6 ;  iii.  10 ; 
vi.  12. 

4.  The  detailed  development  of  the  argument  is  now  intro- 
duced. The  point  is  to  show  the  superiority  of  the  agent  of 
the  new  dispensation  to  the  agents  of  the  old — the  angels 
and  Moses.    Christ's  superiority  to  the  angels  is  first  discussed. 

Being  made  so  much  better  than  the  angels  (roo-otny 
fcpeiTTODv  yevdfjLevo^  r&v  ayjiXtov),  The  informal  and  abrupt 
introduction  of  this  topic  goes  to  show  that  the  writer  was 
addressing  Jewish  Christians,  who  were  familiar  with  the 
prominent  part  ascribed  to  angels  in  the  O.  T.  economy, 
especially  in  the  giving  of  the  law.  See  on  Gal.  iii.  9.  For 
being  made^  rend,  having  become;  which  is  to  be  taken  in  close 
connection  with  sat  down^  etc.,  and  in  contrast  with  tbv  being^ 
ver.  3.  It  Lb  not  denied  that  the  Son  was  essentially  and 
eternally  superior  to  the  angels;  but  his  glorification  was 
conditioned  upon  his  fulfilment  of  the  requirements  of  his 
human  state,  and  it  is  this  that  is  emphasised.  After  having 
passed  through  the  experience  described  in  Philip,  ii.  6-8,  he 
sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  the  divine  majesty  as  messianic 
sovereign,  and  so  became  or  proved  to  be  what  in  reality  he  was 
from  eternity,  superior  to  the  angels.  Toaovr^ — &-y  so 
much — as.  Never  used  by  Paul.  Kpetrmv  better^  superior^ 
rare  in  Paul,  and  always  neuter  and  adverbial.  In  Hebrews 
thirteen  times.     See  also  1  Pet.  iii.  17 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  21.    Often 

VOL.  IV. — 26 


886  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Gte.  L 

in  LXX.  It  does  not  indicate  here  moral  exeettenee^  but  diff-^ 
nity  and  power.  He  became  superior  to  the  angels,  resuming 
his  preincamate  dignity,  as  he  had  been,  for  a  brief  period, 
less  or  lower  than  the  angels  (ch.  ii.  7).  The  superiority  of 
Messiah  to  the  angels  was  affirmed  in  rabbinical  writings. 

He  hath  by  inheritance  obtained  (jc&cKfiipovdiMiKai).  More 
neatly,  as  Rev.,  hath  inherited^  as  a  son.  See  ver.  2,  and  comp. 
Rom.  viii.  17.    For  the  verb,  see  on  Acts  ziiL  19,  and  1  Pet.  L  4. 

More  excellent  (iia^pArtpov).  Aui^po^  only  once  out- 
side of  Hebrews,  Rom.  xii.  6.  The  comparative  only  in 
Hebrews.  In  the  sense  of  more  excellent^  only  in  later  writers. 
Its  earlier  sense  is  different.  The  idea  of  difference  is  that 
which  radically  distinguishes  it  from  icpetrmv  better.  Here 
it  presents  the  comparative  of  a  comparative  conception. 
The  Son's  name  differs  from  that  of  the  angels,  and  is  more 
different  for  good. 

Than  they  (jrap*  avroi^).  Lit.  bends  or  in  eomparimm  with 
them.  Hap^,  indicating  compai*ison,  occurs  a  few  times  in 
Luke,  as  iii.  13 ;  xiii.  2 ;  xviii.  4.  In  Hebrews  always  to 
mark  comparison,  except  xi.  11, 12. 

5.  The  writer  proceeds  to  establish  the  superiority  of  the 
Son  to  the  angels  by  O.  T.  testimony.  It  is  a  mode  of  argu* 
ment  which  does  not  appeal  strongly  to  us.  Dr.  Bruce 
suggests  that  there  are  evidences  that  the  writer  himself 
developed  it  perfunctorily  and  without  much  interest  in  it. 
The  seven  following  quotations  are  intended  to  show  the  sur- 
passing excellence  of  Christ's  name  as  set  forth  in  Scripture. 
The  quotations  present  difficulty  in  that  they  appear,  in  great 
part,  to  be  used  in  a  sense  and  with  an  application  different 
from  those  which  they  originally  had.  All  that  can  be  said 
is,  that  the  writer  takes  these  passages  as  messianic,  and 
applies  them  accordingly ;  and  that  we  must  distinguish 
between  the  doctrine  and  the  method  of  argumentation  pecul- 
iar to  the  time  and  people.  Certain  passages  in  Paul  are 
open  to  the  same  objection,  as  Gal.  iii.  16 ;  iv.  22-25. 


C3h.  L]  TBGB  KPI8TLB  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  887 

To  which  (rivi).  Note  the  author's  characteristic  use  of 
the  question  to  express  denial.  Comp.  ver.  14 ;  ii.  8 ;  iii.  17 ; 
vii.  11;  xii.  7. 

First  quotation  from  Ps.  ii.  7.  The  Psahn  is  addressed  as 
a  congratulatory  ode  to  a  king  of  Judah,  declaring  his  coming 
triumph  over  the  surrounding  nations,  and  calling  on  them 
to  render  homage  to  the  God  of  Israel.  The  king  is  called 
Son  of  Jdhveht  and  is  said  to  be  ^^  begotten  "  on  the  day  on 
which  he  is  publicly  recognised  as  king.  Words  of  the  same 
Psalm  are  quoted  Acts  iv.  26,  and  these  words  Acts  xiii.  88. 

Thou  art  my  Son.  Note  the  emphatic  position  of  vlif;  «on. 
See  on  ver.  4.  In  the  O.  T.  Bon  is  applied  to  angels  coUeet" 
ively^  but  never  individually.  See  Ps.  xxix.  1 ;  Ixxxix.  6. 
Similarly,  9on  is  applied  to  the  chosen  nation,  Ex.  iv.  22; 
Hos.  xi.  1,  but  to  no  individual  of  the  nation. 

Have  I  begotten  (yeyAnnftca).  Recognised  thee  publicly 
as  sovereign  ;  established  thee  in  an  official  sonship-relation. 
This  official  installation  appears  to  have  its  N.  T.  counterpart 
in  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  In  Acts  xiii.  38,  this  is  dis- 
tinctly asserted  ;  and  in  Rom.  i.  4,  Paul  says  that  Christ  was 
"powerfully  declared"  to  be  the  Son  of  God  by  the  resurrec- 
tion from  tie  dead.     Comp.  Col.  i.  18;  Apoc.  i.  5.* 

Second  quotation,  2  Sam.  vii.  14.  The  reference  is  to 
Solomon.  David  proposes  to  build  a  temple.  Nathan  tells 
him  that  this  shall  be  done  by  Solomon,  whom  Jahveh  will 
adopt  as  his  son.  In  2  Cor.  vi.  18,  Paul  applies  the  passage 
to  followers  of  the  Messiah,  understanding  the  original  as 
referring  to  all  the  spiritual  children  of  David. 

*  Opinions  differ  as  to  the  sense  in  which  this  expression  is  applied  to  the 
Messiah.  Origen,  Athanasius,  Llinemann,  Alford,  Bleek,  the  eternal  gener* 
ation  of  the  Son :  Chrysostom,  Theodoret,  Ensebius,  Gregory  of  Nyssa,  the 
generation  of  the  Son  in  time :  De  Wette,  the  manifeetation  ofJesue  to  men 
a»  the  Son  of  Ood :  von  Soden,  the  establishment  of  the  Son  as  heir  in  the 
world  to  come.  The  reference  to  the  resurrection  is  held  by  Delitzsch,  West- 
cott,  Weiss,  Calvin.  According  to  these  different  explanations,  ff^/mpow  to-dag 
will  signify  eternity^  the  time  of  the  incarnation^  the  time  of  f)^  first  pro- 
phetic announcement  of  Christ  as  Son<,  the  time  of  the  ascension. 


888  WORV  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Cb.  L 

A  father — a  son  (e^  war^pa — ek  vl6v).  Lit.  far  or  as  a 
father  —  son.  This  usage  of  e&  mostly  in  O.  T.  citations  or 
established  formulas.  See  Matt.  xix.  5;  L.  ii.  84;  Acts 
xix.  27 ;  1  Cor.  iv.  8. 

6.  Third  quotation,  marking  the  relation  of  angels  to  the 
Son. 

And  again,  when  he  bringeth  in,  etc.  (Jkav  Bk  irdXiv  daa- 

70717).  Const,  again  with  bringeth  in.  ^^  When  he  a  second 
time  bringeth  the  first-begotten  into  the  world.'*  Re^f erring 
to  the  second  coming  of  Christ.  Others  explain  again  as 
introducing  a  new  citation  as  in  yer.  5;  but  this  would 
require  the  reading  wdXiv  Bk  irrav  and  again^  when.  In 
Hebrews,  iroKip^  when  joined  to  a  verb,  always  means  a  second 
time.  See  v.  12 ;  vi.  1,  2.  It  will  be  observed  that  in  this 
verse,  and  in  vv.  7,  8,  God  is  conceived  as  spoken  of  rather 
than  as  speaking;  the  subject  of  XSyei  saith  being  indefinite. 
This  mode  of  introducing  citations  differs  from  that  of  Paul. 
The  author's  conception  of  the  inspiration  of  Scripture  leads 
him  to  regard  all  utterances  of  Scripture,  without  regard  to 
their  connection,  as  distinct  utterances  of  God,  or  the  Holy 
Spirit,  or  the  Son  of  God ;  whereas,  by  Paul,  they  are  des- 
ignated either  as  utterances  of  Scripture  in  general,  or  of 
individual  writers.  Very  common  in  this  Epistle  are  the 
expressions,  "God  saith^  said,  spake,  testifieth,^^  or  the  like. 
See  ch.  ii.  11,  13 ;  iii.  7  ;  iv.  4,  7 ;  vii.  21 ;  x.  5,  8,  15,  80. 
Comp.  with  these  Rom.  i.  17 ;  ii.  24 ;  iv.  17 ;  vii.  7  ;  ix.  13  ; 
X.  5,  16,  20,  21 ;  xi.  2.  '^Orav  eUraydyp  whenever  he  shall 
have  brought.  The  event  is  conceived  as  occurring  at  an 
indefinite  time  in  the  future,  but  is  viewed  as  complete. 
Comp.  J.  xvi.  4  ;  Acts  xxiv.  22.  This  use  of  irav  with  the 
aorist  subjunctive  never  describes  an  event  or  series  of  events 
as  completed  in  the  past. 

The  first-begotten  (ihv  irpwr&roKov).  Mostly  in  Paul  and 
Hebrews.  Comp.  Rom.  viii.  29;  Col.  i.  15,  18;  Apoc.  i.  5. 
Uovori€inf:  only-begotten  (J.  i.  14,  18;   iii.  16, 18 ;   IJ.  iv.  9, 


Uh.  I.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO   THE   HEBREWS.  389 

never  by  Paul)  describes  the  unique  relation  of  the  Son  to 
the  Father  in  his  divine  nature:  irpcrnhoKo^  fir8t4>effotten 
describes  the  relation  of  the  risen  Christ  in  his  glorified 
humanity  to  man.  The  comparison  implied  in  the  word  is 
not  limited  to  angels.  He  is  the  first-born  in  relation  to  the 
creation,  the  dead,  the  new  manhood,  etc.  See  Col.  i.  15, 18. 
The  rabbinical  writers  applied  the  title  first-bom  even  to 
God.  Philo  (2>e  Confus.  Ling.  §  14)  speaks  of  the  Logos  as 
irporrdyopo^  or  Trpea-fivraro^  vuk  the  first-bam  or  eldest  son. 

And  let  all  the  angels  of  Qod  worship  him  (^fcal  vpoa- 
KvvqadrwTav  airr^  iravre^  dyjeXoi  Oeov).  npoatcvpelv  to  wor- 
ship  mostly  in  the  Gospels,  Acts,  and  Apocrypha.  In  Paul 
only  1  Cor.  xiv.  25.  Very  often  in  LXX.  Originally,  to 
kiss  the  hand  to:  thence,  to  do  homage  to.  Not  necessarily  of 
an  act  of  religious  reverence  (see  Matt.  ix.  18 ;  xx.  20),  but 
often  in  N.  T.  in  that  sense.  Usually  translated  worship^ 
whether  a  religious  sense  is  intended  or  not :  see  on  Acts 
X.  25.  The  quotation  is  not  found  in  the  Hebrew  of  the 
O.  T.,  but  is  cited  literally  from  LXX,  Deut.  xxxii.  43.  It 
appears  substantially  in  Ps.  xcvi.  7.  For  the  writer  of 
Hebrews  the  LXX  was  Scripture,  and  is  quoted  throughout 
without  regard  to  its  correspondence  with  the  Hebrew. 

7.  Fourth  quotation,  Ps.  ciii.  4,  varies  slightly  from  LXX 
in  substituting  aflame  of  fire  iov  flaming  fire. 

Who  maketh  his  angels  spirits  (o  iroi&v  roin^  ayy^Xov^ 
avToO  TTvev/jLara^.  For  spirits  rend,  vnnds.^  This  meaning 
is  supported  by  the  context  of  the  Psalm,  and  by  J.  iii.  8. 
Hvevfia  often  in  this  sense  in  Class.  In  LXX,  1  K.  xviii.  45  ; 
xix.  11 ;  2  K.  iii.  17 ;  Job  i.  19.  Of  breath  in  N.  T.,  2  Th. 
ii.  8 ;  Apoc.  xi.  11.  In  Hebrew,  spirit  and  wind  are  sjmony- 
mous.     The  thought  is  according  to  the  rabbinical  idea  of 

*  Bleek,  Ebrard,  Lttnemann,  Toy,  rend.  **  who  maketh  winds  his  mess- 
engers and  flames  of  fire  his  servants.**  This  is  defended  on  the  groond  of 
the  previous  * '  who  maketh  clouds  his  chariots.**  But  in  the  Hebrew  the  order 
of  our  passage  is  transposed ;  and  according  to  this  rendering  there  would  be 
no  allusion  to  angels. 


390  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [ClL  I 

the  variableness  of  the  angelic  nature.  Angels  were  sup* 
posed  to  live  only  as  they  ministered.  Thus  it  was  said: 
'^God  does  with  his  angels  whatever  he  will.  When  he 
wishes  he  makes  them  sitting:  sometimes  he  makes  them 
standing :  sometimes  he  makes  them  winds,  sometimes  fire." 
^^  The  subjection  of  the  angels  is  such  that  they  must  subnodt 
even  to  be  changed  into  elements."  ^^The  angel  said  to 
Manoah,  ^  I  know  not  to  the  image  of  what  I  am  made ;  for 
God  changes  us  each  hour:  wherefore  then  dost  thou  ask 
my  name?  Sometimes  he  makes  us  fire,  sometimes  wind.* " 
The  emphasis,  therefore,  is  not  on  the  fact  that  the  angels 
are  merely  servants,  but  that  their  being  is  such  that  they 
are  only  what  God  makes  them  according  to  the  needs  of 
their  service,  and  are,  therefore,  changeable,  in  contrast  with 
the  Son,  who  is  ruler  and  unchangeable.  There  would  be 
no  pertinency  in  the  statement  that  God  makes  his  angels 
spirits,  which  goes  without  saying.  The  Rabbis  conceived 
the  angels  as  perishable.  One  of  them  is  cited  as  saying, 
"  Day  by  day  the  angels  of  service  are  created  out  of  the  fire- 
stream,  and  sing  a  song,  and  disappear,  as  is  said  in  Lam.  iii. 
23, '  they  are  new  every  morning.' "  For  Xeirovpyoi^  mini9ter$^ 
see  on  miniftration^  L.  i.  23,  and  mini$tered^  Acts  xiii.  2. 

8.  Fifth  quotation,  Ps.  xlv.  7,  8.  A  nuptial  ode  addressed 
to  an  Israelitish  king.  The  general  sense  is  that  the  Messiah's 
kingdom  is  eternal  and  righteously  administered. 

Thy  throne,  O  Qod  (6  BpSvo^  aov  6  06O9).  I  retain  the 
vocative,  although  the  translation  of  the  Hebrew  is  doubtful. 
The  following  renderings  have  been  proposed  :  "  thy  throne 
(which  is  a  throne)  of  God  "  :  "  thy  throne  is  (a  throne)  of 
God  " :  "  God  is  thy  throne. "  Some  suspect  that  the  Hebrew 
text  is  defective. 

Forever  and  ever  (etv  rbv  al&va  roO  al&po^').  Lit.  unto  the 
aeon  of  the  aeon.*     See  additional  note  on  2  Th.  i.  9. 

*  ThlB  is  the  reading  of  the  LXX,  and  is  followed  by  Tlfchendorf  and 
Weiss.    Westcott  and  Hort  bracket  roO  aluvot. 


Ch.  IJ  the  epistle  to  the  HEBREWS.  391 

A  sceptre  of  righteousness  (1}  pdfiBo^  r^  cv^un^ro?) 
Rend,  the  sceptre.     The  phrase  N.  T.^.     ^LXX.     'Evdirffif 
lit.  9traighine$$^  N.  T.^.     It  occurs  in  LXX. 

9.  Iniquity  (avoiilav).     Lit.  Iawle99ne9$. 

Hath  anointed  (ixpuroT).  See  on  Chrut,  Matt.  i.  1.  The 
ideas  of  the  royal  and  the  festive  unction  are  combined. 
The  thought  includes  the  royal  anointing  and  the  fulness 
of  blessing  and  festivity  which  attend  the  enthronement. 

Oil  of  gladness  (iXcuov  a^iaWtcur^m).  The  phrase  N.T.^. 
^LXX.  ^krfaWlaai^  exultant  joy.  Comp.  L.  i.  44;  Acts 
ii.  46,  and  the  verb  ayaXXiAaOcu^  Matt.  v.  12 ;  L.  x.  21,  etc. 
The  noun  only  here  in  Hebrews,  and  the  verb  does  not  occur. 

Fellows  (/ierrfxow).  With  exception  of  L.  v.  7,  only  in 
Hebrews.  Lit.  partakeru.  In  the  Psalm  it  is  applied  to 
other  kings  :  here  to  angels. 

10.  Sixth  quotation  (10-12),  exhibiting  the  superior  dig- 
nity of  the  Son  as  creator  in  contrast  with  the  creature. 
Ps.  ci.  26-28.     The  Psalm  declares  the  eternity  of  Jahveh. 

And  —  in  the  beginning  (jcal —  Kar  apxdi^.  And  connects 
what  follows  with  unto  the  San  he  saith^  etc.,  ver.  8.  Kai^ 
apx^  in  the  beginning^  N.  T.^.  Often  in  Class.,  LXX  only 
Ps.  cxviii.  152.     The  more  usual  formula  is  iv  i^^xS  ^^  ^^* 

Hast  laid  the  foundation  (id€ii€\l»<rasi).  Only  here  in 
Hebrews.     In  Paul,  Eph.  iii.  18;  CoL  i.  28. 

11.  They  (ainoX).     The  heavens :  not  heaven  and  earth. 

Remainest  (hiaiUvwi).  Note  the  present  tense :  not  9haU 
remain.  Permanency  is  the  characteristic  of  God  in  the 
absohite  and  eternal  present. 


01^2  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Gb.  VL 

12.  Vesture  (irepifi^lXaiov).  Only  here  and  1  Cor.  xi.  5. 
From  irepifidXkeip  to  throw  around:  a  wrapper^  numUe. 

Shalt  thou  fold  them  up  (cXiJm  ovrov?).  Rather,  roU 
them  up.  A  scribal  error  for  aXXofm  Mhalt  change.  After 
these  words  the  LXX  repeats  it^  ifumop  a$  a  garment  from 
ver.  11. 

Shall  not  fail  (ovtc  ikXet^vaip).  Shall  not  be  ended. 
With  this  exception  the  verb  only  in  Luke's  Gospel.  See 
L.  xvi.  9 ;  xxii.  32 ;  xxiii.  45.     Very  frequent  in  LXX. 

13.  Seventh  quotation,  Ps.  cix.  No  one  of  the  angels 
was  ever  enthroned  at  God's  right  hand. 

Sit  (tcdOov).  Or  be  gifting,  as  distinguished  from  hcdBureif^ 
ver.  3,  which  marked  the  act  of  assuming  the  place. 

On  my  right  hand  (eic  Be^i&p  fiov).  Lit.  ^^from  my  right 
hand."  The  usual  formula  is  ip  Be^ia.  The  genitive  indi- 
cates moving  from  the  right  hand  and  taking  the  seat.  The 
meaning  is,  ^'be  associated  with  me  in  my  royal  dignity.'' 
Comp.  Dan.  vii.  13,  14,  and  the  combination  of  the  Psalm 
and  Daniel  in  Christ's  words,  Mk.  xiv.  62.  Comp.  also 
Matt.  xxiv.  30 ;  Acts  ii.  34 ;  1  Cor.  xv   25 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  22. 

14.  Ministering  spirits  (XeiToupyiKh  Trvevfiard).  Summing 
up  the  function  of  the  angels  as  compared  with  Christ. 
Christ's  is  the  highest  dignity.  He  is  co-ruler  with  God. 
The  angels  are  servants,  appointed  for  service  to  God  for  the 
sake  of  (St^)  the  heirs  of  redemption.  Aurovpyuch  minister" 
ingy  N.  T.^.     See  on  ministers,  ver.  7. 


CHAPTER  n. 

The  opening  words  of  this  chapter  illustrate  the  writer's 
habit  of  introducing  his  practical  exhortations  into  the  body 
of  his  argument,  unlike  Paul,  who  defers  them  until  the  end. 
Comp.  ch.  iii.  7-19;  v.  11. 


Ob.  n.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  893 

1.  Therefore  (&^  tovto).  Because  you  have  received  a 
revelation  superior  to  that  of  the  old  dispensation,  and  given 
to  you  through  one  who  is  superior  to  the  angels. 

To  give  the  more  earnest  heed  (vepurtrordpca^  irpoir^tiv). 
Lit.  to  give  heed  more  abundantly.  Upoa-dxieiv  to  give  Iieed^ 
lit.  to  hold  (the  mind)  to.  ^P.  The  full  phrase  in  Job  vii.  17. 
Mostly  in  Luke,  Acts,  and  the  Pastorals.  See  on  1  Tim.  i.  4. 
HepuraoT^pcK  more  abundanUt/^  in  Hebrews  only  here  and 
ziii.  19  :  elsewhere  only  in  Paul. 

To  the  things  which  we  have  heard  (rok  cucovaOeunp). 
Lit.  to  the  things  which  were  heard^  that  is,  from  the  messengers 
of  the  gospel.  Comp.  the  phrase  o  X(Pyo9  r^  axori^  the  word 
of  hearing^  ch.  iv.  2 ;  1  Th.  ii.  13.  ^Evayj^Xiov  gospel  does 
not  occur  in  the  Epistle,  and  evayyeXX^eaOai  to  proclaim  good 
tidings,  only  twice. 

We  should  let  them  slip  (irapapv&fiep).  Rend,  should  drift 
past  them.  N.  T.®.  Vroimrapit  by  3Jid  pelv  to  flow.  Of  the 
snow  slipping  off  from  the  soldiers'  bodies,  Xen.  Anab.  iv.  4, 
11 :  of  a  ring  slipping  from  the  finger,  Plut.  Amat.  754 : 
see  also  LXX,  Prov.  iii.  21,  and  Symmachus's  rendering  of 
Prov.  iv.  21,  "let  not  mj  words  flow  past  (irapappinjo'dTOM'ap) 
before  thine  eyes.''  The  idea  is  in  sharp  contrast  with  giving 
earnest  heed.  Lapse  from  truth  and  goodness  is  more  often 
the  result  of  inattention  than  of  design.  Drifting  is  a  mark 
of  death  :  giving  heed,  of  life.  The  log  drifts  with  the  tide  : 
the  ship  breasts  the  adverse  waves,  because  some  one  is  giving 
earnest  heed. 

2.  The  word  spoken  by  angels  (o  Si*  ayy4\»p  XaXtjOeU 
X(Pyo9).  The  Mosaic  legislation  which  was  conveyed  through 
the  mediation  of  angels.  Comp.  Deut.  xxxiii.  2  ;  Acts  vii.  38, 
53 ;  Gkd.  iii.  19,  on  which  see  note.  The  agency  of  angels 
indicates  the  limitations  of  the  legal  dispensation;  its  char- 
acter as  a  dispensation  of  the  flesh.  Hence  its  importance  in 
this  discussion.     The  abolition  of  the  old  limitations  is  the 


894  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ca.  IL 

emancipation  of  man  from  subordination  to  the  angels.  The 
O.  T.  is  made  to  famish  proof  that  such  subordination  is 
inconsistent  with  man's  ultimate  destiny  to  sovereignty  over 
all  creation. 

Was  steadfast  (iyivero  fidfiam).  Rend,  proved  ware: 
realised  itself  in  the  event  as  8ecui:iBl7  founded  in  the  divine 
holiness,  and  eternal  in  its  principles  and  obligations.  Comp. 
Matt.  V.  18. 

Transgression  and  disobedience  (irapdfiaav:  icai  irapaKOfi). 
Hapdffaai^  is  a  stepping  over  the  line  ;  the  violation  of  a  posi- 
tive divine  enactment.  See  on  Rom.  ii.  23.  Ila^Muco^,  only 
in  Paul  and  Hebrews,  is  a  disobedience  which  results  from 
neglecting  to  hear;  from  letting  things  dr\ft  by.  It  is  notice- 
able how  often  in  O.T.  obedience  is  described  as  hearing,  and 
disobedience  as  refusing  to  hear.  See  Ex.  xv.  26 ;  xix.  5,  8 ; 
xxiii.  22  ;  Josh.  i.  18 ;  Isa.  xxviii.  12 ;  xxx.  9 ;  Jer.  xi.  10 ; 
xxxii.  28  ;  xxxv.  16.     Comp.  Acts  vii.  67. 

A  just  recompense  of  reward  (hhucov  fuaOofxroSoalcaf). 
"EpBiko;  juet^  only  here  and  Rom.  iii.  8.  ^LXX,  quite 
frequent  in  Class.,  but  mainly  in  poetry.  The  meaning  is 
substantially  the  same  as  hUcuo^  as  it  appears  in  the  familiar 
phrase  iUcutk  el/u  with  the  infinitive  :  thus,  BUauk-  elfu  xoXd^- 
€iv  lam  right  to  punish^  that  is,  /  have  a  rights  etc.,  right  or 
justice  being  regarded  as  working  within  a  definite  circle. 
^urOairo^oala  recompense  only  in  Hebrews.  Comp.  x.  86 ; 
xi.  26.  ®LXX,  ^Class.,  where  the  word  is  fuaOoBoalcL  From 
fucOik  wages  and  a7roSiS6vcu  to  pay  off  or  discharge.  The 
reference  is,  primarily,  to  the  punishments  suffered  by  the 
Israelites  in  the  wilderness.  Comp.  ch.  iii.  16;  x.  28 
1  Cor.  X.  5,  6. 

3.  IHow  shall  we  escape  (wS^  ^fiek  iKtf>€v^fA€Oa^.  The 
rhetorical  question  expressing  denial.  We  is  emphatic.  We^ 
to  whom  God  has  spoken  by  his  Son,  and  who,  therefore,  have 
so  much  the  more  reason  for  giving  heed.    *E/ic^€i;fJ/A€^a,  lit. 


Ch.  IL]  THB  epistle  to  the  HEBREWS.  895 

fiee  outfnnn.  The  English  escape  conveys  the  same  idea,  but 
contains  a  picture  wliich  is  not  in  the  Greek  word,  namely, 
to  slip  out  of  one^s  cape^  ex  cappd^  and  so  get  away.  Comp. 
French  Schapper.  In  Italian  we  have  scappare  "  to  escape," 
and  also  incappare  ^^  to  fall  into  a  snare,''  and  ineappueiare 
^^  to  wrap  up  in  a  hood  or  cape ;  to  mask." 

If  we  neglect  (^ifieXi^avre^^.  Lit.  having  neffleeted.  Rare 
in  N.  T.,  ^P.  Comp.  Matt.  xxii.  6 ;  1  Tim-  iv.  14.  The 
thought  falls  in  with  dr\ft  past^  ver.  1. 

Salvation  (atamiplav).  Characterising  the  new  dispensa- 
tion, as  the  word  (ver.  2)  characterises  the  old.  Not  the 
teaching  or  word  of  salvation,  but  the  salvation  itself  which  is 
the  gift  of  the  gospel,  to  be  obtained  by  purification  from  sin 
through  the  agency  of  the  Son  (ch.  i.  8). 

Which  (^i9).  Explanatory.  A  salvation  which  may  be 
described  as  one  which  was  first  spoken  by  the  Lord,  etc. 

At  the  first  began  to  be  spoken  Capxh^  Xafiovaa  XaXeUr- 
OaC).  Lit.  having  taken  beginning  to  he  spoken.  Rend,  which^ 
having  at  the  first  been  spoken.     The  phrase  N.  T.^. 

By  the  Lord  (&^  rov  tcuplav).  Const,  with  apx^v  Xa/Sovo'a^ 
not  with  TixiXelaOai.  It  is  the  beginning^  not  the  speaking 
which  is  emphasised. 

Was  confirmed  (ifie/SauiOrf^.  It  was  sure  (^fi^fiaio^^  even 
as  was  the  word  spoken  by  angels  (ver.  2),  and  it  was  con^ 
firmed^  proved  to  be  real,  by  the  testimony  of  ear-witnesses. 

By  them  that  heard  (trrri  r&v  axowrdirmv).  We  heard  it 
(ver.  1)  from  those  who  heard,  the  immediate  followers  of 
the  Lord.  The  writer  thus  puts  himself  in  the  second  genera- 
tion of  Christians.  They  are  not  said  to  have  heard  the  gospel 
directly  from  the  Lord.  Paul,  on  the  other  hand,  claims  that 
he  received  the  gospel  directly  Irom  Christ  (Ghd.  i.  11). 


896  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  IL 

4.  God  also  bearing  them  witness  (awemfAoprvpov^Tat 
rov  deoO).  The  verb  N.  T.® :  avv  along  with  other  untne$$es: 
M  giving  additional  testimony :  futprvpetv  to  bear  witneu. 

With  Signs  and  wonders  (ariiieCoi^  re  tcai  rdpannv).  A 
very  common  combination  in  N.  T.  See  Matt.  xxiv.  24; 
Mk.  xiii.  22 ;  J.  iv.  48 ;  Acts  ii.  43 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  11,  etc. 
See  on  Matt.  xxiv.  24. 

Divers  miracles  (iroiKl\ai^  Bwd/uaiv).  Rend.  power$.  No 
doubt  the^  include  miracles,  see  Acts  ii.  22 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  12  ; 
hut  powers  signifies,  not  the  miraculous  mantfestations^  as  $iffn9 
and  wonders^  but  the  miraculous  energies  of  Grod  as  displayed 
in  his  various  forms  of  witness. 

Qifts  (^fieptafui^^.     Rend,  distributions  or  impartations. 

Of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  genitive  is  objective :  distriba- 
tions  of  the  one  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  different  measure 
and  in  different  ways.     Comp.  1  Cor.  xii.  4-11. 

According  to  his  will  (tcari,  rifv  airrov  OdXriaiv).  BfKfiavf 
willing :  his  act  of  will.  N.  T.®.  Const,  with  distribuHonB. 
The  Spirit  was  imparted  and  distributed  as  God  willed. 
The  hortatory  digression  ends  here.  The  subject  of  the 
Son's  superiority  to  the  angels  is  resumed. 

5.  The  writer's  object  is  to  show  that  the  salvation^  the 
new  order  of  things  inaugurated  by  Christ,  is  in  pursuance 
of  the  original  purpose  of  creation,  to  wit,  that  universal 
dominion  was  to  pertain  to  man,  and  not  to  angels.  The 
great  salvation  means  lordship  of  the  world  to  be.  This  pur- 
pose is  carried  out  in  Christ,  who,  in  becoming  man,  became 
temporarily  subject  to  the  earthly  dispensation  of  which 
angels  were  the  administrators.  This  was  in  order  that  he 
might  acquire  universal  lordship  as  man.  Being  now  exalted 
above  angels,  he  does  away  with  the  angelic  administration, 
and,  in  the  world  to  come,  will  carry  humanity  with  him  to 


Ch.  n.]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWS.  397 

the  position  of  universal  lordship.  This  thought  is  developed 
by  means  of  Ps.  viii.  Having  set  Christ  above  the  angels, 
the  writer  must  reconcile  that  claim  with  the  historical  fact 
of  Christ's  humiliation  in  his  incarnate  state.  The  Psalm 
presents  a  paradox  in  the  antithesis  of  lower  than  the  angels 
and  all  things  under  his  feet.  From  the  Psalm  is  drawn  the 
statement  of  a  temporary  subordination  of  Christ  to  angels, 
followed  by  his  permanent  exaltation  over  them. 

Hath  —  put  in  subjection  (Jnr^ra^af).  The  word  suggests 
an  economy ;  not  merely  subjecting  the  angels,  but  arranging 
or  marshalling  them  under  a  new  order.  See  1  Cor.  xv.  27,  28 ; 
Eph.  i.  22;  Philip,  iii.  21. 

The  world  to  come  (ri^p  oUovfAAnfv  t^i/  /jL^Wovaav^.  See 
on  ch.  i.  2.  For  ^  oUov/A4bnf  the  inhabited  (land  or  eomUry) 
see  on  L.  ii.  1.  The  world  to  come  means  the  new  order  of 
things  inaugurated  by  the  sacrifice  of  Christ. 

6.  In  a  certain  place  (wov).  Only  here  and  ch.  iv.  4, 
signifying  indefinite  quotation.  It  does  not  mean  that  the 
writer  is  ignorant  of  the  author  or  of  the  place,  but  assumes 
that  the  readers  know  it,  and  that  it  is  a  matter  of  no  moment 
who  said  it  or  where  it  is  written. 

Testified  (hietiapTvpdro').  Mostly  in  Luke  and  Acts.  Only 
here  in  Hebi*ews.  In  Paul  only  in  1st  Thessalonians.  See 
on  1  Th.  li.  12.     It  implies  a  solemn^  earnest  testimony. 

What  is  man.  The  Hebrew  interrogation,  np  what,,  what 
kind  of  implies  ^^  how  smaU  or  insignificant "  compared  with 
the  array  of  the  heavenly  bodies ;  not  "  Ju>w  great  is  man." 

The  son  of  man.  Hebrew  son  of  Adam^  with  a  reference 
to  his  earthly  nature  as  formed  out  of  the  dust.  Very  often  in 
Ezekiel  as  a  form  of  address  to  the  prophet,  LXX,  vU  avOpA- 
irov  son  of  man.  The  direct  reference  of  these  words  cannot 
be  to  the  Messiah,  yet  one  is  reminded  that  the  Son  of  man 
was  Christ's  own  title  for  himself. 


398  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [CSlL  H. 

Visitest  (iwurK^TTTp^.  The  primary  sense  of  the  verb  is  to 
look  upon;  hence,  to  look  after  or  inspect;  to  visit  in  order  to 
inspect  or  help.  Similarly  the  Latin  visere  means  both  to  look 
at  and  to  visit.  An  hrlaicoiro^  is  an  overlooker^  and  hrurteowii 
is  visitation.  The  verb  only  here  in  Hebrews,  ^P.,  very  often 
in  LXX.  See  on  Matt.  xxv.  36.  Here  in  the  sense  of  grae^ 
iously  and  helpfully  regarding  ;  caring  for. 

Thou  madest  him  a  little  lower  than  the  angels  (rpsdr- 
Twaa^  airrhv  fipayy  ri  trap  077^X01/9).  Rend,  thou  didst  for 
some  little  time  make  him  lower  than  the  angels.  'EXarrouv  to 
make  less  or  inferior^  only  here,  ver.  9,  and  J.  iii.  30.  Often 
in  LXX  (principally  Sirach).  B/>axv  rt,  the  Hebrew  as  A.  V. 
a  little  ;  of  degree.  The  LXX  translators  interpreted  it,  ap- 
parently, of  tiTTte,  ^^for  some  little  time."  Although  there  is 
precedent  for  both  meanings  in  both  Class,  and  N.  T.,  the 
idea  of  time  better  suits  the  whole  line  of  thought,  and  would 
probably,  as  Robertson  Smith  observes,  have  appeared  to  a 
Greek  reader  the  more  natural  interpretation.  For  this  sense 
see  Isa.  Ivii.  17 ;  Acts  v.  34.  He  who  has  been  described  as 
superior  to  the  angels,  was,  for  a  short  time,  on  the  same 
plane  with  man,  and  identified  with  an  economy  which  was 
under  the  administration  of  angels.  This  temporary  sub- 
ordination to  angels  was  followed  by  permanent  elevation 
over  them.  Wap  ayydXov^.  The  Hebrew  is  a^\pfi  than  Qod. 
Elohim  is  used  in  a  wide  sense  in  O.  T. :  see,  for  instance, 
Ps.  Ixxxii.  6,  where  God  addresses  the  judges  by  that  title, 
and  declares  that  he  himself  called  them  to  their  office  and 
gave  them  their  name  and  dignity.  Comp.  J.  x.  34  and 
Ps.  xxix.  1,  LXX  viol  Oeov  sons  of  Q-od^  A.V.  mighty.  The 
LXX  translators  understand  it,  not  as  representing  the  per- 
sonal God,  but  that  which  is  divine,  in  which  sense  it  would 
be  appropriate  to  angels  as  having  divine  qualities. 

8.  For  (7^/)).  Explanatory.  Thou  hast  put  all  things  in 
subjection  under  his  feet,  that  is  to  say^  nothing  is  excepted* 

That  is  not  put  under  him  (avr^  apvirdrateTov).  Lit. 
"  unsubjected  to  him. "  The  adjective  only  here  and  1  Tim.  i.  9 ; 


Ch.  n.]  THB  EPISTLB  TO  THB  HEBREWS.  899 

Tit.  i.  6.  But  this  ideal  is  not  yet  a  reality.  We  see  not  yet 
all  things  subjected  to  him,  but  we  do  see  the  germinal  ful- 
filment of  the  prophecy  in  Jesus'  life,  suffering,  and  death. 

9.  Jesus — made  a  little  lower,  etc.  Repeated  from  ver.  7. 
To  be  subordinated  to  the  angels  is  the  same  as  being  ^^  made 
under  the  law,"  Gal.  iv.  4.  In  that  chapter  Paul  shows  that 
the  law  under  which  the  church  in  its  state  of  pupilage  was 
kept  (Gal.  iii.  28 ;  iv.  8)  was  instituted  through  the  media- 
tion of  angels  (Gkd.  iii.  19).  Then,  as  interchangeable  with 
under  the  law^  Paul  has  ^^  enslaved  under  the  elements  (tnrb  r^ 
aroixBia)  of  the  world  "  (Gal.  iv.  8,  9).  These  elements  are 
elemented  forces  or  spirits  j  as  appears  from  a  correct  interpre- 
tation of  Col.  ii.  8,  20.*  The  subjection  to  elemental  spirits 
is  only  another  form  of  subjection  to  the  angels  of  the  law, 
and  our  author  uses  this  doctrine  to  show  the  mutable  nature 
of  angels  in  contrast  with  the  immutable  perfection  of  the 
Son  (see  ch.  i.  7,  8).  This  accords  with  the  Epistle  to  the 
Colossians  which  deals  with  the  heresy  of  angel-worship,  and 
in  which  the  worship  of  angels  is  represented  as  connected 
with  the  service  of  elemental  or  cosmic  forces.  Very  strik- 
ing is  Col.  ii.  15.  When  the  bond  of  the  law  was  rendered 
void  in  Christ's  crucifixion,  that  ministry  of  angels  which 
waited  on  the  giving  of  the  law  was  set  aside  by  God  (air€K- 
SwrafA€iHi^  having  stripped  off^^  revealing  Christ  as  the  head 
of  every  principality  and  power.  God  made  a  show  or  display 
of  them  (iBeiyfjLdrurev)  as  subordinate  and  subject  to  Christ. 
He  thus  boldly  (iv  irappfifrUf)^  by  a  bold  stroke,  put  his  own 
chosen  ministers  in  subjection  before  the  eyes  of  the  world. 
See  on  Col.  ii.  15.  The  use  of  the  human  name,  Jesus,  at 
\hvs  point,  is  significant.  In  this  epistle  that  name  usually 
furnishes  the  key  to  the  argument  of  the  passage  in  which  it 
occurs.     See  ch.  iii.  1 ;  vi.  20 ;  xii.  2. 

•  On  this  sabject  see  T.  K.  Abbott,  InUmational  Commentary  on  Ck>l.  ii.  S, 
and  compare  Lightfoot,  Commentary  on  ColosHans,  ad  loc.  Also  Yon  Soden 
ad  loc  in  Hand-Commentar  on  Colostians;  Professor  Hincks  in  Journal  of 
Biblical  Literature^  VoL  XV.,  1S06 ;  Otto  Eferling,  Die  pauUniteke  AngeUh 
logie  und  Daemonologie^  p.  66  2L 


400  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Gb.  H 

For  the  suffering  of  death  crowned  with  glory  and 
honour  (&^  rb  irdOrnia  rov  Oavdrov  S6fy  teal  ri^y  iart^tam- 
lUyov).  The  usual  interpretation  connects /<>r  the  tuffering 
of  death  with  made  lower  than  the  angels^  meaning  that  Jesus 
was  subordinated  to  the  angels  for  the  suffering  of  death* 
But  for  the  euffering  of  death  should  be  connected  wiUi 
crowned^  etc.  Ai^  should  be  rendered  hecauBe  of.  Jesus  was 
crowned  with  glory  and  honour  because  of  the  suffering  of 
death.  Christ's  exaltation  and  preeminence  over  the  angels 
was  won  through  humiliation  and  death.  For  crowned^  see 
on  2  Tim.  ii.  5.  Exaltation  was  the  logical  result  of  Christ*s 
humiliation  (comp.  Philip,  ii.  9),  not  simply  its  recompense 
(comp.  Matt,  xxiii.  12;  L.  xiv.  11;  xviii.  14).  He  was 
glorified  in  humiliation.  ^  The  humiliation  is  only  the  glory 
not  yet  begun."  • 

By  the  grace  of  God  (x^^i  dcoO).  God  manifested  his 
grace  in  giving  Christ  the  opportunity  of  tasting  death  for 
every  man,  and  so  abolishing  death  as  a  curse.  The  same 
thought  of  glory  in  humiliation  is  expressed  in  J.  i.  14.  To 
be  called  to  the  office  of  ^^  apostle  and  high-priest  of  our  con- 
fession "  (ch.  iii.  1),  an  office  which  involved  personal  humili- 
ation and  death,  was  to  be  ^^  crowned  with  glory  and  honour,'' 
and  was  a  signal  token  of  God's  favour.  Note  J.  xii.  23,  28 ; 
xiii.  31,  32,  in  which  Jesus  speaks  of  his  approaching  passion 
as  itself  his  glorification.  Comp.  Heb.  iii.  3.  It  was  desir- 
able to  show  to  Jews  who  were  tempted  to  stumble  at  the 
doctrine  of  a  crucified  Messiah  (Gal.  iii.  13),  that  there  was 
a  glory  in  humiliation.! 

Should  taste  death  (yewnfrai  Oavdrov).  The  phrase  is 
found  several  times  in  the  Gospels,  as  Matt.  xvi.  28 ;  Mk.  ix.  1; 
L.  ix.  27  i  J.  viii.  52.     See  on  L.  ix.  27 ;  J.  viii.  52. 

•  Schmidt,  An.  **  Stand  doppelter  Christi,'*  Herzog,  Beal  Encyc 
t  Findlay,  Expositor,  3d  ser.  ix.  220,  calls  attention  to  the  fact  that  iikar* 
TiafUpop  and  iffre^vtatUvop  are  in  the  same  tense  and  grammatical  form,  indi- 
cating contemporary  rather  than  successive  states.  For  x^P<^<  ^^  ^  ^ 
grace  of  Ood,  some  texts  read  x«P^»  ^^^  apart  from  Ood.  So  Weiss.  On 
this  reading  interpretations  differ,  as,  apart  from  divinity  :  for§aken  by  Ood; 
for  all,  Ood  orUy  exceed  (  /). 


Cb.  IL]  THX  epistle  to  the  HEBBEW8.  401 

The  following  statement  justifies  the  bold  assertion  of  ver.  9. 
With  a  view  to  the  recoil  of  Jewish  readers  from  the  thought 
of  a  suffering  Messiah  (1  Cor.  i.  23),  the  writer  will  show 
that  Jesus'  suffering  and  death  were  according  to  the  divine 
fitness  of  thing^. 

10.  It  became  (hrpeirof) .  Not  logical  necesiity  (&*,  ver.  1), 
nor  obligation  growing  out  of  eircu7n$tances  (cS^iXcv,  ver.  17), 
but  an  inner  fitne$s  in  God's  dealing.  Dr.  Robertson  Smith 
observes  :  ^*  The  whole  course  of  nature  and  grace  must  find 
its  explanation  in  God ;  and  not  merely  in  an  abstract  divine 
arbitrium^  but  in  that  which  befits  the  divine  nature." 

For  whom  —  by  whom  (&'  Sv — &*  oS).  For  whom^  that 
is,  for  whose  $ake  all  things  exist.  God  is  the  final  cause  of 
all  things*  This  is  not  =  ek  ainiv  rh  irdma  unto  whom  are 
all  things^  Rom.  xi.  86 ;  which  signifies  that  all  things  have 
their  retdieation  in  God;  while  this  means  that  all  things 
have  their  reason  in  God.  By  whom^  through  whose  agency^ 
all  things  came  into  being.  On  &^  applied  to  God,  see  on 
ch.  i.  2.  These  two  emphasise  the  idea  of  fitness.  It  was 
becoming  even  to  a  God  who  is  the  beginning  and  the  end  of 
all  things. 

In  bringing  many  eons  unto  glory  (^roXXoi^  vioiii  ek  Sd^av 
ayay6vTa^.  Const,  bringing  with  him;*  not  with  captain^ 
which  would  mean  ^to  perfect  the  captain,  etc.,  as  one  who 
led  many  sons,  etc."  *Ayay6vTa  is  not  to  be  explained  who 
had  brought^  or  qfter  he  had  brought^  with  a  reference  to  the 
O.  T.  saints,  ^^  after  he  had  brought  many  O.  T.  sons  of  God 
unto  glory";  but  rather,  bringing  as  he  did^  or  in  bringing^ 
as  A.  y.f  Many  sons^  since  their  leader  himself  was  a  son. 
Unto  glory^  in  accordance  with  the  glory  with  which  he 
himself  had  been  crowned  (ver.  9).     The  glory  is  not  dis- 

•  For  the  ooDBtniction  see  Moolton's  Winer,  p.  402 ;  and  for  limUar  in- 
ffUnoee,  L.  L  74 ;  Acta  zi.  18 ;  xv.  22 ;  zzr.  27. 

t  The  Vulgate  has  **qni  moltos  filioe  in  gioriam  adduieroV^  For  the 
conetroction  see  Barton,  New  Tettament  Moods  and  Tsmses^  1 140. 

VOL.  IT.— 26 


402  WORD  8TIJDI£S  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.IL 

tingoished  from  the  salvation  immediately  following.  For 
the  combination  salvcUian  and  glory  see  2  Tim.  ii.  10; 
Apoc.  xiz.  1. 

To  make  perfect  (reKeiwrai).  Lit.  to  cany  to  the  goat  or 
consummation.  The  ^'perfecting"  of  Jesus  corresponds  to  his 
being  "  crowned  with  glory  and  honour,"  although  it  is  not  a 
mere  synonym  for  that  phrase ;  for  the  writer  conceives  the 
perfecting  not  as  an  act  but  as  a  process.  ^^  To  make  perfect " 
does  not  imply  moral  imperfection  in  Jesus,  but  only  the 
consummation  of  that  human  experience  of  sorrow  and  pain 
through  which  he  must  pass  in  order  to  become  the  leader  of 
his  people's  salvation. 

The  captain  of  their  salvation  (top  hpxn^^  '^  aernipla/i 
air&v).  Comp.  Acts  v.  31.  *A.pxvy^  captain^  quite  frequent 
in  LXX  and  Class.  Rev.  renders  aiUhor^  which  misses  the 
fact  that  the  Son  precedes  the  saved  on  the  path  to  glory. 
The  idea  is  rather  leader^  and  is  fairly  expressed  by  captain. 

11.  In  order  to  bring  many  sons  unto  glory,  Christ  assumes 
to  them  the  relation  of  brother. 

He  that  sanctifieth  (o  ayid^av).  Sanctification  is  the  path 
to  glorification.     Comp.  Heb.  x.  14. 

Of  one  (i^  €1^).  Probably  God,  although  the  phrase  may 
signify  of  one  piece^  or  of  one  whole.  Jesus  and  his  people 
alike  have  God  for  their  father.  Therefore  they  are  breth- 
ren, and  Christ,  notwithstanding  his  superior  dignity,  is  not 
ashamed  to  call  them  by  that  name. 

12.  This  acknowledgment  as  brethren  the  writer  fepre- 
sents  as  prophetically  announced  by  Messiah  in  Ps.  xxii.  22. 
The  Psalm  is  the  utterance  of  a  sufferer  crying  to  God  for 
help  in  the  midst  of  enemies.  The  Psalmist  declares  that 
God  has  answered  his  prayer,  and  that  he  will  give  public 
thanks  therefor. 


Ch.  n.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  408 

Unto  my  brethren  (roU  &fie\^«9  fu>t;).  His  brethren  in 
the  worshipping  assembly.  This  is  applied  by  our  writer  to 
the  human  brotherhood  at  large,  and  Christ  is  represented 
as  identifying  himself  with  them  in  thanksgiving. 

Will  I  sing  praise  unto  thee  (v/ii^co  o-e).  Rare  in  N.  T. 
Matt.  xxvi.  80 ;  Mk.  xiv.  26  ;  Acts  xvi.  25.  Lit.  hymn  thee. 
Often  in  the  Greek  liturgies. 

18.  I  will  put  my  trust,  etc.  Isa.  viii.  17, 18.  The  pas- 
sage occurs  in  an  invective  against  the  people's  folly  in  trust- 
ing to  any  help  but  God*s  during  the  Syro-Israelitish  war 
under  Ahaz.  The  prophet  is  commanded  to  denounce  those 
who  trusted  to  soothsayers  and  not  to  God,  and  to  bind  and 
seal  God's  testimony  to  the  righteous  party  who  maintained 
their  confidence  in  him — a  party  comprising  the  disciples  of 
Isaiah,  and  in  whom  lies  the  prophet's  hope  for  the  future  of 
Israel.  Isaiah  declares  his  own  faith  in  God,  and  announces 
that  he  and  his  children  have  been  appointed  as  living  sym- 
bols of  the  divine  will,  so  that  there  is  no  need  of  applying  to 
necromancers.  The  names  of  the  children  are  Shear-jashub 
a  remnant  shall  return^  and  Maher-shalal-hash-baz  haste-^poUr 
hurry-prey.  These  names  will  teach  Israel  that  Assyria  will 
spoil  Damascus  and  Samaria ;  and  that,  in  the  midst  of  foreign 
invasion,  God  will  still  be  with  Judah,  and  will  make  a  nation 
of  the  remnant  which  the  war  shall  leave.  The  prophet  and 
his  children  are  thus  omens  of  the  nation's  fortunes.  The 
children  were  babes  at  this  time,  and  ^Hhe  only  unity  which 
existed  among  them  was  that  which  exists  between  every 
father  and  his  children,  and  that  which  resulted  from  their 
belonging  to  the  same  prophetic  household  and  all  bearing 
symbolic  names  (without  knowledge  of  the  fact  on  the  part 
of  the  children)."  •  Our  writer  ignores  the  historical  sense 
of  the  words,  takes,  a  part  of  a  sentence  and  puts  a  messianic 
meaning  into  it,  inferring  from  it  the  oneness  of  Jesus  and 
his  people,  and  the  necessity  of  his  assuming  their  nature  in 
order  to  be  one  with  them.     He  treats  the  two  parts  of  the 

•  VnJmam  Toy,  iiw)iatUm$  1m  the  New  TeetammU. 


404  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NEW  TB3TAJCEMT.       [GiL  IL 

passage  separately,  emphasismg  in  the  first  part  Messiah^s 
trust  in  God  in  common  with  his  human  brethreni  and  insert- 
ing iji»  I  into  the  LXX  text  in  order  to  call  special  attention 
to  the  speaker  as  Messiah.  In  the  second  paj-t,  he  expresses 
the  readiness  of  himself  and  his  children  to  carry  out  God's 
will. 

14.  The  children  (rh  iroiSid).  Children  of  men,  tbe  sab- 
jects  of  Christ's  redemption. 

Are  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood  (jcacoufArnitcG^  alftarm 
KoX  aap/uk).  For  tcetcoivwrfxev  see  on'  Rom.  xii.  13.  For 
fle$h  and  blood  the  correct  text  reads  blood  and  fie9h.  In 
rabbinical  writers  a  standing  phrase  for  human  nature  in 
contrast  with  God. 

Likewise  (irapairXtiaCm).  Rend,  in  like  manner.  N.  T.^. 
Expressing  general  similarity.  He  took  his  place  alongeide 
(irapii)  and  near  (irXtfcuk^  :  near  by. 

Took,  part  (fAcrdaxev)'  The  verb  only  in  Hebrews  and 
Paul.  The  distinction  between  it  and  ic&coivAwiicGf  were  par-' 
takers  is  correctly  stated  by  Westcott ;  the  latter  marking 
the  characteristic  sharing  of  the  common  fleshly  nature  as  it 
pertains  to  the  human  race  at  large,  and  the  former  signify- 
ing the  unique  fact  of  the  incarnation  as  a  voluntary  accept- 
ance of  humanity. 

He  might  destroy  (jcarapyriajf).  Rend,  bring  to  nought. 
See  on  cumbereth^  L.  xiii.  7,  and  make  of  none  effect,  Rom.  iii.  3. 
The  word  occurs  27  times  in  N.  T.,  and  is  rendered  in  17 
di£Ferent  ways  in  A.  V. 

Him  that  had  the  power  of  death  (jov  rh  icpdrt^  ix^vra 
rov  Oavdrov).  Not  power  over  death,  but  sovereignty  or  domin- 
ion  of  deaths  a  sovereignty  of  which  death  is  the  realm. 
Comp.  Rom.  v.  21,  ^^Sin  reigned  in  death." 

That  it  the  devil.  An  explanation  has  been  sought  in 
the  Jewish  doctrine  which  identified  Satan  with  Sammael, 


Ch.  IL]  the  EPISTLB  to  the  HEBSXW8.  406 

the  angel  of  death,  who,  according  to  the  later  Jews,  tempted 
Eve.  This  is  fanciful,  and  has  no  value,  to  say  nothing  of 
the  fact  that  Michael  and  not  Sammael  was  the  angel  of  death 
to  the  Israelites.  The  O.  T.  nowhere  identifies  Satan  with 
the  serpent  in  Eden.  That  identification  is  found  in  Wiad. 
ii.  24,  and  is  adopted  Apoc.  xii.  9.  The  devil  has  not  power 
to  inflict  death,  nor  is  death,  as  such,  done  away  by  the 
bringing  of  the  devil  to  nought.  The  sense  of  the  passage 
is  that  Satan's  dominion  in  the  region  of  death  is  seen  in  the 
existence  and  power  of  the  fear  of  death  as  the  penalty  of  sin 
(comp.  thnyughfear  of  deaths  ver.  15).  The  fear  of  death  as 
implying  rejection  by  God  is  distinctly  to  be  seen  in  O.  T. 
It  appears  in  the  utterances  of  many  of  the  Psalmists.  There 
is  a  consciousness  of  the  lack  of  a  pledge  that  God  will  not, 
in  any  special  case,  rise  up  against  one.  Along  with  this 
goes  the  conception  of  Satan  as  the  accuser,  see  Zech.  iii. 
This  idea  may  possibly  give  colouring  to  this  passage.  Even 
before  death  the  accuser  exercises  sway,  and  keeps  God's 
people  in  bondage  so  long  as  they  are  oppressed  with  the 
fear  of  death  as  indicating  the  lack  of  full  acceptance  with 
God.  How  strongly  this  argument  would  appeal  to  Hebrew 
readers  of  the  Epistle  is  clear  from  rabbinical  theology,  which 
often  speaks  of  the  fear  of  death,  and  the  accuser  as  a  con- 
stant companion  of  man's  life.  Jesus  assumes  the  mortal 
flesh  and  blood  which  are  subject  to  this  bondage.  He 
proves  himself  to  be  both  exempt  from  the  fear  of  death  and 
victorious  over  the  accuser.  He  never  lost  his  sense  of  one- 
ness with  God,  so  that  death  was  not  to  him  a  sign  of  separ- 
ation from  God's  grace.  It  was  a  step  in  his  appointed 
career ;  a  means  (St^  rot)  Oavdrov)  whereby  he  accomplished 
his  vocation  as  Saviour.  His  human  brethren  share  his 
exemption  from  the  bondage  of  the  fear  of  death,  and  of  the 
accusing  power  of  Satan.  ^^  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son 
hath  eternal  life.'*  "Whether  we  live  or  die  we  are  the 
Lord's."* 

•  I  dedre  to  acknowledge  my  obligation  in  the  notes  on  this  pMsage  to 
the  yery  suggestive  aeries  of  articlea  by  Dr.  W.  Robertson  Smith  on  *'  Christ 
and  the  Angela,'*  jeqKMftor,  Sd  aer.  Yola.,  IL,  IIL 


446  WOKD  gftlHlB  a  ZHS  SXW  TZSZAMSST         GC^  IL 


15.  Dtlitm  (iwmXkJ^y  Qnlj  here  in  Hehrewa,  and 
htmdt^  otilj  L.  ziL  38 ;  AcU  zix«  12.  TolenUj  often  in 
LXX.  Verj  common  in  Clasi.  Used  here  aheolntetj*  not 
with  iavXiiaf  hmdagt^  reading  idiwtrfnm  iomdage. 

Subject  to  bondage  (jbnx^  ImXdak).  'Epdx0»  £nnn  ^ 
in  and  e^ciF  to  hold.  Lit.  i^liifii  ^  bomdoffe.  See  on  Jaa. 
ii.  10.  Comp.  the  verb  Ip^^^j^sf,  Mk.  tL  19  (note),  and  (SaL 
T.  1.     AovXe^  ioiulajpie  only  in  Hebrews  and  PaoL 

16.  Verily  (&rree).    N.  T.^    iXwMett,  m  u  mS  inem. 

Took  fiot  on  him  (ov  hnXat^fiamtrai).  Bend.  Ae  cloCi  iiel 
taie  A4>U.  Comp.  Matt.  xiv.  31 ;  Mk.  viii.  23 ;  Acta  xriiL  17. 
Abaolntelj,  in  the  sense  of  help^  Sir.  iv.  11.  The  Greek  and 
Latin  fathers  explained  the  verb  in  the  sense  of  tt/yroprurfmy. 
He  did  not  appit^iiate  the  nature  of  angels.  Angels  did  not 
need  to  be  deUyered  from  the  fear  of  death. 

The  nature  of  angels  (ivffiXmp).  The  natwre  is  not  in 
the  Greek,  and  does  not  need  to  be  supplied  if  JwiXafAfidw- 
eroi  is  properly  translated.  Rend.  moC  cf  angeU  doth  he  take 
hold.     It  is  not  angels  who  receive  his  help. 

The  seed  of  Abraham.  The  one  family  of  God,  consist- 
ing of  believers  of  both  dispensations,  but  called  by  its  O.  T* 
name.  See  Ps.  cv.  6 ;  Isa.  xli.  8,  and  comp.  Gal.  iii.  29. 
The  O.  T.  name  is  selected  because  the  writer  is  addressing 
Jews.  The  entire  statement  in  w.  16, 17  is  not  a  mere  repe- 
tition of  vv.  14, 15.  It  carries  out  the  line  of  thought  and 
adds  to  it,  while  at  the  same  time  it  presents  a  parallel  argu- 
ment to  that  in  vv.  14,  15.  Thus :  w.  14, 15,  Christ  took 
part  of  flesh  and  blood  that  he  might  deliver  the  children  of 
God  from  the  fear  of  death  and  the  accusations  of  Satan : 
vv.  16,  17,  Christ  takes  hold  of  the  seed  of  Abraham,  the 
church  of  God,  and  is  made  like  unto  his  brethren,  tempted 
as  they  are,  in  order  that  he  may  be  a  faithful  high  priest, 
making  reconciliation  for  sin,  thus  doing  away  with  the  fear 


Ch.  IL]  the  EPI8TLB  TO  THS  HSBREWS.  407 

of  death,  and  enabling  his  people  to  draw  near  to  God  with 
boldness.  Comp.  ch.  iv.  16, 16.  Christ  gives  that  peculiar 
help  the  necessity  of  which  Was  exhibited  in  the  O.  T.  econ- 
omy under  which  the  original  seed  of  Abraham  lived.  The 
fear  of  death,  arising  from  the  consciousness  of  sin,  could  be 
relieved  only  by  the  intervention  of  the  priest  who  stood 
between  God  and  the  sinner,  and  made  reconciliation  for  sin. 
Jesus  steps  into  the  place  of  the  high  priest,  and  perfectly 
fulfils  the  priestly  office.  By  his  actual  participation  in  the 
sorrows  and  temptations  of  humanity  he  is  fitted  to  be  a  true 
sympathiser  with  human  infirmity  and  temptation  (ch.  v.  2), 
a  merciful  and  faithful  high  priest,  making  reconciliation 
for  sin,  and  thus  abolishing  the  fear  of  death. 

17.  Wherefore  (Mev^.    ^P.     Often  in  Hebrews. 

In  all  things  to  be  made  like  unto  his  brethren  (^tcarl^ 
wdirra  roi9  i&X^fe  ofJLouoOfjPoi).  Comp.  Philip,  ii.  7,  iv 
ofJLouifiaTi  avOpArirmv  y€v6fi€P0^  having  become  in  the  likene$$  of 
men.  Likeness  is  asserted  without  qualification.  There  was 
a  complete  and  real  likeness  to  humanity,  a  likeness  which 
was  closest  just  where  the  traces  of  the  curse  of  sin  were 
most  apparent  —  in  poverty,  temptation,  and  violent  and 
unmerited  death. 

It  behooved  (cSi^iXcv).  Indicating  an  obligation  growing 
out  of  the  position  which  Christ  assumed :  something  which 
he  owed  to  his  position  as  the  helper  of  his  people. 

That  he  might  be  a  merciful  and  faithful  high   priest 

(Jpa  ikeijfjMv  ydinfTcu  tcaX  irurro^  iipx^peis).  Rend,  that  he 
might  he  companionate^  and  $o  (in  consequence  of  being  com- 
passionate), a  faitJ^fid  high  prieet.  The  kejmote  of  the 
Epistle,  the  high-priesthood  of  Christ,  which  is  intimated  in 
ch.  i.  8,  is  here  for  the  first  time  distinctly  struck.  Having 
shown  that  Christ  delivers  from  the  fear  of  death  by  nullify- 
ing the  accusing  power  of  sin,  he  now  shows  that  he  does 
this  in  his  capacity  of  high  priest,  for  which  office  it  was 


408  WORD  nUDlES  IN  THE  NKW  TnTAXBNT.        Gk.  IL 

necessary  that  he  should  be  made  like  unto  his  human  breth- 
ren. In  the  O.  T.  economy,  the  fear  of  death  was  especially 
connected  with  the  approach  to  Gt>d  of  an  impure  worshipper 
(see  Num.  xviii.  3,  5).  This  fear  was  mitigated  or  removed 
by  the  intervention  of  the  Levitical  priest,  since  it  was  the 
special  charge  of  the  priest  so  to  discharge  the  service  of  the 
tabernacle  that  there  might  be  no  outbreak  of  divine  wrath 
on  the  children  of  Israel  (Num.  xviii.  5).  TAnfrai  might 
$haw  himself  to  be^  or  prove  to  be.  The  idea  of  compassion 
as  an  attribute  of  priests  is  not  found  in  the  O.  T.  On  the 
contrary,  the  fault  of  the  priests  was  their  frequent  lack  of 
sympathy  with  the  people  (see  Hoe.  iv.  4-9).  In  the  later 
Jewish  history,  and  in  N.  T.  times,  the  priestly  aristocracy 
of  the  Sadducees  was  notoriously  unfeeling  and  cruel.  The 
idea  of  a  compassionate  and  faithful  high  priest  would  appeal 
powerfully  to  Jewish  readers,  who  knew  the  deficiency  of  the 
Aaronic  priesthood  in  that  particular.  Hurrh^  faithfilt  as  an 
attribute  of  a  priest,  appears  in  1  Sam.  ii.  85.  The  idea  there 
is  fdelity.  He  will  do  all  that  is  in  God's  mind.  Comp. 
Heb.  iii.  2.  This  implies  truetworthineee.  The  idea  here  is, 
faithful  in  filling  out  the  true  ideal  of  the  priesthood  (ch. 
V.  1,  2),  by  being  not  a  mere  ceremonialist  but  a  compas- 
sionate man. 

In  things  pertaining  to  God  (rk  wp^  rhv  0e6v).  Comp. 
Rom.  XV.  17.  A  technical  phrase  in  Jewish  liturgical  lan- 
guage to  denote  the  functions  of  worship.  Const,  with  a 
faithful  high  priest^  not  with  compassionate. 

To  make  reconciliation  (^ek  ro  IXdaKeOcu).  See  on  pro- 
pitiation^ Rom.  iii.  25.     The  verb  only  here  and  L.  xviii.  18. 

18.  In  that  he  himself  hath  suffered  being  tempted  (ip 
f  yitp  7r4irov0€P  airm  Treipa^rffek) .  Rend,  for  having  himself 
been  tempted  in  that  which  he  suffered.  The  emphasis  is  on 
having  been  tempted.  Christ  is  the  succourer  of  the  tempted 
because  he  has  himself  been  tempted.     'Ei^  ^  is  not  inasmuch 


ch.  hi.]  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  409 

as,  but  means  in  that  which.  *Ev  ^  iriirovOaf  qualifies  ireipaa-' 
0€k^  explaining  in  what  the  temptation  consisted,  namely,  m 
taffering.* 

CHAPTER  in. 

1.  The  leading  ideas  of  the  preceding  section  are  echoed 
in  this  verse:  brethren^  of  whom  Christ  made  himself  the 
brother :  holy^  in  virtue  of  the  work  of  the  sanctifier. 

Wherefore  {SOev).   Drawing  a  conclusion  from  ch.  ii.  9-18. 

Holy  brethren  (a&X^l  iyioi).  The  phrase  N.  T.^.  'AScX- 
<f>ol  brethren,  in  address,  is  not  found  in  the  Gospels.  In  Acts 
mostly  avSp€9  aScX^l  brother  men.  In  Paul,  dS.  ayairriroi 
brethren  beloved^  or  dS.  d7a7r.  fcal  hnirdOrjroi  brethren  beloved 
and  longed  for  (once,  Philip,  iv.  1),  aS.  ^airfjfAdpoi  birh  rov 
0€ov  and  rov  tcvpiov  brethren  beloved  of  God  or  of  the  Lordy  and 
&B.  /lov  my  brethren.  In  James  mostly  d&  fjLov.  In  Hebrews, 
except  here,  dSeX^l  simply.  Holy  brethren  (see  ch.  ii.  11) 
are  worshippers  of  God,  taking  the  place  of  God's  O.  T. 
people,  as  called  and  consecrated  to  ethical  and  spiritual 
service  according  to  the  Christian  ideal. 

Partakers  of  a  heavenly  calling  (/cXi7<r6a»9  hrovpavlov  fUro- 
X^O'  MA-o^oi  partakers  only  in  Hebrews  except  L.  v.  7. 
See  on  fier^axev  took  part^  ch.  ii.  14.  The  phrase  heavenly 
calling  N.  T.®.  Comp.  rij^  ape»  xXija&o^  the  upward  calling, 
Philip,  iii.  14.  The  expression  points  to  the  lordship  of  the 
world  to  be  (ch.  ii.  6) ;  and  the  world  to  be  is  the  abiding 
world,  the  place  of  realities  as  contrasted  with  tjrpes  and 

*  Dr.  W.  Robertson  Smith  objects  that  Jesus  was  in  all  points  tempted 
like  as  we  are  (ch.  iy.  16),  and  that  not  every  temptation  arises  out  of  the 
painful  experiences  of  life.  But  the  great  point  \b  that  Christ  is  able  to 
snccour  the  tempted  because  he  has  himself  experienced  temptation.  The 
peculiar  nature  of  his  temptation,  and  the  points  of  its  correspondence  with 
ours,  are  not  in  question.  One  point  \b  selected  out  of  the  whole  range  of 
possible  causes  of  temptation,  and  that  the  most  prominent  and  obvious 
point  —  suffering. 


4lO  WOBD  STUDIES  Df  THS  9KW  TBIAMXHT.      [Ch.  IIL 


shadows.  The  calling  comes  from  that  world  and  is  to  that 
world.     See  ch.  xiii.  14. 

Consider  (^Korawaiiaart).*  Attentivelj,  thooghtfollj 
(^marii^.  See  on  Jas.  i.  23.  The  writer's  habit  iB  to  use 
tJie  communicatiye  we  or  u$  identifying  himself  with  his 
readers. 

The  apostle  and  high  priest  (rir  awJaroXop  koI  hpx^'^AC). 

In  calling  Jesus  apostle^  the  writer  is  thinking  of  Moses  as 
one  $efU  by  God  to  lead  Israel  to  Canaan.  Comp.  LXX^ 
where  inro<n^XKav  to  $end  is  often  used  of  Moses.  See  Ex. 
iii.-vii.    Often  of  Jesus,  as  L.  x.  16 ;  J.  iiL  17 ;  v.  86 ;  yi.  29. 

Of  our  profession  {rrj/i  ofioXoylof  ^f*M).  Bend.  coitfetfiMi 
for  profeuion.  The  apostle  and  high  priest  whom  we  con- 
fess.    Comp.  1  Tim.  yi.  12. 

2.  Who  was  faithful  (vurrw  Svra).  Bend.  ^U  &iihful.** 
A  general  designation  of  inherent  character.  He  U  faithful 
as  he  ever  wa9. 

To  him  that  appointed  him  (j^  woiijaapn  ainhf).  dm- 
itituted  him  apostle  and  high  priest.  Some  render  created, 
referring  to  Christ's  humanity  or  to  his  eternal  generation. 
So  the  Old  Latin,  creatori  $uo;  but  this  does  not  suit  the  con- 
text. Tloieiv  often  in  Class,  in  the  sense  of  imtitute^  as  sacri- 
fices, funerals,  assemblies,  etc.,  and  in  the  middle  voice  of 
adoption  as  a  son.    See  1  Sam.  xii.  6 ;  Mk.  iii.  14 ;  Acts  ii.  36. 

As  also  Moses  (c»9  teal  Mwo^).  The  highest  example 
of  human  fidelity  known  to  the  readers. 

In  all  his  house  (^ip  SK^  r^  oitc<p  ainov).  Const,  with  upos 
faithful.     Jesus  was  faithful  even  as  Moses  was  faithful. 

*  Some  interestiiig  data  and  remarks  on  the  use  of  **  I,**  **  we  **  Aod 
*«yoa*'  in  the  EpUtle  may  be  fonnd  in  Hamack*8  article,  **Pn>babilia  fiber 
die  Adreese  and  den  Verfaaser  des  Hebr&erbriefs,'^  in  Prenscben's  ZMtKikrifi 
fikr  dU  netUestamentliehe  Wiueiuchaft  und  die  Kunde  des  UrehrisUtUhwme^ 
Heft  L  a  24. 


Ch.  m.]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  411 

The  subject  of  the  high-priesthood  of  Christ,  introduced 
in  this  verse,  is  not  carried  out  in  detail  by  showing  the 
superiority  of  Jesus  to  earthly  high  priests.  This  is  reserved 
for  chs.  v.-vii.  Instead,  the  writer  proceeds  to  show  that 
Christ  is  superior  to  Moses,  as  he  has  already  shown  his 
superiority  to  angels.  He  will  thus  have  shown  Christ's 
superiority  to  both  the  agencies  by  which  the  old  covenant 
was  mediated.  The  subject  is  a  delicate  one  to  treat  for 
Jewish  readers  to  whom  Moses  was  the  object  of  the  deepest 
veneration ;  but  the  treatment  displays  tact  by  placing  Moses 
in  the  foreground  beside  Christ  as  an  example  of  fidelity  to 
his  commission.  Justice  is  thus  done  to  the  familiar  histor- 
ical record,  and  to  Ood*s  own  testimony,  Num.  xii.  7.  The 
general  sense  of  the  comparison  is  that  Moses  was  as  faithful 
as  any  »ervant  in  a  house  can  be,  while  Christ  was  not  a  serv- 
ant in  the  house,  but  a  son,  and  displayed  his  fidelity  in  that 
capacity. 

8.  Was  counted  worthy  (tfiien-ai).  Used  both  of  reward 
which  is  due  (1  Tim.  v.  17)  and  of  punishment  (Heb.  x.  29). 

Of  more  glory  (irXeCoiw  &^^).     Comp.  ch.  ii.  8,  9. 

Inasmuch  as  (^ica6^  6aov).  Rend,  by  $o  mv>eh  a$.  The 
argument  is  based  on  the  general  principle  that  the  founder 
of  a  house  is  entitled  to  more  honour  than  the  house  and  its 
individual  servants.  There  is  an  apparent  confusion  in  the 
working  out,  since  both  God  and  Christ  appear  as  builders^ 
and  Moses  figures  both  as  the  house  and  as  a  servant  in  the 
house.  The  point  of  the  whole,  however,  is  that  Moses  was 
Apart  of  the  O.  T.  system  —  a  servant  in  the  house;  while 
Christ,  as  one  with  Ood  who  established  all  things,  was  the 
founder  and  establisher  of  both  the  Old  and  the  New  Testa- 
ment economies. 

4.  He  that  built  all  things  is  God  (oirdpra  tcaraaict^daa^ 
Oeoi),  The  verb  includes  not  only  erection^  hot  fiimisMnff 
with  the  entire  eqtUpment.    See  ch.  ix.  2 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  10.    The 


412  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [0&  m 

verb  ^P.  The  application  of  buUt  or  establUhed  to  Christ 
(ver.  3)  is  guarded  against  possible  misapprehension.  Christ 
is  the  establisher,  but  not  by  any  independent  will  or  agency. 
As  the  Son  he  is  he  that  built^  but  it  is  as  one  with  Ood  who 
built  all  thingi.  The  $peeial  foundership  of  Christ  does  not 
contradict  or  exclude  the  general  foundership  of  God.* 

5.  And  Moses.  Kal  and  introduces  the  further  develop- 
ment of  the  thought  of  yy.  2,  3 — fidelity^  and  the  corre- 
sponding honour.  It  is  not  a  second  proof  of  the  superiority 
of  Christ  to  Moses.     See  Num.  xii.  7. 

A  servant  Qdepdirtov).  N.  T.^.  Comp.  Apoc.  xv.  8.  Often 
in  LXX,  mostly  as  translation  of  i^  servant^  elave^  bondman. 
Also,  when  coupled  with  the  name  of  a  deity,  a  warihipper^ 
devotee.  Sometimes  applied  to  angels  or  prophets.  Of  Moses, 
Oepdirtov  Kvplov  servant  of  the  Lord^  Wisd.  x.  16.  In  Class, 
and  N.  '1^  the  word  emphasises  the  perfonnance  of  a  pres- 
ent service,  without  reference  to  the  condition  of  the  doer, 
whether  bond  or  free.  An  ethical  character  attaches  to  it, 
as  to  the  kindred  verb  Oepaweveiv :  service  of  an  affectionate, 
hearty  character,  performed  with  care  and  fidelity.  Hence 
the  relation  of  the  Oepdirtov  is  of  a  nobler  and  freer  character 
than  that  of  the  &)dXo9  or  bondservant.  The  verb  is  used  of 
a  physician's  tendance  of  the  sick.  Xenophon  (JHem.  iv.  8, 9) 
uses  it  of  the  gods  talcing  care  of  men,  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  of  men's  worshipping  the  gods  (ii,  1.  28).  See  Eurip. 
Iph.  Taur.  1105 ;  and  on  heal^  Matt.  viii.  7 ;  L.  v.  16,  and 
on  is  worshipped^  Acts  xvii.  26. 

For  a  testimony  of  those  things  which  were  to  be  spoken 

(jek  fiapTvpiop  rSiv  XaX'qO'qaoiiJvfDv),    'Ea9  /or,  with  the  whole 

*  The  older  expositors  regarded  6  ^e^f  as  predicate,  and  6  vdrra  carariccv- 
dtf-af  as  designating  Christ ;  and  explained,  ^*  now  he  that  founded  all  thingp 
(Christ)  must  be  God/'  thus  using  the  passage  as  a  proof  of  Christ's  deity. 
But  this  would  be  entirely  irrelevant.  The  writer  is  not  trying  to  show  that 
Christ  was  greater  than  Moees  because  he  was  God,  bat  because  of  his  fidel- 
ity as  a  son  instead  of  as  a  servant.  This  is  the  point  which  he  goes  on  to 
elaborate. 


Ch.  hi.]  the  EPI8TLB  TO   THE  HEBREWS.  418 

preceding  clause.  Moses'  faithful  service  in  6od*s  house  was 
for  a  tettimony^  etc.  The  thingi  which  were  to  he  spoken  are 
the  revelations  afterward  to  he  given  in  Christ.  Others,  how- 
ever, explain  of  the  things  which  Moses  himself  was  after- 
ward  to  speak  to  the  people  by  God*s  command,  referring 
to  Num.  xii.  8.  According  to  this  explanation,  the  fidelity 
hitherto  exhibited  by  Moses  ought  to  command  respect  for 
all  that  he  might  say  in  future.  But  (1)  in  the  present 
connection  that  thought  is  insignificant.  (2)  It  would  be 
an  exaggeration  to  speak  of  Moses's  fidelity  to  God  through- 
out his  whole  official  career  as  a  witness  of  the  things  which 
he  was  to  speak  to  the  people  by  God's  command.  (8)  The 
future  participle  requires  a  reference  to  a  time  subsequent  to 
Moses's  ministry.  The  meaning  is  that  Moses,  in  his  entire 
ministry,  was  but  a  testimony  to  what  was  to  be  spoken  in 
the  future  by  another  and  a  greater  than  he.  Comp. 
Deut.  xviii.  15,  explained  of  Christ  in  Acts  iii.  22,  28. 

6.  But  Christ.  Replacing  the  human  name  Jesus^  and  being 
the  official  name  which  marks  his  position  over  the  house. 

As  a  son  (c»9  vt^).  The  fidelity  of  Moses  and  the  fidelity 
of  Christ  are  exhibited  in  different  spheres :  of  Moses  in  that 
of  servant ;  of  Christ  in  that  of  son. 

Over  his  own  house  (M  top  oUov  avrov).  Comp.  oh.  x.  21, 
and  notice  iirl  over  his  house,  and  iv  in  all  his  house,  of 
Moses.  For  ^^  Jus  own  house  "  rend.  ^^  Jns  house,"  referring  to 
God.  Reference  to  Christ  would  destroy  the  parallel.  It  is 
said  by  some  that  the  matter  of  respective  positions  is  irrele- 
vant :  that  the  main  point  is  fidelity^  and  that  therefore  it 
does  not  matter  whether  Moses  was  a  son  or  a  servant,  pro- 
vided he  was  faithful.  But  the  writer  evidentiy  feels  that 
Christ's  position  as  a  son  enhanced  his  fidelity.  Comp.  cii.  v.  8. 
The  implication  is  that  Christ's  position  involved  peculiar 
difficulties  and  temptations. 

Whose  house  (ofi).  Gt>d'8  house.  The  church  is  nowhere 
called  the  house  of  Christ. 


^14  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NSW  TBSTAMSNT.      [Oc  DI 

We  (i^/icl9).  Even  as  was  the  house  in  which  Moses  served. 
The  Christian  community  is  thus  emphatically  designated  aj 
the  house  of  God^  implying  the  transitoriness  of  the  Mosaic 
system.  Comp.  1  Cor.  iii.  16, 17;  2  Cor.  vi.  16 ;  Eph.  ii.  22 ; 
1  Pet.  iv.  17. 

Hold  fast  (jcartUrxf^iiey).  The  verb  is  used  in  N.  T.  as 
here,  1  Th.  v.  21 ;  Philem.  18 ;  of  rettraining  or  preventing^ 
L.  iv.  42  ;  of  holding  hack  or  holding  down  with  an  evil  pur- 
pose, Rom.  i.  18 ;  2  Th.  ii.  7 ;  of  holding  one^e  course  toward^ 
bearing  down  f  or ^  Acts  xxvii.  40. 

The  confidence  and  the  rejoicing  of  the  hope  (r^v  «-ap- 
pvialav  Koi  TO  KavxvfM  ^rj^  iKiriSo^^.  The  combination  eon^ 
fidence  and  r^oieing  N.  T.^.  Rejoicing  or  boaeting  of  hope 
N.  T.^,  but  comp.  1  Th.  ii.  19.  For  wapprfaia  confidence  see 
on  1  Tim.  iii.  18.  The  entire  group  of  words,  icavxi^fMi  ground 
of  glorying^  icavxnaL^  act  of  glorying^  and  icavxaa-Oai  to  glory^ 
in  peculiarly  Pauline.  Outside  of  the  Pauline  letters  cav- 
Xaa-Oai  occurs  only  Jas.  i.  9 ;  iv.  16 ;  icai^<ri9  only  Jas.  iv.  16 ; 
and  tcavxnM^  only  here.  The  thought  here  is  that  the  condi- 
tion of  being  and  continuing  the  house  of  God  is  the  holding 
fast  of  the  hope  in  Christ  (^7r^So9  of  the  obfect  of  hope)  and 
in  the  consummation  of  God's  kingdom  in  him  ;  making  these 
the  ground  of  boasting ;  exultantly  confessing  and  proclaim- 
ing this  hope.  There  must  be,  not  only  confidence,  but 
joi/fui  confidence.  Comp.  Rom.  v.  8 ;  Eph.  iii.  12,  18 ; 
Philip,  iii.  8. 

Firm  unto  the  end  (M^t  t/Xov9  fiefiaCap).  Textually, 
there  is  some  doubt  about  these  words.  Westcott  and  Hort 
bracket  them.  Tischendorf  retains,  and  Weiss  rejects  them. 
The  latter  part  of  this  verse  marks  the  transition  to  the 
lesson  of  the  wilderness-life  of  the  exodus ;  the  writer  fear- 
ing that  the  fate  of  the  exodus-generation  may  be  repeated 
in  the  experience  of  his  readers.  We  are  God's  house  if  we 
steadfastly  hold  fast  our  Christian  hope,  and  do  not  lose  our 
faith  as  Israel  did  in  the  wilderness.  The  exhortation  to 
&ith  is  thrown  into  the  form  of  warning  against  unbelief. 


Oh.  m.]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  415 

Faith  is  the  condition  of  realising  the  divine  promise.     The 
section  is  introduced  by  a  citation  from  Ps.  xcv.  7,  8. 

7.  Wherefore  as  the  Holy  Ghost  saith  (&o  tcaOcoi  X^ci  rb 
irvevfMi  TO  irfiov).  See  on  ch.  i.  6.  The  formula  the  Spirit 
the  holy  (Spirit)  is  common  in  the  N.  T.  with  the  exception  of 
the  Catholic  Epistles,  where  it  does  not  occur.  The  construc- 
tion of  the  passage  is  as  follows :  Aid  wherefore  is  connected 
with  fiXhrere  take  heed^  ver.  12.  The  point  is  the  tvriter's 
warning,  not  the  warning  of  the  citation.  The  whole  citation 
including  the  introductory  formula,  down  to  reeU  ver.  11,  is 
parenthetical. 

To-day  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice  (aijfupop  ihp  t^  ^i^ 
airov  oKovarfT^).  The  Hebrew  reads,  0  that  you  would  hear 
his  voice  to-day.  To-day  is  prophetically  interpreted  by  the 
writer  as  referring  to  the  Christian  present,  the  time  of 
salvation  inaugurated  by  the  appearance  of  Christ. 

8.  Harden  not  (j^tf  a-tcXrjfnhnfre).  In  N.  T.  mostly  in  this 
epistle.  Comp.  Acts  xix.  9;  Rom.  ix.  18,  see  note.  The 
group  of  kindred  words  consists  of  atcXffpfk  hard  (see  on 
Matt.  XXV.  24 ;  Jude  14);  aKXffpJrrj^  hardness  (Rom.  ii.  6); 
aK\i]pw€ip  to  harden  (Acts  xix.  9;  Rom.  ix.  18);  and  the 
compounds  atcXtfpOKapSla  hardness  of  heart  (Matt.  xix.  8; 
Mk.  X.  6),  and  akkriporpdyrjiXw  stiff-necked  (Acts  vii.  5). 
All  occur  in  LXX,  with  the  addition  of  cKKr^pm  hardly^ 
painfully  (not  in  N.  T.). 

In  the  provocation  (Jv  r^  Trapainxpaa-fAfi).  Only  here  and 
ver.  15.  In  LXX  only  Ps.  xciv.  8.  The  verb  irapawixpa^tv 
to  provoke^  only  in  ver.  16.  Often  in  LXX.  The  simple  verb 
irucpaiveiv  to  make  bitter^  Col.  iii.  19 ;  Apoc.  viii.  11 ;  x.  9, 10. 
From  irucptk  bitter^  pungent :  hence  to  stir  up  to  bitterness^  to 
irritate.     Comp.  LXX  Ezek.  ii.  4. 

In  the  day  (xarh  r^p  f^Upap^.  ILarh  in  a  temporal  sense, 
as  Acts  xii.  1 ;  xix.  28 ;  xxvii.  27.  Comp.  tear*  apx^k  in  the 
beginning^  ch«  i.  10. 


4l6  WORD  BTC7DIB8  IN  THB  NEW  TB8TAMENT.      [Cx.  m. 

Of  temptation  (roO  Treipaa-fAov).  Rend.  ^*of  the  tempta- 
tion/' referring  to  a  definite  event,  the  murmuring  against 
Moses  at  Rephidim  on  account  of  the  lack  of  water,  Ex.  xvii. 
1-7.  In  that  passage  the  LXX  gives  for  the  two  proper 
names  Massah  and  Meribak,  jreipacfjiM  temptation^  which  is 
correct,  and  \oiS6prfai^  railing  or  reviling^  which  is  loose,  since 
Meribah  signifies  strife.*  In  Ps.  xciv,  LXX  renders  Meribah 
irapairiKpaati^  provocation^  which  is  inexact,  and  Maeedh  iru- 
paafAOi  temptation^  which  is  correct. 

9.  When  (ofi).  Rend,  where.  See  oi  after  I^/ao9  wUder- 
n«M,  Deut.  viii.  15. 

Tempted  me,  proved  me  (hrelpaaav  iv  hoKiiuurltf).  Lit. 
tried  (jm)  in  proving.  The  text  differs  from  LXX,  which 
reads  hreCpa^rav^  iSoxi/iaaav  tempted^  proved^  as  A.  V.  The 
phrase  here  means  tempted  by  putting  to  the  test.  Comp. 
i/cireipd^eiv  to  tempt  or  try  with  a  view  to  seeing  haw  far  one  eon 
go.     See  on  1  Cor.  x.  9. 

And  saw  my  works  (teal  elSop  rd  Ipya  yyov).  Some  construe 
my  works  with  both  verbs :  tried  and  saw  my  works  :  but  it  is 
better  to  supply  me  after  iweipcurav  tempted^  to  take  works 
with  saw  only,  and  to  give  xal  the  force  of  and  yet  (see  on 
L.  xviii.  7).  "They  tempted  and  yet  saw  my  works;'* 
although  they  saw  my  works.  The  Hebrew  is  "tried  me, 
proved  me,  yea  saw  my  works.*' 

Forty  years.    In  LXX  this  is  connected  with  saw  my  works. 

In  the  Hebrew  forty  years  begins  the  next  clause. 

10.  Wherefore  I  was  grieved  (Sio  irpoa&xfiura).  The 
Hebrew  omits  wherefore.  It  was  inserted  because  of  the 
transfer  oi  forty  years  to  the  preceding  clause.     The  verb 

*  Comp.  ToO  vSarof  XocSoplat,  Num.  xx.  24,  and  v8mp  'ArrcXoytftt,  Nmn. 
xz.  13 ;  xxvii.  14 ;  Dent  xxxii  61 ;  xxxiii.  S ;  Ps.  Ixxx.  7 ;  cr.  82.  The 
LXX  has  preserred  the  proper  names  only  hi  Exek.  xl?iL  19,  UmpiitAe^  and 
xlYiil  28,  ^t^KiM. 


Ch.  m.]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  417 

irpo<r&x0uTa  I  was  grieved^  only  here  and  ver.  17.  In  LXX 
for  Kp  to  $jme  out;  hpf  to  exclude^  rge^  abhor;  t^  to 
repudiate. 

11.  So  I  aware  (fc).  Rend.  ^'  aceording  a%  I  sware  " :  the 
ck  correlating  the  oath  and  the  disobedience. 

They  shall  not  enter  Into  my  rest  (ti  iKewrovrai  ek  t^p 
Kardiravaiv  fMv).  Lit.  if  they  $Kall  enter^  etc.  A  common 
Hebraistic  formula  in  oaths.  Where  God  is  speaking,  as 
here,  the  ellipsis  is  ^^may  I  not  be  Jehovah  tf  they  shall 
enter."'  Where  man  is  speaking,  *^so  may  God  punish  me 
(f ;  or  ^*  God  do  so  to  me  and  more  (f.''  Comp.  Mk.  viii.  12 : 
LXX,  Gen.  xiv.  23 ;  Deut.  i.  85 ;  1  K.  i.  61 ;  ii.  8.  Some- 
times the  ellipsis  is  filled  out,  as  1  Sam.  iii.  17;  2  Sam.  iii.  85. 
KardTravciv  reit^  only  in  Hebrews,  and  Acts  vii.  49.  The 
verb  tcarairavav  to  lay  to  reit  also  only  in  Acts  and  Hebrews. 
In  Class,  the  verb  sometimes  means  to  kill  or  to  depou  from 
power.  In  the  original  citation  the  reference  is  to  Canaan. 
Paul  uses  ic\ffpovofA(a  inheritance  in  a  similar  sense. 

12.  Note  how  the  following  exhortation  is  colored  by  the 
O.  T.  citation  :  evil  heart;  the  today;  be  hardened;  take  heed 
(/SX^ere).  See  to  it.  Often  in  warnings  or  admonitions: 
sometimes  with  inrbfrofn^  with  genitive  of  that  against  which 
the  warning  is  given,  as  Mk.  viii.  15 ;  xii.  88 ;  but  so  only  in 
the  Gospels.  In  construction  connect  with  &&,ver.  7;  there- 
fare  beware. 

Lest  there  be  (am)  were  jforcu).  The  indicative  with  ftii 
lest  shows  that  with  the  fear  that  the  event  may  occur,  there 
is  blended  a  euepieion  that  it  toiU  occur. 

in  any  of  you  (fr  rm  iimm).  They  are  appealed  to  indi- 
vidually. 

An  evil  heart  of  unbolieff  (jtofUla  imnipk  iLwurrla^y  The 
whole  phrase  N.  T.^.     Neither  do  the  combinations  evil  heoH 

▼OL.  IV. — 27 


118  WORD  8TUDIEB  IH  THK  HKW  TBBTAMKNT.      [Cli.  m. 

or  he4srt  qf  mmieU^  occur  elaewheie.  In  LXX,  among  nearly 
a  thoiuand  instances  of  xapila  hearty  Kopila  wo^fipk  evil  heart 
a{^>ear8  only  five  times,  and  in  three  of  the  five  in  apocryphal 
books.  See  Sir.  ix«  1 ;  Bar.  i.  22 ;  ii.  8.  In  LXX  proper, 
Jer.  XYi.  12 ;  xviiL  12.  *hwurrlwf  of  wfheHef^  specifies  that 
in  which  the  more  general  irortipk  evU  consists.  An  evil  heart 
is  an  unbelieving  heart. 

In  departing  from  the  Ihring  Qod  Qh  rf  mroor^Mu  <hri 
Beov  ^mirra^}.  The  characteristic  of  unbelief.  Faith  is  per- 
sonal union  with  God.  Unbelief  separates  from  God*  The 
phrase  limng  Q-od  is  common  to  both  Testaments.  For  the 
bearing  of  the  words  upon  the  question  of  the  Grentile  destin- 
ation of  the  Epistle,  see  Introduction. 

18.  While  it  is  called  tOHlay  (axP^  ^  '^  ^itapow  KokjuraC). 
Lit.  90  long  09  the  to-day  i$  being  named.  The  article  points 
to  the  former  expression — the  ^to-day"  of  yer.  7.  It  is  the 
day  of  grace,  while  salvation  through  Christ  is  still  attainable. 

Through  the  deceitfulnees  of  sin  (awori^  rfj/i  aiuLprrloi). 
'Airdrrf  is  rather  a  tricky  stratagem^  deeeity  thim  the  quality  of 
deceitf  ulness.  The  warning  is  against  being  hardened  by  a 
trick  which  their  sin  may  play  them.  Note  the  article,  the 
or  hu  sin  —  the  sin  of  departing  from  the  living  God.  The 
particular  deceit  in  this  case  would  be  the  illusion  of  faith- 
fulness to  the  past. 

14.  We  are  made  partakers  of  Christ  (fUroxoi  yi^p  rov 
Xpurrov  yeySvafiev).  Rend,  we  are  became  feUowt  with  Chriet. 
For  fellows  see  L.  v.  7 ;  Heb.  i.  9.  It  marks  even  a  closer 
relation  than  ^^  brethren."  See  L.  xxii.  80;  Rom.  viii.  17; 
Apoc.  iii.  21. 

Beginning  of  our  confidence  (rifv  apj^v  r79  vrroardaem^. 
The  believing  confidence  with  which  we  began  our  Christian 
life.  For  \nr6araavi  confidence  see  on  ch.  i.  8.  The  Greek 
fathers  render  eubetance;  that  in  virtue  of  which  we  are 
believers. 


Cb.  m.]  THS  EPI8TLB  TO  THB  HEBREWS.  419 

Unto  the  end  Qh^xP^  rfkov^^.  Better,  the  eamwrnmaUan. 
It  is  more  than  mere  temUnatian.  It  is  the  point  into 
which  the  whole  life  of  faith  finally  gathers  itself  up.  See 
Rom.  vi.  21 ;  2  Cor.  xi.  16 ;  Philip,  iii.  19 ;  Heb.  vi.  8 ; 
1  Pet.  i.  9. 

15.  While  it  is  said  (^  r^  X^yeir0ai).  The  formula  by 
which  the  writer  reverts  to  the  previous  citation.  Connect 
with  if  we  holdfaet.  The  exhortation  of  ver.  12  answered  to 
Ps.  xcY ;  so  the  condition  of  fulfilment  in  ver.  14  is  declared 
to  rest  on  the  same  Scripture.  Only  on  the  ground  of  what  w 
eaid  in  that  Psakn  does  the  holding  fast  come  to  pass.  Rend, 
therefore,  ^*  We  are  fellows  of  Christ  if  we  hold  the  begin- 
ning of  our  confidence  steadfast  unto  the  end,  seeing  it  is 
said,'*  etc. 

16.  For  some,  when  they  had  heard,  did  provoke  (r6«9 
7^  cucovaaprei  Trapen-Upavav).  Rend,  who^  when  they  heard^ 
did  provoke  f  The  interrogative  r/m  calls  special  attention 
to  those  who  provoked  God.  The  writer  would  say,  "  My 
warning  against  ai>ostasy  is  not  superfluous  or  irrelevant: 
/or,  consider:  who  were  they  that  provoked  God  ?  They  were 
those  who  had  fairly  begun  their  journey  to  Canaan,  as  you 
have  begun  your  Christian  course.  They  provoked  God,  so 
may  you. 

Howbeit  not  all  (&XX*  ov  wdtmf).  Wrong.  The  inter- 
rogation should  be  continued.  Who  were  they?  But  (&XX*) 
why  do  I  ask?  Were  they  not  aU  who  came  out  of  Egypt  by 
Moseet  They  were  so  numerous  that  they  practically  consti- 
tuted the  whole  generation  of  the  exodus.  So  far  from  its 
being  true  that  a  good  ending  necessarily  follows  a  good 
beginning,  a  whole  generation  of  God's  chosen  people  failed 
to  reach  the  Land  of  Promise  because  they  provoked  God. 


17.   The  interrogation  still  continued.     **  With  whom 
he  displeased  forty  years?    Was  it  not  with  them?"  etc. 


•*20  WORD  STUDIES   IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [CiL  IV. 

Carcasses  (r^  xAXa).  N.  T.^.  LXX  for  -vf  a  earp9e. 
K&Xov  properly  a  limb.  The  idea  of  ditmemberment  underlies 
the  use  of  the  word.  Comp.  Num.  xiv.  29  (LXX),  and 
1  Cor.  X.  5,  of  the  rebellious  Israelites,  who  xar^rrpAfft^aM 
iv  ry  iprjfjjp  were  strewn  doum  along  in  the  mldemeM9, 

18.  To  them  that  believed  not  (roV;  InraBJfaaauf).  Boid. 
to  them  that  disobeyed. 


CHAPTER  IT. 

Christian  salvation,  having  been  presented  as  lordship  over 
the  world  to  come,  and  as  deliverance  from  the  fear  of  death, 
is  now  to  be  presented  as  participation  in  the  rest  of  God.  The 
purpose  of  vv.  1-11  is  to  confirm  the  hope  of  that  rest,  and 
to  warn  against  forfeiting  it.  There  is  a  possibility  of  your 
forfeiting  it.  The  rest  of  God  was  proclaimed  to  your  fore- 
fathers, but  they  did  not  enter  into  it  because  of  their  unbe- 
lief. It  has  been  proclaimed  to  you.  You  may  fail  as  did 
they,  and  for  the  same  reason. 

1.  Being  left  (/caraXftTro/i^^).  Still  remaining :  not  being 
neglected.  It  is  not  a  reason  for  fearing  that  is  given,  but  a 
circumstance  connected  with  the  tiling  to  be  avoided.  As 
there  is  now  left  a  promise,  let  us  fear.  Being  left  announces 
the  thought  which  is  afterward  emphasised,  and  on  which 
the  whole  treatment  of  the  subject  turns — that  God's  original 
promise  of  rest  remains  unchanged^  and  still  holds  good.  Such 
being  the  ciise,  he  wJio  doubts  the  promise  itself,  or  thinks 
that  it  is  too  late  for  him  to  enjoy  its  fulfilment,  runs  a  risk. 

Should  seem  to  come  short  (hoKy  varefyrjKevai).  Accord- 
ing to  this  rendering,  the  meaning  is  that  one  must  avoid  the 
appearance  of  having  failed  to  enter  into  the  rest ;  the  per- 
fect tense  (yareprfic^vai^  placing  the  reader  at  the  parousia, 
when  judgment  will  be  pronounced.  This  is  forced,  tame, 
and  irrelevant  to  the  previous  discussion.      Rend,  lest  any 


Ch.  IV.]  THE   EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  421 

one  of  you  think  he  has  come  too  late  for  it.  This  accords  with 
the  previous  admonitions  against  unbelief.  For  one  to  think 
that  he  has  come  too  late  to  inherit  the  promise  is  to  disbe- 
lieve an  immutable  promise  of  God.  Hence  the  writer  may 
well  say,  ^^  Since  this  promise  remaint^  let  us  fear  to  distrust 
it."  *T<rr€p€iv  is  to  be  behind;  to  come  late;  to  come  short; 
hence,  to  suffer  need^  as  Philip,  iv.  12 ;  of  material  deficiency, 
L.  XV.  14 ;  J.  ii.  3 ;  of  moral  and  spiritual  shortcoming, 
Rom.  iii.  23 ;  1  Cor.  viii.  8 ;  Heb.  xii.  15. 

2.  For  unto  us  was  the  gospel  preached  (jcaX  yi^p  iafiep 
evfiyyeKuTfAdpoi).  Lit.  we  have  had  good  tidings  proclaimed  to 
us.  The  translation  of  the  A.  V.  is  unfortunate,  since  it 
conveys  the  technical  and  conventional  idea  of  preaching  the 
gospeU  which  is  entirely  out  of  place  here.  The  reference  is 
to  the  special  announcement  of  the  rest  of  God ;  the  glad 
tidings  that  God  has  provided  a  rest  for  his  people.  This 
announcement  was  made  to  the  fathers,  and  signified  to  them 
the  promise  of  the  rest  in  Canaan.  It  has  been  proclaimed 
to  us,  and  to  us  is  the  announcement  of  the  heavenly  rest. 
The  emphasis  is  on  the  entire  statement,  ^^we  have  had  the 
good  tidings  proclaimed  to  us,"  rather  than  on  we  as  con- 
trasted with  they. 

The  word  preached  (o  X^o9  r^  ^o^).  Lit.  the  word  of 
the  message.     See  on  1  Th.  ii.  13. 

Not  being  mixed  with  faith  in  them  that  heard  it  (/i^ 
irvvK€K€paayLivov^  r^  irUrrei  roU  cucovaaaiv).  Rend,  because 
not  incorporated  by  faith  in  them  that  heard."*  A  body  of 
obedient  hearers  with  whom  the  erring  Israelites  were  not  in- 

*  There  is  a  diiferenoe  of  reading :  ^vwimupoff/Aipovt  and  ^wnxtpoff/idwot. 
According  to  the  former,  the  participle  agrees  with  iKtlwovt  them :  *'  the  word 
did  not  profit  them,  (they)  not  having  been  united,  etc.,**  or,  **  since  they 
were  not  united.**  According  to  the  latter,  the  participle  agrees  with  6  \670t 
the  word:  **the  word  not  having  been  united,  etc.**  I  prefer  the  second 
reading,  although  the  external  authority  for  the  other  is  stronger.  80  Tisch* 
endorf  and  Weiss.  Westcott  and  Hort  read  ovFct Mpa^/i^ivvt,  but  suspect  a 
primitive  corruption.  Westcott,  however,  adopts  the  other  in  his  oonunentaiy 


422  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.      [Gk.  IV. 

corporated  would  be  an  idea  foreign  to  the  discussion.  More- 
over, in  ch.  iii.  16,  the  writer  has  declared  that  there  were 
practically  no  believing  hearers.  He  says  that  although  the 
good  tidings  were  announced  to  them,  they  did  not  profit 
them.  The  word  did  not  profit  them  because  it  (the  word) 
was  not  assimilated  by  faith  in  those  that  heard.  They  did 
not  make  the  promise  of  rest  their  own.  Their  history  was 
marked  by  continual  renewals  and  rejections  of  the  promise. 

8.    For  we  which    have    believed  do  enter    into   rest 

(elaepx'if^ffo'  y^p  w  t^p  tcardirauaip  oi  irurmuravTei).  I  say 
by  faith,  /or,  we  believers,  who  embraced  the  Christian  faith 
when  it  was  offered  to  us  (note  the  aorist  participle),  do  enter 
into  the  rest.  'Eurepxiit^th  categorical ;  not  are  entering  or 
are  on  the  way  to^  but  entering  into  the  rest  is  a  fact  which 
characterises  us  as  believers. 

As  he  said  (jcaBia^  elprfxep).  We  enter  m  aeeordanee  with 
the  saying  which  follows. 

As  I  have  sworn — if  they  shall  enter.  The  statement 
is  somewhat  obscure.  The  meaning  is,  we  (who  believed) 
enter  into  rest  in  accordance  with  God's  declaration  that  thejf 
(who  did  not  believe)  should  not  enter.  The  point  is  faiA 
as  the  condition  of  entering  into  the  rest. 

Although  the  works  were  finished  (jcaCroi,  r&v  Spy^p 
yevrjOdmoDv).  This  is  an  awkward  and  indirect  way  of  say- 
ing, "  these  unbelievers  did  not  enter  into  God's  rest,  although 
he  had  provided  that  rest  into  which  they  might  have  en- 
tered." The  providing  of  the  rest  is  implied  in  the  comple- 
tion of  God's  works.  The  writer  assumes  the  readers* 
acquaintance  with  the  narrative  of  the  creation  in  Genesis. 

4.   What  was  implied  in  the  preceding  verse  is  now  stated. 

Did  rest  from  all  his  works  (^/car^avaev — &irh  wdtrnop 
r&v  IpyoDv  auToC).  The  verb  only  in  Hebrews  and  Acts 
xiv.  18.  Works,  plural,  following  LXX.  The  Hebrew  has 
work. 


OH.  IV.]  TU£  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  428 

5.  In  this  place  (h  roury).  The  passage  already  cited, 
\er.  8.  It  is  cited  again  to  show  that  the  rest  was  not 
entered  into. 

6.  The  rest  was  not  appropriated  by  those  under  Moses, 
nor,  in  the  full  sense,  by  those  under  Joshua,  nor  in  David's 
time. 

It  remaineth  that  some  must  enter  therein  (i^oWir- 
ercu  Tipit^  etaeXOeiv  ek  ainip).  ^AiroXeiirerai^  ^'remains  over 
from  past  times."  The  promise  has  not  been  appropriated. 
It  must  be  appropriated  in  accordance  with  6od*s  provision. 
The  rest  was  not  provided  for  nothing.  God's  provision  of 
a  rest  implies  and  involves  that  some  enter  into  it.  But  the 
appropriation  is  yet  in  the  future.  It  remaim  that  some 
enter  in. 

They  to  whom  it  was  first  preached  (oi  irpdT€pop  €^07- 
yeXurOAfrei^.  Lit.  they  who  were  first  the  iubjecte  of  the 
antunmeement  of  the  glad  tidings.  It  is  desirable  to  avoid  the 
word  preached.  See  on  ver.  2.  The  Israelites  under  Moses 
and  Joshua  are  meant. 

Because  of  unbelief  (&*  hireldeiav).  Rend,  for  wnbeUrf^ 
disobedience.  Comp.  ch.  iii.  18.  ^Aireldua  disobedienee  is 
the  active  manifestation  of  iiirurrta  unbelitf. 

7.  Again  he  limiteth  a  certain  day  (vdkuf  ni^  6pi^ 
fltUpav).  For  limiteth  rend,  defineth.  For  the  verb  see  on 
declared^  Rom.  i.  4.  The  meaning  is,  he  gives  another  oppor- 
tunity of  securing  the  rest,  and  calls  the  period  in  which  the 
opportunity  is  offered  to-day. 

In  David.  The  date  of  the  composition  of  Ps.  xcv  is  unceiv 
tain.  In  LXX  (zciv)  it  is  called  a  Psalm  of  David.  In  the 
words  in  David  the  writer  may  adopt  the  LXX  title,  or  may 
mean  simply  in  the  Psalms.  In  the  Hebrew  the  Psalm  has 
no  inscription. 


424  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Cte.  IV. 

After  so  long  a  time  Qfierh  too-ovtop  xf^vov).  The  time 
between  Joshua  and  David.  After  this  long  interval  he 
renews  the  promise  in  the  Psahn. 

As  it  is  said  (jcaOm  irpoeCpfircu).  Rend,  as  it  hath  been 
before  said;  referring  to  the  citations,  eh.  iii.  7,  8,  16. 

8.  But  it  might  be  said  that  under  Joshua  the  people  did 
enter  into  the  promised  rest.  He  therefore  shows  that  Isra- 
el's rest  in  Canaan  did  not  fulfil  the  divine  ideal  of  the  rest. 

Jesus  ('Ii/o-ow).     Rend.  JoshucL^  and  see  on  Matt.  i.  21. 

After  this  (fier^  ravra).  After  the  entrance  into  Canaan 
under  Joshua. 

9.  There  remaineth  therefore  a  rest  (apa  airoXetirercu 

aafifiarurfjM).  Remaineth^  since  in  the  days  of  neither  Moses, 
Joshua,  or  David  was  the  rest  appropriated.  He  passes  over 
the  fact  that  the  rest  had  not  been  entered  into  at  any  later 
period  of  IsraeFs  history.  Man's  portion  in  the  divine  rest 
inaugurated  at  creation  has  never  been  really  appropriated  : 
but  it  still  remaineth.  This  statement  is  just^ed  by  the  new- 
word  for  "rest"  which  enters  at  this  point,  aa^fiarur/jw 
instead  of  KaraTravan;.  la/Sfiarurfia:,  N.  T.^  ^LXX,  ^Class., 
signifies  a  keeping  Sahhath.  The  Sabbath  rest  points  back  to 
God's  original  rest,  and  marks  the  ideal  rest — the  rest  of  per- 
fect adjustment  of  all  things  to  God,  such  as  ensued  upon 
the  completion  of  his  creative  work,  when  he  pronounced  all 
things  good.  This  falls  in  with  the  ground-thought  of  the 
Epistle,  the  restoration  of  all  things  to  God's  archetype.  The 
sin  and  unbelief  of  Israel  were  incompatible  with  that  rest. 
It  must  remain  unappropriated  until  harmony  with  Gt>d  is 
restored.  The  Sabbath-rest  is  the  consummation  of  the  new 
creation  in  Christ,  through  whose  priestly  mediation  recon- 
ciliation with  God  will  come  to  pass. 

For  the  people  of  Qod  (r^  Xa^rov  deov).  For  the  phrase 
see  Rom.  ix.  25 ;   xi.  1 ;   1  Pet.  ii.  10,  and  comp.  Israel  qf 


Ch.  IV.]  the  epistle  to  the  HEBREWS.  425 

God^  Gal.  vi.  16.     The  true  Israel,  who  inherit  the  promise 
by  faith  in  Christ. 

10.  Only  in  such  a  Sabbath-rest  is  found  the  oounterpart 
of  God^s  rest  on  the  seventh  day. 

For  he  that  is  entered  into  his  rest  (6  7^  eureXffmv  ek 
rrfP  Kardiravaip  airrov).  Whoever  has  once  entered.*  SU^ 
God's.  The  aorist  marks  the  completeness  of  the  appropria- 
tion— once  and  for  all. 

He  also  hath  ceased  from  his  own  works  QcaX  airm 
tcar^avaep  airo  r&v  Ipyatp  aurot)) .  Omit  aum.  The  statement 
is  a  general  proposition :  any  one  who  has  entered  into  God's 
rest  has  ceased  from  his  works. 

As  God  did  from  his  (Jkairep  hirh  r&v  lUmv  o  Beii).  Rend. 
us  God  (^did)  from  his  awn.  *\hluv  aum  signifies  more  than 
mere  possession.  Rather,  works  pecvdiarly  his  own,  thus  hint- 
ing at  the  perfect  nature  of  the  original  works  of  creation  as 
corresponding  with  God's  nature  and  bearing  his  impress. 
The  blessing  of  the  Sabbath-rest  is  thus  put  as  a  cessation 
from  labours.  The  basis  of  the  conception  is  Jewish,  the 
rest  of  the  Sabbath  being  conceived  as  mere  abstinence  from 
labour,  and  not  according  to  Christ's  conception  of  the  Sab- 
bath, as  a  season  of  refreshment  and  beneficent  activity, 
Mk.  ii.  27 ;  J.  v.  17.  Our  writer's  conception  is  not  the 
rabbinical  conception  of  cessation  of  work,  but  rather  of  the 
cessation  of  the  weariness  and  pain  which  accompany  human 
labor.  Comp.  Apoc.  xiv.  18;  xxi.  4;  L.  xi.  7;  zviii.  5; 
Gal.  vi.  17. 

11.  This  promise  of  rest  carries  with  it  a  special  responsi- 
bility for  the  people  of  God. 

Let  us  labour  therefore  (^oirovBtUrc^fM^p  fAv).  For  the  verb, 
see  on  Eph.  iv.  8.  Chive  diligenee^  not  Juuteti,  which  is  the 
primary  meaning. 

•  Not  as  Etaraid  and  Alfoid,  ke  that  entered^  referring  to  Christ,  aod  con- 
trasted with  Joahna.    Jeans  ia  not  mentioned  in  tha  entire  pa8nge,iii.7-iv.9L 


426  WORD  STUDIES   IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ch.  IV. 

That  rest  (jUtCmiv  rifp  Kardiravaip).  The  Sabbath-rest  of 
God,  instituted  at  creation,  promised  to  the  fathers,  forfeited 
by  their  unbelief,  remaining  to  us  on  the  condition  of  faith. 

Lest  any  man  fall  after  the  same  example  of  unbelief 
(fva  fi^  iv  T^  avT^  Tt9  inroSeiyfiaTi  irdarf  rrfi  iiretOeia^^.  Il^jy 
fcUl  is  to  be  taken  absolutely ;  not,/aZ/  into  the  same  example. 
'Tir6S€iyfia  example^  mostly  in  Hebrews.  Rejected  as  unclass- 
ical  by  the  Attic  rhetoricians.  Originally  a  sign  which 
suggests  something :  a  partial  suggestion  as  distinct  from  a 
complete  expression.  See  ch.  viii.  5 ;  ix.  28.  Thus  Christ's 
washing  of  the  disciples'  feet  (J.  xiii.  15)  was  a  typical 
suggestion  of  the  whole  field  and  duty  of  ministry.  See  on 
1  Pet.  ii.  6.  It  is  not  easy  to  give  the  exact  force  of  ip  in. 
Strictly  speaking,  the  ^^ example  of  disobedience"  is  con- 
ceived as  that  in  which  the  falling  takes  place.  The  fall  is 
viewed  in  the  sphere  of  example.  Comp.  2  Mace.  iv.  80; 
1  Cor.  ii.  7.  Rend,  that  no  man  faU  in  the  same  example  of 
disobedience :  the  same  as  that  in  which  they  fell. 

12.  The  exhortation  is  enforced  by  reference  to  the  char- 
acter of  the  revelation  which  sets  forth  the  rest  of  Grod. 
The  message  of  God  which  promises  the  rest  and  urges  to 
seek  it,  is  no  dead,  formal  precept,  but  is  instinct  with  living 
energy. 

The  word  of  God  (6  XiPyo^  rod  Oeov).  That  which  God 
speaks  through  any  medium.  The  primary  reference  is  to 
God's  declarations  concerning  his  rest.  The  fathers  ex- 
plained it  of  the  personal  Word  as  in  the  Fourth  Gospel. 
But  in  the  Epistle  there  is  no  approach  to  any  definite  use 
of  Xdyo^  with  reference  to  Christ,  not  even  in  the  description 
of  his  relation  to  God  in  ch.  i,  where,  if  anywhere,  it  might 
have  been  expected.  In  ch.  vi.  6  and  xi.  3  we  find  pfjfui. 
Everywhere  in  the  Epistle  Christ  appears  as  the  Son^  not  as 
the  Word.  In  this  passage,  the  following  predicates,  ivepytfi^ 
TOfuSnepo^y  icpiTiichiiy  would  hardly  be  applied  to  the  Logos,  and 
in  ver.  14  he  is  styled  Jesii^  the  Son  of  God. 


Ck.  IV.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  427 

Quick  and  powerful  (^^Av  teal  ivepyii^}.  Note  the  emphatio 
position  of  ^&v  living.  Living  is  the  word  of  God,  since  it  is 
the  word  of  "the  living  God"  (ch.  iii.  12).  Living  in  its 
essence.  For  ipepyi/^  active^  energising^  and  kindred  words, 
see  on  J.  i.  12 ;  Philip,  iii.  21 ;  Col.  i.  29 ;  Philem.  6.  Mani- 
festing itself  actively  in  the  world  and  in  men's  hearts. 
Comp.  1  Pet.  i.  28. 

Sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword  (ro/M&rcpo9  inrip  irSUrav 
fidxcupap  SUrrofiop).  TofKurepo^  sharper  from  riikveiv  to  cut^ 
N.  T.^.  ^LXX.  The  word  of  God  has  an  incisive  and  pene- 
trating quality.  It  lays  bare  self-delusions  and  moral  soph- 
isms. For  the  comparison  of  the  word  of  God  or  of  men  to 
a  sword,  see  Ps.  Ivii.  4 ;  liz.  7  ;  Ixiv.  8 ;  Eph.  vi.  17.  Philo 
calls  his  Logos  6  rofiev?  the  cutter^  as  cutting  chaos  into  dis- 
tinct things,  and  so  creating  a  kosmos.  *Tirip  than^  is  liter- 
ally, above.  JlSurav  any^  is  every,  ^laroiiov  only  here  and 
Apoc.  i.  16 ;  ii.  12,  lit.  two-movthed.  In  LXX  idways  of  a 
sword.  See  Judg.  iii.  16 ;  Ps.  cxlix.  6 ;  Prov.  v.  4 ;  Sir.  xxi.  8. 
In  Class,  of  a  cave  with  a  twofold  mouth  (Soph.  Philoct.  16); 
of  double-branching  roads  (Soph.  Oed.  Col.  900);  of  rivers 
with  two  mouths  (Polyb.  xxxiv.  10,  5).  J,r6fia  mouthy  of  the 
edge  of  a  sword,  L.  xxi.  24 ;  Heb.  xi.  34.  Often  in  LXX,  as 
Gen.  xxxiv.  26 ;  Josh.  x.  28,  88,  86,  87,  89 ;  Judg.  i.  8.  So 
occasionally  in  Class.,  as  Homer,  Tl.  xv.  889.  KaT€a'0Uiv  or 
KardaOeip  to  devour  is  used  of  the  sword,  Deut.  xxxii.  42 ; 
2  Sam.  ii.  26 ;  Isa.  xxxi.  8 ;  Jer.  ii.  80,  etc.  Mdxaipa  swordy 
in  Class,  a  dirk  or  dagger:  rarely,  a  carving  knife;  later,  a 
bent  sword  or  sabre  as  contrasted  with  a  straight,  thrusting 
sword,  ^((JH)^  (not  in  N.T.  but  occasionally  in  LXX).  *Poft- 
(f>a(a^  L.  ii.  86  (see  note),  elsewhere  only  in  Apocalypse,  very 
often  in  LXX,  is  a  large  broadsword.  In  LXX  of  Goliath's 
sword,  1  Sam.  xvii.  61 

Piercing  (Sa^ryovficiw).     Lit.  coming  through.     N.  T.^. 

Even  to  the  dividing  asunder  of  soul  and  spirit  and  of 
the  joints  and  marrow  (axpi  t^^^uafJMv  V^t/^^  ^^^  tti^v^tov 


428  WOBD  8TUDIB8  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ok.  IV. 

apfi&p  re  teal  fivek&p).  MtpiafA^  dividing^  only  here  and 
cii.  ii.  4,  is  not  to  be  understood  of  dividing  soul  from  spirit 
or  joints /ront  marrow.  Soul  and  spirit  cannot  be  said  to  be 
separated  in  any  such  sense  as  this,  and  joints  and  marrow 
are  not  in  contact  with  each  other.  Mepur/jM  is  the  act  of 
division ;  not  the  point  or  line  of  division.  Joints  and  mar- 
row are  not  to  be  taken  in  a  literal  and  material  sense.*  In 
rendering,  construe  sotU^  spirit^  joints^  marrow^  as  all  depend- 
ent on  dividing.  Joints  and  marrow  (ap^v^  fivcK&Pj  N.  T.^ 
are  to  be  taken  figuratively  as  joints  and  marrow  of  soul  and 
spirit.  This  figurative  sense  is  exemplified  in  classical  usage* 
as  Eurip.  Hippol.  255,  ^^to  form  moderate  friendships,  and 
not  7r/909  aKpov  pveXjop  '^^vxrj^  to  the  deep  marrow  of  the  soul.*' 
The  conception  of  depth  applied  to  the  soul  is  on  the  same 
figurative  line.  See  Aesch.  Agam.  778 ;  Eurip.  Baceh.  208. 
Attempts  to  explain  on  any  psychological  basis  are  futile. 
The  form  of  expression  is  poetical,  and  signifies  that  the 
word  penetrates  to  the  inmost  recesses  of  our  spiritual  being 
as  a  sword  cuts  through  the  joints  and  marrow  of  the  body. 
The  separation  is  not  of  one  part  from  another,  but  operates 
in  each  department  of  the  spiritual  nature.  The  expression 
is  expanded  and  defined  by  the  next  clause. 

Adi8cerner(icpm/co9).  N.  T.^.  ^LXX.  The  word  carries 
on  the  thought  of  dividing.  From  tcplveip  to  divide  or  separate^ 
which  runs  into  the  sense  of  judge^  the  usual  meaning  in 
N.  T.,  judgment  involving  the  sifting  out  and  analysis  of 
evidence.  In  Kpiritc^  the  ideas  of  discrimination  and  jtidg- 
ment  are  blended.     Vulg.  discretor. 

Of  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart  (ivOvfAijamp  /col 
ivpoi&p  Kaphla^).  The  A.V.  is  loose  and  inaccurate.  'Evfti- 
fM/o-i?  rare  in  N.  T.  See  Matt.  ix.  4 ;  Acts  xvii.  29.  Comp. 
ipOv/jLeiaOai^  Matt.  i.  20 ;  ix.  4.  In  every  instance,  both  of 
the  noun  and  of  the  verb,  the  sense  is  pondering  or  thinking 

•  As  Delitzsch,  whose  note  on  this  passage  is  one  of  the  curioaities  of 

exegesis,  and  a  specimen  of  literalism  run  mad. 


Ch.  IV.]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  429 

out.  Rend,  the  reflectiam.  "lEwouiy  only  here  and  1  Pet.  iv.  1. 
It  is  t^  definite  conception  which  follows  ipOvfitfai^  Rend. 
conceptioM. 

13.  From  the  word  of  God  the  writer  proceeds  to  God 
himself  as  cognisant  of  all  things;  thus  giving  a  second 
ground  for  the  exhortation  of  ver.  11. 

Creature  (irr6r«9).  See  on  Rom.  viii.  19 ;  2  Cor.  v.  17 ; 
Col.  i.  15.     Here  in  the  sense  of  thing  created. 

Opened  (rerpaxn^^f^a).  N.  T.^.  ^LXX.  Only  later 
Greek.  Evidently  connected  with  Tpdj(fi\o^  neek^  throat. 
The  exact  metaphor,  however,  it  is  impossible  to  determine. 
The  following  are  the  principal  explanations  proposed :  taken 
by  the  throaty  as  an  athlete  gprasps  an  adversary ;  exposed^  as 
a  malefactor's  neck  is  bent  back,  and  his  face  exposed  to  the 
spectators ;  or,  as  the  necks  of  victims  at  the  altar  are  drawn 
back  and  exposed  to  the  knife.  The  idea  at  the  root  seems 
to  be  the  bending  back  of  the  neck,  and  the  last  explanation, 
better  than  any  other,  suits  the  previous  figure  of  the  sword. 
The  custom  of  drawing  back  the  victim's  neck  for  sacrifice 
is  familiar  to  all  classical  students.  See  Hom.  11.  i.  459; 
ii.  422 ;  Pindar,  01.  xiii.  114.  The  victim's  throat  bared  to 
the  sacrificial  knife  is  a  powerful  figure  of  the  complete  ex- 
posure of  all  created  intelligence  to  the  eye  of  him  whose 
word  is  as  a  two-edged  sword. 

With  whom  we  have  to  do  (tf/^o?  iv  fiiuv  6  Xdyofs^.  Rend. 
with  whom  is  our  reckoning;  that  is  to  wham  we  have  to  give 
account.* 

14.  Chapter  ii.  17, 18  is  now  resumed.  This  and  the  fol- 
lowing verse  more  naturally  form  the  conclusion  of  the  pre- 
ceding section  than  the  introduction  to  the  following  one. 

•  Not  M  Ltinemann,  Alfoid,  Bleek,  Calvin,  De  Wette,  toward  whom  a 
relation  exUU  for  m,  oa  which  Wei«  oorrectly  remarka  that  this  aanae  of 
X^ot  is  unbiblicaL 


480  WOBD  8TXTDIB8  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Gb.  IV. 

Great  high  priest  (^fi^ap).  Emphasising  Christ^s  priestly 
character  to  Jewish  readers,  as  superior  to  that  of  the  Leviti- 
cal  priests.     He  is  holding  up  the  ideal  priesthood. 

Passed  into  the  heavens  (BieXtfXuOdra  roini  ovpavwk^. 
Rend.  ^^  passed  through  the  heavens."  Through,  and  up  to 
the  throne  of  God  of  which  he  wields  the  power,  and  is  thus 
able  to  fulfil  for  his  followers  the  divine  promise  of  rest. 

Jesus  the  Son  of  God.  The  name  Jmu  applied  to  the 
high  priest  is  forcible  as  recalling  the  historical,  human  per- 
son, who  was  tempted  like  his  brethren.  We  are  thus  pre- 
pared for  what  is  said  in  ver.  15  concerning  his  sympathising 
character. 

15.  We  have  not  an  high  priest  who  cannot,  etc.  What- 
ever may  be  thought  to  the  contrary ;  whatever  contrary  con- 
clusion may  be  drawn  from  the  character  of  the  Levitical 
priests,  or  from  Christ's  exalted  dignity  and  purity. 

Touched  with  the  feeling  (tnnnraOfjirai).  Only  here  and 
ch.  X.  34.  This  is  more  than  knowledge  of  human  infirmity. 
It  is  feeling  it  by  reason  of  a  common  experience  with  (aw) 

men. 

Infirmities  (aaOeveUu^^.  Not  sufferings^  but  weaknesses^ 
moral  and  physical,  which  predispose  to  sin  and  facilitate  it. 

Like  as  we  are  (tcaff  ofjLoiAnjra).  Lit.  according  to  like-- 
ness.  'Kfi&p  of  us  or  our  is  to  be  understood,  or,  as  some, 
1^/AAi/,  according  to  his  likeness  to  us. 

Without  sin  Cx^P^  a/iaprCa^^.  This,  of  course,  implies 
that  he  was  not  led  into  sin  by  temptation,  and  also  that  no 
temptation  aroused  in  him  sin  already  present  and  dormant. 
It  is  not  meant  that  temptation  arising  from  sin  external  to 
himself  was  not  applied  to  him. 


Ch.  v.]  the  KPISTLB  to  the  HEBREWS.  431 

16.  Come —  unto  (irpoa-epxiofi^Oa).  ^P.,  often  in  Hebrews, 
and  commonly  in  the  same  sense  as  here — approach  to  God 
through  the  O.  T.  sacrifices  or  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  Paul's 
word  irpocaytifiyii  access  expresses  the  same  idea.*  See  Eph. 
ii.  18  ;  iii.  12.  The  phrase  come  boldly  expresses  a  thought 
which  the  Epistle  emphasises — that  Christianity  is  the  reli- 
gion otfree  access  to  God.     Comp.  2  Cor.  iii.  12, 18. 

Unto  the  throne  of  grace  (t^  Opiv^  rrjfi  ;^<^709).  The 
phrase  N.  T.^.  Throne  of  ghrj/y  Matt.  xix.  28 ;  xxv.  81 : 
of  majesty^  Heb.  viii.  1.  In  Apoc.  throne  occurs  over  forty 
times,  either  the  throne,  or  his  throne,  or  throne  qf  Chd. 
Once  throne  of  the  beasts  xvi.  10.  Throne  qf  grace  expresses 
grace  as  the  gift  of  divine  power. 

Mercy — grace  (IXco9 — x^^)*  J^^cy  for  past  sins ;  grace 
for  future  work,  trial,  and  resistance  to  temptation. 

To  help  in  time  of  need  (jek  eS/caipop  fioiffiuav).  Lit. 
for  seasonable  help^  or  help  in  good  time;  before  it  is  too  late ; 
while  there  is  stiU  time  to  seek  God's  rest.  Others,  however, 
explain,  when  it  is  needed;  or,  hrfore  temptation  leads  to  sin. 


CHAPTER   V. 

The  doctrine  of  the  high-priesthood  of  Christ. 

The  Hebrew  Christians  were  not  familiar  with  Christ  under 
the  aspect  of  a  high  priest.  They  did  not  understand  the 
application  of  the  title  and  office  to  him.  They  could  not 
infer  it  from  his  early  life,  since  he  was  not  of  the  lineage  of 
Aaron,  nor  from  his  ministry,  since  he  claimed  no  special 
privilege  of  access  to  the  temple,  performed  no  priestly  func- 
tions, and  contradicted  the  whole  Jewish  conception  of  the 
priesthood. 

*  Thoufl^  lome,  as  M^er  and  ElUoott,  inaiit  on  the  trmnaitife  Mnae— 
^nJtfoductUm, 


482  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TBSTAICENT.         [On.  V. 

1.  Every  high  priest  (vS/^  ipx^epei^^.  Every  Lievitical 
high  priest.      Apx^P^d^  ^P. 

Taken  (\afA/5av6fiaH^^.  Rend,  being  taken^  or  nnee  he  is 
taken:  not  who  is  taken.  The  point  is  that  the  high  priest's 
efficiency  for  men  depends  on  his  being  taken  from  among 
men. 

Is  ordained  (jcaOlararaC).  Constitated  priest.  See  on 
Tit.  i.  6. 

For  men  (tnrkp  iivOpAirfap).     On  behalf  of  men. 

In  things  pertaining  to  Qod  (r&  vpi^  riv  Oeiw).    As 

respects  his  relation  to  God.     See  on  ch.  ii.  17. 

That  he  may  offer  (Xva  irpo<r^prf).  II/MMr^/Mtv,  lit.  to 
bring  to  (the  altar').  Comp.  Matt.  v.  28.  ^P.,  who,  however, 
has  the  kindred  noun  irpotr^pii  offering.  Very  often  in  LXX  ; 
nineteen  times  in  Hebrews,  and  always,  with  one  exception 
(ch.  xii.  7),  in  the  technical  sense,  as  here. 

Gifts — sacrifices  (h&pa — Ovtrlasi).  ^Apa  offerings  gener- 
oily:  Owrla^  bloody  sacrifices.  The  distinction,  however,  is 
not  constantly  observed.  Thus,  Ovalai^  of  unbloody  offerings^ 
Gen.  iv.  8,  5  ;  Lev.  ii.  1 ;  Num.  v.  15  :  B&pa^  of  bloody  offer- 
ings, Gen.  iv.  4 ;  Lev.  i.  2,  8, 10. 

For  sins  (yn-kp  a/iapri&v).  In  this  the  priest's  efficiency  is 
especially  called  out,  and  he  who  has  not  genuine  compassion 
for  the  sinful  cannot  do  this  efficiently.  Hence  the  words 
which  follow. 

2.  Have  compassion  (^fierpioiraOelv).  N.  T.^.  ^LXX. 
^Class.  Originally  of  the  rational  regulation  of  the  natural 
passions,  as  opposed  to  the  Stoic  avdOeui^  which  involved  the 
crushing  out  of  the  passions.  Often,  in  later  Greek,  of  mod- 
erating anger.    It  is  not  identical  with  awiraOrjaoi  (ch.  iv.  S)^ 


Ch.V.]  the  epistle  to  the  HEBREWS.  488 

but  signifies  to  he  moderate  or  tender  in  judgment  toward 
another's  errors.  Here  it  denotes  a  state  of  feeling  toward 
the  ignorant  and  erring  which  is  neither  too  severe  nor  too 
tolerant.  The  high  priest  must  not  be  betrayed  into  irrita- 
tion at  sin  and  ignorance,  neither  must  he  be  weakly  indul- 
gent. 

The  ignorant  (roS?  ivfyoovai).  Comp.  iyvatffidrwp  igno* 
ranees^  ch.  ix.  7,  and  Num.  xv.  22-81,  where  the  distinction 
is  drawn  between  sins  of  ignorance  and  sins  of  presumption. 
Atonement  for  sins  of  ignorance  was  required  by  the  Leviti- 
cal  law  as  a  means  of  educating  the  moral  perception,  and 
of  showing  that  sin  and  defilement  might  exist  unsuspected : 
that  God  saw  evil  where  men  did  not,  and  that  his  test  of 
purity  was  stricter  than  theirs. 

For  that  he  himself  also  is  compassed  with  infirmity 

(^iwel  ical  aM9  irepUeiroi  iurOiimav).  Sympathy  belongs  to 
the  high-priestly  office,  and  grows  out  of  the  sense  of  per- 
sonal infirmity.  The  verb  is  graphic:  hoe  infirmity  lying 
round  him.  Comp.  ch.  xii.  1,  of  the  encompassing  {ir^pucelr 
fuvop)  cloud  of  witnesses.  *Kir6iv€Uiv^  the  moral  weakness 
which  makes  men  capable  of  sin.  This  is  denied  in  the  case 
of  Christ.     See  ch.  vii.  28. 

8.  IHe  ought  (i^ielXsC).  It  is  his  duty,  growing  out  of 
the  fact  of  his  own  infirmity. 

4.  The  high  priest  must  be  divinely  called.  One  thus 
compassed  with  infirmity  would  shrink  from  such  an  office 
unless  called  to  it  by  God. 

He  that  is  called  (/KaXov/iAciw).  The  A.  V.  follows  T.  R., 
6  /ca\ovfA€vo^.  The  article  should  be  omitted.  Rend,  but  being 
called  by  God  (he  taketh  tO«  <u  did  Aaron. 

5.  Did  not  glorify  himself  to  be  made  high  priest. 
'ESd^fiurei/  glorified  is  general,  and  is  more  specifically  defined 
by  yevffOfjvai  apx^^p^  to  be  made  high  priest. 

TOL.  IT.— 2S 


434  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  MEW  TESTAMENT.         [p^Y 

But  he  that  said  unto  him.  Thou  art  my  Son,  etc.  Sup- 
ply glorified  him.  He  did  not  glorify  himself,  but  God  who 
styled  him  '^  son  "  glorified  him.  2%(m  art  my  Son  is  intro- 
duced thus  in  close  connection  with  the  call  to  the  priesthoocU 
in  recognition  of  the  fact  that  the  priesthood  of  Christ  had  its 
basis  in  his  sonship.  ^^  Christ^s  priestly  vocation  ceases  to  be 
an  accident  in  his  history,  and  becomes  an  essential  character- 
istic of  his  position  as  Son :  sonship,  christhood,  priestUness* 
inseparably  interwoven"  (Bruce). 

6.  Thou  art  a  priest  forever,  etc.  According  to  this 
verse  Christ  is  prophetically  pointed  out  in  Ps.  ex  as  an 
eternal  priest,  independent  of  fleshly  descent,  a  king,  and 
superior  in  dignity  to  the  Levitical  priests. 

According  to  the  order  (^Karh  riiv  rd^ip).  According  to 
the  rank  which  Melchisedec  held.  Almost « like.  For  Mel- 
chisedec  see  ch.  vii. 

7.  He  is  now  to  show  that  Christ  was  under  training  for 
the  priesthood,  and  describes  the  process  of  training. 

Who  (A9).  Nominative  to  iiutOof  learned^  ver.  8,  to  which 
all  the  participles  are  preparatory. 

In  the  days  of  his  flesh  (iv  rai9  fiii^paw  t^  aaptc^  avrov). 

During  his  mortal  life. 

When  he  had  offered   up    prayers  and    supplications 

(Se77(7€t9  T€  Kol  UenfpCa^  irpoaev^tca^').  A&jaei^  special^  defin- 
ite reque%t%:  Uen^pla^^  N.  T.^,  is  properly  an  adjective,  per- 
taining  to  or  fit  for  suppliants^  with  pdfiSov^  staves  or  ikaia^ 
olive-branches  understood.  The  olive-branch  bound  round 
with  wool  was  held  forth  by  a  suppliant  in  token  of  his  char- 
acter as  such.     The  phrase  irpoa(f>^p€iv  Sei/o-et?  N.  T.*^.* 

*  In  his  volume  on  Hebrews  (1800)  Professor  Bruce  abandons  the  view 
held  by  him  in  his  Humiliation  of  Christ,  p.  30,  that,  in  the  use  of  the  sacri- 
ficial expression  irpoctv4yKa%^  the  writer  conceived  Christ ^s  prayer  in  Geth- 
semane  as  a  sacrificial  offering,  and  found  in  it  a  parallel  with  the  offering 
which  the  Levitical  high  priest  presented  for  himself ;  a  view  which  mxux  bo 
regarded  as  fanciful    See  Weiss  ad  loc. 


SB.  v.]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEW8.  485 

Unto  him  that  was  able  to  save  him  from  death  Qn-po^ 
TOP  Bwdfuvop  aiiieip  avrop  he  Bapdrov),  Const,  with  prayers 
and  9upplication9j  not  with  offered.  To  save  him  from  death 
may  mean  to  deliver  him  from  the  fear  of  deaths  from  the 
anguish  of  death,  or  from  remaining  a  prey  to  death.  In  either 
case,  the  statement  connects  itself  with  the  thought  of  Christ's 
real  humanity.  He  was  under  the  pressure  of  a  sore  human 
need  which  required  divine  help,  thus  showing  that  he  was 
like  unto  his  brethren.  He  appealed  to  one  who  could  answer 
his  prayer.  The  purport  of  the  prayer  is  not  stated.  It  is 
at  least  suggested  by  Matt.  xxvi.  89. 

And  was  heard  in  that  he  feared  (jcaX  elaaicowrOeU  inrh 
T^  evXa/SeUK).  Rend,  tvas  heard  on  account  of  his  godly  fear. 
*Ev\dl3€ia  only  here  and  ch.  xii.  28.  The  verb  evXafitiaOai 
to  act  cautiously y  beware^  fear^  only  ch.  xi.  7.  The  image  in 
the  word  is  that  of  a  cautious  taking  hold  (\a/A0dP€ip^  and 
careful  and  respectful  handling:  hence  piety  of  a  devout  and 
circumspect  character,  as  that  of  Christ,  who  in  his  prayer 
took  account  of  all  things,  not  only  his  own  desire,  but  his 
Father's  will.  *Ev\d/3€ut  is  ascribed  to  Christ  as  a  human 
trait,  see  ch.  xii.  28.  He  was  heard^  for  his  prayer  was 
answered,  whatever  it  may  have  been.  Grod  was  able  to 
save  him  from  death  altogether.  He  did  not  do  this.  He 
was  able  to  sustain  him  under  the  anguish  of  death,  and  to 
give  him  strength  to  sufiFer  the  Father's  will:  he  was  also 
able  to  deliver  him  from  death  by  resurrection :  both  these  he 
did.  It  is  not  impossible  that  both  these  may  be  combined 
in  the  statement  he  was  heard.* 

8.  Though  he  were  a  Son  (xahrep  tbp  vuk}.  For  were 
rend.  was.  His  training  for  the  priesthood  involved  sufiFer- 
ing,  even  though  he  was  a  son.  Connect  with  (fiaOep  learned^ 
not  with  the  preceding  clause,  which  would  mean  that  his 
position  as  a  son  did  not  exempt  him  from  the  obligation  to 

•  Hie  rendering  he  toot  heard  (and  «o  delivered)  from  hUfear  (thatwMdi' 
he  feared)  \b  untenable  becanee  f^Xi/lcMi  cannot  mean  the  of^teet  of  fear.  TIm 
rendering  he  toot  heard  hv  him  who  wuhUfear  is  absozd. 


486  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Cat.  V. 

godly  fear,  which  is  true  as  a  fact  (see  ver.  7),  but  is  not  the 
point  of  emphasis  here. 

Learned  he  obedience  (iiutOev  r^p  tnroieai^p).  Omit  he^ 
since  the  subject  of  IfiaOep  learned  is  A9  who^  ver.  7.  Jesus 
did  not  have  to  learn  to  obey,  see  J.  viii.  29 ;  but  he  required 
the  special  discipline  of  a  severe  human  experience  as  a  train- 
ing for  his  office  as  a  high  priest  who  could  be  touched  with 
the  feeling  of  human  infirmities.  He  did  not  need  to  be  dis- 
ciplined out  of  any  inclination  to  disobedience ;  but,  as  Alf  ord 
puts  it,  ^Hhe  special  course  of  submission  by  which  he  became 
perfected  as  our  high  priest  was  gone  through  in  time,  and 
was  a  matter  of  acquirement  and  practice."  This  is  no  more 
strange  than  his  growth  in  wisdom,  L.  ii.  52.  GratDth  in 
experience  was  an  essential  part  of  his  humanity. 

By  the  things  which  he  suffered  (a^'  &p  hra0€ii).  Or 
from  the  things,  etc.  Note  the  word-play,  ifiaOep  hroBev. 
So  Croesus,  addressing  Cyrus,  says,  r^  S^  yyoi  iraOruMTc^  iSvra 
&;^a/3urra,  fiaOi^fiaTa  y^ovep^  "  my  9uffering%^  though  painful, 
have  proved  to  be  le%%on9^^  (Hdt.  i.  207)  :  so  Soph.  Traeh. 
142,  ikTfT  ixfuWoK  iraBoxHTcUt  "  may st  thou  not  learn  by  WLffering^ 

9.  And  being  made  perfect  (jcdi  rik^wSdlfi),  Comp.  eh. 
ii.  10.  The  fundamental  idea  in  reXciotH;  is  the  bringing  of 
a  person  or  thing  to  the  goal  fixed  by  God.  Comp.  ch.  vii. 
11,  19;  ix.  9;  x.  1,  14;  xi.  40;  xu.  28.  Here  of  Christ's 
having  reached  the  end  which  was  contemplated  in  his 
divinely -appointed  discipline  for  the  priesthood.  The  con- 
summation was  attained  in  his  death,  Philip,  ii.  8  :  his  obedi- 
ence extended  even  unto  death. 

The  author  of  eternal  salvation  (aino^  acorrfpCa;  aitDvCov). 
*ACtio^^  N.  T.^,  an  adjective,  causing,  Comp.  captain  of  sal- 
vation^ Heb.  ii^  10.  The  phrase  aamfpCa  alAvuK  eternal  salva- 
tion N.  T.^  but  see  LXX,  Isa.  xv.  17.  Not  everlasting 
salvation,  but  a  salvation  of  which  all  the  conditions,  attain- 
ments, privileges,  and  rewards  transcend  the  conditions  and 
limitations  of  time. 


Ch.  v.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  487 

Unto  all  them  that  obey  him  (iraatv  rok  inrascovovaiv 
airr^^.  Obey  points  to  obedience^  ver.  8,  and  scUvation  to  9ave^ 
ver.  7.  If  the  captain  of  salvation  must  learn  obedience,  so 
must  his  followers.     Comp.  2  Th.  i.  8. 

10.  Called  of  Qod  (wpoaayopeuOeU  tnrh  roS  ^coS).  Rend. 
tince  he  was  addressed  or  saluted  by  Qod.  God  recognised  and 
saluted  him  as  that  which  he  had  become  by  passing  through 
and  completing  his  earthly  discipline.  Upoaajopeikiv  to  aid- 
dress  N.  T.^.     A  few  times  in  LXX. 

11 .  From  this  point  the  comparison  of  Christ  with  Melchise- 
dec  would  naturally  be  developed ;  but  the  author  digresses 
into  a  complaint  of  the  imperfect  spiritual  attainment  of  hiB 
readers,  and  a  remonstrance  and  admonition  extending  to  the 
end  of  ch.  vi. 

Of  whom  (wepl  oS).  Rend,  concerning  which.  Not  Mel- 
chisedec,  but  the  topic  that  Christ  is  a  priest  after  the  order 
of  Melchisedec,  a  topic  to  which  great  importance  is  attached. 
Can  it  be  imagined  that  the  discussion  of  such  a  topic  would 
appeal  to  a  Gentile  audience  as  a  reason  for  not  relapsing  into 
paganism? 

We  have  many  things  to  say  (iroXif^  ^fitv  6  X<^o9).  Lit. 
the  discourse  is  abundant  unto  us.  We  refers  to  the  writer 
himself. 

Hard  to  be  uttered  (^SvaepfAi^veuro^  'XJyeiv).  Lit.  hard  of 
interpretation  to  speak.  The  A.  V.  entirely  misses  the  idea  of 
interpretation.  Rev.  better,  hard  of  interpretation.  Avaep- 
fAiJiwro9  N.  T.^.     ^LXX.     ^Class. 

Ye  are  dull  of  hearing  (vtsOpol  y€y6paT€  rah  iucoaU').  Rend, 
ye  have  grown  dull  in  your  hearing.  For  &4co^  hearing  see  on 
2  Tim.  iv.  8.  The  verb  implies  a  deterioration  on  the  hearers* 
part.     Na»^/M>l  only  here  and  ch.  vi.  12.     From  mi  not  and 


^8  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  KEW  TESTAMENT.         i€Ja.  V. 

ideiv  to  push.  Hence  ^law^  sluggish.*  Mostlj  in  later  Greek, 
iilthough  Plato  uses  it  much  in  the  same  sense  as  here.  **  When 
they  have  to  face  study  they  are  stupid  (iwBpoC)  and  cannot 
remember."  Theaet.  144  B.  In  LXX,  Prov.  xxii.  29; 
Sir.  iv.  29;  xi.  12.  Sometimes  ==  {(HT,  mean^  obscure.  So 
in  Proverbs,  but  in  Sirach  slaeky  slow. 

12.  When  for  the  time  ye  ought  to  be  teachers  (o^/Xoi^ 
r€9  ehai  BiBcuricaXoi  &A  top  xf^vov).  Rend,  for  when  ye  aught 
to  be  teachers  by  reason  of  the  time.  A.  Y.  entirely  obscures 
the  true  meaning,  which  is  that,  because  of  the  time  during 
which  the  readers  have  been  under  instruction,  they  ought  to 
be  able  to  instruct  others. 

Again  (wdXiv).  Not  with  teach  you^  as  A.V.,  but  with  ye 
have  need.  The  position  of  the  word  is  emphatic.  Again  ye 
have  need  of  being  taught  the  very  rudiments  of  divine  truth 
which  ye  were  taught  long  ago. 

Which  be  (rti^).  A.V.  takes  the  pronoun  as  interrogative 
(r/i/a).  Better  indefinite  as  subject  of  BtBdaic&v  teach.  Rend, 
^^ye  have  need  that  some  one  teach  you.*' 

The  first  principles  of  the  oracles  (r^  (rroixela  r^  ^pxn^ 
T&v  XoyloDv).  Lit.  tJie  rudiments  of  the  beginning  of  the  oracles. 
The  phrase  aroix^ia  r^  apxn^  N.  T.^.  It  18=^ primary  ele- 
ments.  For  crroix^la  see  on  Gal.  iv.  8.  A<iyiov  is  a  diminutive, 
meaning  strictly  a  brief  utterance,  and  used  both  in  classical 
and  biblical  Greek  of  divine  utterances.  In  Class,  of  prose 
oracles.  Philo  uses  it  of  the  O.  T.  prophecies,  and  his  treatise 
on  the  Ten  Commandments  is  entitled  irepl  r&v  S^ica  Xoyieov. 
In  LXX  often  generally  —  "  the  word  or  words  of  the  Lord," 
see  Num.  xxiv.  16 ;  Deut.  xxxiii.  9 ;  Ps.  xi.  6 ;  xvii.  80,  etc. 
It  was  used  of  the  sayings  of  Jesus,  see  Polycarp,  Ad  Phil.  vii. 
From  the  time  of  Philo,  of  any  sacred  writing,  whether  dis- 

*  Schmidt,  Sjfnon.^  says  it  ia  best  nprennted  by  the  Gennaa  ntthlen  te 
iauxHe. 


Ch.  v.]  the  epistle  to  the  HEBREWS.  489 

course  or  narrative.  Papias  and  Irenaeus  have  r^  tcvpuuch 
Xiyia  daminieal  oracles.*  The  meaning  here  is  the  0.  T. 
%aying%^  especially  those  pointing  to  Christ. 

And  are  become  (jcaX  yefdpare).  As  in  ver.  11,  implying 
degeneracy.  The  time  was  when  you  needed  the  strong  meat 
of  the  word. 

Milk  (^ydXeucm).  Comp.  1  Cor.  iii.  2.  Answering  to 
rudiments. 

Strong  meat  (artpeibi  rpo^rfi^.  Lit.  eolid  meat.  See  on 
steadfast  1  Pet.  v.  9.  More  advanced  doctrinal  teaching. 
The  explanation  of  the  Melchisedec  priesthood  to  which  the 
writer  was  about  to  pass  involved  the  exhibition  for  the  first 
time  of  the  opposition  of  the  N.  T.  economy  of  salvation  to 
that  of  the  old,  and  of  the  imperfection  and  abrogation  of  the 
O.  T.  priesthood.  To  apprehend  this  consequence  of  N.  T. 
revelation  required  alert  and  matured  minds.  This  is  why 
he  pauses  to  dwell  on  the  sluggish  mental  and  spiritual  con- 
dition of  his  readers. 

18.  Useth  (/ier^Q»v).  Rend,  partakes  of.  See  on  oh.  i.  9; 
ii.  14 ;  iii.  1,  14. 

Unskilful  (i!7r€ipo9).  N.  T.^  Rend.  unskOUd  or  tn- 
experienced. 

In  the  word  of  righteousness  (Xiyov  Sucaunnhni^^.    The 

phrase  N.  T.^.  The  genitive  Sucauxrvpti^  of  righteoumeee  \b 
combined  in  N.  T.  with  tray,  Q-od^  gift^  instrwments^  servants^ 
law^  ministration^  fruit  and  fruits^  ministers^  hope^  breastplate^ 
crown^  king^  preacher.  It  is  a  mistake  to  attempt  to  give  the 
phrase  here  a  concrete  meaning.  It  signifies  simply  a  word 
of  normally  right  character.  It  is  not = the  Christian  revelation^ 
which  would  require  the  article.     Probably,  however,  in  the 

*  An  interesting  diseoBsion  of  the  w<nd  may  be  found  in  Li|^ill6oi^s 
E$9ay9  on  SupenuUural  Beligiont  p.  172  fL 


440  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  KBW  TESTAMENT.        [Ck.  VL 

foreground  of  the  writer's  thought  was  the  word  spoken  by 
the  Son  (oh.  i.  2) ;  the  salvation  which  at  first  was  spoken 
by  the  Lord  (eh.  ii.  8).* 

A  babe  (i^m).     See  on  Rom.  ii.  20;  1  Cor.   iiL  1; 

Eph.  iv.  14. 

14.   Strong  meat  belongeth  to  them  that  are  of  full  age 

{reXeiwp  S^  icrrip  17  crrepeii  rpo^').  This  rendering  is  clumsy. 
Rend,  solid  food  uforfidUgroum  men.  For  r€KelmvfuXlrgroumf 
see  on  1  Cor.  ii.  6.  Often  by  Paul,  as  here,  in  contrast  with 
vrfjnoi  immature  Chrietiane.  See  1  Cor.  ii.  6 ;  iii.  1 ;  xiii.  11 ; 
Eph.  iv.  4.  Paul  has  the  verb  rniind^euf  to  be  a  child  in 
1  Cor.  xiv.  20. 

By  reason  of  use  (&^  rtfp  l^iv).  For  u$e  rend,  habihide. 
N.  T.^.  It  is  the  condition  produced  by  past  exercise.  Not 
the  process^  as  A.  V.,  but  the  reeult. 

Their  senses  (r^  aUrdrrn^pid).  N.  T.^.  Organs  of  per* 
ception ;  perceptive  faculties  of  the  mind.  In  LXX  see 
Jer.  iv.  19 ;  4  Mace.  ii.  22. 

Exercised   (fYeyvfAvacfAAfa).      See  on  2  Pet.  ii.  14,  and 

1  Tim.  iv.  7. 

Good  and  evil.  Not  moral  good  and  evil,  but  wholesome 
and  corrupt  doctrine.  The  implication  is  that  the  readers' 
condition  is  such  as  to  prevent  them  from  making  this 
distinction. 

CHAPTER   VI. 

Some  difficulty  attaches  to  the  first  three  verses,  beoanse 
the  writer  combines  two  thoughts :  his  own  intention  to  pro- 
ceed from  elementary  to  more  advanced  teachings,  and  hie 

*  Surely  not,  as  Ltinemann,  the  gotpel  mettagt  a»  centring  in  the  doeirtim 
of  juetificaUon  by  faith,  which  would  be  dragged  in  by  the  < 


Ch.  VI.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE   HEBREWS.  441 

readers'  advance  to  that  higher  grade  of  spiritual  receptive- 
ness  on  which  the  effectiveness  of  his  teaching  must  depend. 
The  mistake  in  interpretation  has  been  in  insisting  that  the 
three  verses  treat  only  the  one  or  the  other  thought.  Ob- 
serve that  Sao  wherefore  is  connected  with  the  rebuke  in 
ch.  V.  11,  12 ;  and  that  that  rebuke  is  directly  connected 
with  the  announcement  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Melchisedec 
priesthood  of  Christ.  The  course  of  thought  is  as  follows  : 
Christ  is  a  priest  after  the  order  of  Melchisedec  (ch.  v.  10). 
There  is  much  to  be  said  on  this  subject,  and  it  is  hard  to 
explain,  because  you  have  become  dull,  and  need  elementary 
teaching,  whereas,  by  reason  of  your  long  Christian  standing, 
you  ought  to  be  teachers  yourselves  (ch.  v.  11, 12).  For  you 
all  recognise  the  principle  that  baby-food  is  for  babes,  and 
solid  food  only  for  men,  whose  powers  have  been  trained  by 
habitual  exercise,  (ch.  v.  18, 14).  Wherefore^  in  order  that 
you  may  be  aroused  from  your  sluggishness  and  have  your 
perceptions  brought  up  to  the  matured  condition  which  befits 
men  in  Christ,  and  in  order  that  I  may,  at  the  same  time, 
complete  the  development  of  my  theme,  I  propose  that  we 
together  move  forward  to  completion :  I  to  the  full  exposi- 
tion of  the  subject  of  Christ's  high-priesthood,  and  you  to 
that  maturity  of  discernment  which  becomes  you.  This  will 
require  us  both  to  leave  the  rudimentary  stage  of  teaching 
concerning  Christ. 

1.    Leaving  the   principles  of  the  doctrines  of  Christ 

(^a<t>dvTe:  top  rrj^  &PXV^  tov  Xpurrov  Xrfyoi/).  Lit.  leaving  the 
word  of  the  beginning  concerning  Cfhrist.  'A^A^tw  leaving  or 
dismissing  does  not  imply  ceasing  to  believe  in  elementary 
truths  or  to  regard  them  as  important,  but  leaving  them  ^^as 
a  builder  leaves  his  foundation  in  erecting  his  building" 
(Bruce).  The  word  of  the  beginning  of  Christ  is  practically 
=  t?^e  rudiments  of  the  beginning^  ch.  v.  12 ;  that  rudimentary 
view  of  Christ's  person  and  office  which  unfolds  into  the 
doctrine  of  his  priesthood.  Up  to  this  point  the  writer  has 
shown  only  that  the  permanent  elements  of  the  old  covenant 
remain  and  are  exalted  in  Christ.    The  more  difficult  point| 


442  WORD  8TUDIEB  IK  THE  NEW  TBBTAMXNT.       [Gb.  TL 

which  it  wiU  require  matured  perception  to  grasp,  is  that 
Christ's  priesthood  inyolves  the  entire  abolition  of  the  old 
covenant. 

Let  us  go  on  unto  perfection  (M  rifv  tAcmPtipw  ^v^ 
fAeda).  Lit.  let  u$  be  borne  an  to  eompUteneu.  The  parti- 
cipial clause,  leaving^  etc.,  is  related  to  the  verbal  clause  as 
expressing  a  necessary  accompaniment  or  consequence  of  the 
latter.  Let  ue  be  borne  on  to  eompleteneu^  and^  because  of  f  Am, 
leave^  etc.  This  sense  is  not  given  by  the  Rev.  TcXcufri^ 
only  here  and  Ck)L  iii.  14.  Rend.  completene$$.  The  com- 
pleteness is  viewed  as  pertaining  to  both  the  writer  and  the 
readers.  He  proposes  to  fully  develop  his  theme :  they  are 
exhorted  to  strive  for  that  full  Christian  manhood  which  will 
fit  them  to  receive  the  fully-developed  discussion. 


Not  laying  again  tlie  foundation  (^fitf  irdXiv  0€fU\iopt 
fiaXXiiuvoi) .  Not  explanatory  of  leaving^  etc.  The  following 
words,  describing  the  elements  of  the  foundation,  —  repent- 
ance, baptisms,  etc.,  —  simply  illustrate  in  a  general  way 
the  proposal  to  proceed  to  the  exposition  of  the  doctrine  of 
Christ's  priesthood.  The  illustrative  proposition  is  that  a 
building  is  not  completed  by  lingering  at  the  foundation; 
and  so  Christian  maturity  is  not  to  be  attained  by  going  back 
to  subjects  which  belong  to  the  earliest  stage  of  Christian 
instruction.  He  purposely  selects  for  his  illustration  things 
which  belong  to  the  very  initiation  of  Christian  life. 

Dead  works  (yexpAp  Ipywv),  The  phrase  only  in  Hebrews. 
Comp.  eh.  ix.  14.  Not  sinful  works  in  the  ordinary  sense  of 
the  term,  but  works  without  the  element  of  life  which  comes 
through  faith  in  the  living  God.  There  is  a  sharp  opposition, 
therefore,  between  dead  works  and  faith.  They  are  contraries. 
This  truth  must  be  one  of  the  very  first  things  expounded  to 
a  Jew  embracing  Christianity. 

2.    Doctrine  of  baptisms  (^fiaimafi&p  BiBax^fv) •  *    Not  lay- 

*  There  is  a  difference  of  reading :  dtdax^^  Westcott  and  Hort,  Weifli : 
Itdax^tf  Tiflcbendorf,  Rev.  T.    If  the  latter,  the  arrangement  may  be  (a)  two 


Cb.  VI.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE   HEBREWS.  443 

ing  again  as  a  foundation  the  teaching  (BiBax^p)  of  baptisms. 
BaiTTha-fuk  only  here,  ch.  ix«  10,  and  Mk.  vii.  4.  The  common 
form  is  fidirr^a-fAa.  Neither  word  in  LXX  or  Class.  The 
meaning  here  is  lu$tral  rites  in  general^  and  may  include  the 
baptism  of  John  and  Christian  baptism.  The  teaching  would 
cover  all  such  rites,  their  relations  and  comparative  signifi- 
cance, and  it  would  be  necessary  in  the  case  of  a  Jewish 
convert  to  Christianity  who  might  not  perceive,  for  example, 
any  difference  between  Jewish  lustrations  and  Christian 
baptism. 

Laying  on  of  hands.  See  on  1  Tim.  iv.  14.  A  Jewish 
and  a  Christian  practice. 

Resurrection  —  eternal  judgment.  Both  resurrection  and 
future  judgment  were  Jewish  tenets  requiring  exposition  to 
Jewish  converts  as  regarded  their  relations  to  the  same  doc- 
trines as  taught  by  Christianity.  The  resurrection  of  Christ 
as  involving  the  resurrection  of  believers  would,  of  itself, 
change  the  whole  aspect  of  the  doctrine  of  resurrection  as 
held  by  a  Jew.  *Au^v(ov  eternal  certainly  cannot  here  signify 
everlasting.  It  expresses  rather  a  judgment  which  shall  tran- 
scend all  temporal  judgments ;  which  shall  be  conducted  on 
principles  different  from  those  of  earthly  tribunals,  and  the 
decisions  of  which  shall  be  according  to  the  standards  of  the 
economy  of  a  world  beyond  time.  See  additional  note  on 
2  Th.  i.  9.  The  phrase  eternal  judgment  N.  T.<>.  Comp. 
icplfM  TO  lUXKov  the  judgment  to  come^  Acts  xxiv.  25. 

8.  If  God  permit  (idmrep  hnrp^  o  ^afe).  The  exact 
formula  N.  T.^.  Comp.  1  Cor.  xvi.  7 ;  Acts  xviii.  21.  Pagan 
parallels  are  r&p  de&v  OeKivroiv  \f  the  gods  tvill ;  de&p  hnrpeir- 

distinct  genitiyes,  of  teaching^  of  baptisnu :  (b)  dtdax^  dependent  on  flaw- 
ritf>Mwr,  bapti9m$  accompanied  with  teaching  :  (c)  dcdax^t  goyeming  fiawrt^- 
M«dv,  teaching  of  bapti$m$.  (a)  is  not  in  accord  with  the  structure  of  what 
precedes  and  foUows,  since  all  the  particular^  of  the  foundation  are  desig- 
nated by  double  expressions :  (b)  is  unusual  and  difficult  to  explain  with  the 
plural  /Sarritf-Mdr,  since  baptism  with  teaching  would  mean  Christian  baptism, 
and  fiavriff/iQw  is  not  limited  to  Christian  baptism :  (c)  is  preferable  if  atdax^t 
18  to  be  read. 


444  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTA3IENT.       [C&  TL 

6inwv  the  gods  permitting^  and  deAv  fiavXofUimi^  %f  the  god» 
desire.  An  ominous  hint  is  conveyed  that  the  spiritual  dul- 
ness  of  the  readers  may  prevent  the  writer  from  developing* 
his  theme  and  them  from  receiving  his  higher  instruction. 
The  issue  is  dependent  on  the  power  which  God  may  impart 
to  his  teaching,  but  his  efforts  may  be  thwarted  by  the  impoB- 
sibility  of  repentance  on  their  part.  No  such  impossibility 
is  imposed  by  God,  but  it  may  reside  in  a  moral  condition 
which  precludes  the  efficient  action  of  the  agencies  which 
work  for  repentance,  so  that  God  cannot  permit  the  desired 
consequence  to  follow  the  word  of  teaching. 

4.    Impossible  (aSiWrop).     It  is  impossible  to  dilate  this 
word  into  difficult. 

Those  who  were  once  enlightened  (roi^  iira^  ^inrurOAh- 
T09).  Rend.  '''' mice  for  all  enlightened."  "Avaf  is  frequent 
in  the  Epistle.  Comp.  ch.  ix.  7, 26, 27, 28 ;  x.  2 ;  xii.  26, 27. 
Indicating  that  the  enlightenment  ought  to  have  sufficed  to 
prevent  them  from  falling  away ;  not  that  it  does  not  admit 
of  repetition.  Enlightened^  through  the  revelation  of  God 
in  Christ,  the  true  light,  and  through  the  power  of  the  Spirit. 
4>on-/^eti/  in  LXX  usually  to  teach  or  instriict;  see  Ps.  cxviii. 
130 ;  2  K.  xii.  2  ;  xvii.  27.  Comp.  in  N.  T.  J.  i.  9 ;  Eph.  i.  18 ; 
iii.  9 ;  Heb.  x.  32.  Erasmus  gives  the  correct  explanation  : 
"  Who  once  for  all  have  left  the  darkness  of  their  former  life, 
having  been  enlightened  by  the  gospel  teaching."  There  is 
no  ground  for  explaining  the  word  here  of  baptism,  although 
the  fathers  from  the  time  of  Justin  Martyr  used  ^cor/^eiy  and 
<t>(0Turfi6<;  in  that  sense,  and  this  usage  continued  down  to  the 
Reformation.  See  Just.  Mart.  ApoL  i.  62.  Chrysostom 
entitled  his  59th  Homily,  addressed  to  candidates  for  baptism, 
7r/)09  Tois  lUXKoirra^  (fxani^eaOai  to  those  who  are  about  to  be 
enlightened;  and  justified  this  name  for  baptism  by  this  pas- 
sage and  X.  32.  The  Peshitto  translates  this  passage,  "  who 
have  once  (for  all)  descended  to  baptism."  The  N.  T.  gives 
no  example  of  this  usage.* 

*  See  a  good  note  by  Alford,  Commentary  ad  kw. 


Ch.VI.]  the  epistle  to  the  HEBREWS.  445 

Tasted  of  the  heavenly  gift  (yevaafUvov^  r^  Bnpe&i  r^ 
hrovpavlov).  For  yewrafiAotf^  tastedj  comp.  ch.  ii.  9.  The 
meaning  is,  have  eomeioudy  partaken  of.  Comp.  1  Pet.  ii.  8, 
and  rpdtywv  eateth^  J.  vi.  56.  The  heavenly  gift  is  the  Holy 
Spirit.  It  is  true  that  this  is  distinctly  specified  in  the  next 
clause,  but  the  two  clauses  belong  together.* 

Partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (^fierdxov^  7rv€VfAaro9  ajtov). 
^^  Heavenly  gift "  emphasises  the  heavenly  quality  of  the  gift. 
The  Holy  Gho8t  is  the  gift  itself  which  possesses  the  heavenly 

quality. 

5.  The  good  word  of  God  (^xaXiv  deov  /^am).  The  gospel 
of  Christ  as  preached.  Comp.  ch.  ii.  8.  To  the  word  are 
attached  life  (Acts  v.  20);  9pirit  and  l\fe  (J.  vi.  68);  salva- 
tion (Acts  xi.  14);  eleanting  (Eph.  v.  26);  especially  the 
impartation  of  the  Spirit  (J.  iii.  84;  Acts  v.  82;  x.  44; 
Eph.  vi.  17 ;  Heb.  ii.  4). 

Powers  of  the  world  to  come  (Swd/Aei^  /i^Xkoirm  oiAiw). 
Not  foretastes  of  heavenly  bliss.  Tfie  world  to  come  is  the 
world  of  men  under  the  new  order  which  is  to  enter  with  the 
fulfilment  of  Christ's  work.  See  on  these  last  days^  ch.  i.  2. 
These  powers  are  characteristic  of  that  period,  and  in  so  far 
as  that  dispensation  is  inaugurated  here  and  now,  they  assert 
and  manifest  themselves. 

6.  If  they  shall  fall  away  (/eal  irapaww6vraK^.  Lit.  and 
having  fallen  away.  Comp.  iriayfall^  ch.  iv.  11.  Hapairhr- 
Tcti/,  N.  T.^.  .It  means  to  deviate^  turn  aside.  Comp.  LXX, 
Ezek.  xiv.  18;  xv.  8. 

To  renew  them  again  (wdluv  hvaicaivl^v).  The  verb 
N.  T.^     *A.vaicaivQvv  to  renew,  2  Cor.  iv.  16;  Col.  iii.  10. 

«  The  number  and  yariety  of  explanations  of  ike  AeooeiUy  gift  are  bewild* 
ering:  the  Lord's  Sapper;  regeneration  in  general,  as  distingoished  from 
the  special  communication  of  the  Spirit  in  baptism ;  persuasion  of  eternal 
life ;  righteousness ;  forgiveness  of  sins ;  peace  which  results  from  forgiye- 
ness ;  faith ;  the  gospel ;  the  heavenly  light  which  produces  the  enlighten- 
ment ;  the  abundant  grace  of  Christianity. 


446  WORD  8TUDIEB  IN  THB  KKW  TEBTAMBMT.        [GiL  VI 

Seeing  they  crucify  to  themselves — afresh  (jtuwaravp- 

autrra^  iavroh^.  In  the  Roman  classical  use  of  the  word,  itmi 
has  only  the  meaning  up  :  to  nail  up  on  the  croes.  Here  in 
the  sense  of  anew^  an  idea  for  which  classical  writers  had  no 
occasion  in  connection  with  crucifying,  f  ^Eavrok  for  ihtmr 
selves.  So  that  Christ  is  no  more  available  for  them.  They 
declare  that  Christ's  crucifixion  has  not  the  meaning  or  the 
virtue  which  they  formerly  attached  to  it. 

The  Son  of  God.    Marking  the  enormity  of  the  offenee. 

Put  him  to  an  open  shame  (irafMUiyfAart^ovra/f).  N.  T.^. 
Rarely  in  LXX.  C'omp.  Num.  xxv.  4,  hang  them  up.  From 
irapi.  beside^  Seucpuvcu  to  show  or  point  out.  To  put  something 
alongside  of  a  thing  by  way  of  commending  it  to  imitation 
or  avoidance.  To  make  an  example  of;  thence  to  expose  to 
public  disgrace.  AeijfJLa  example^  only  Jude  7.  A^ypLari^&w 
to  make  a  public  show  or  example^  Matt.  i.  19 ;  CoL  ii.  15. 
See  additional  note  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. 

7.  The  inevitableness  of  the  punishment  illustrated  by  a 
familiar  fact  of  nature. 

The  earth  (7^).  Or  the  land.  Personified.  Comp.  aimh- 
fidTf)  17  yrj  tJie  land  of  itself^  Mk.  iv.  28,  see  note. 

Which  drinketh  in  (1^  iriowra^.  Appropriates  the  heavenly 
gift  of  rain,  the  richness  of  which  is  indicated  by  that  eometh 
oft  upon  it. 

Herbs  (^fiordvrjp).     Grass,  fodder.     N.  T.®. 

*  Principal  Edwards,  Expositor's  Bible,  explains,  *'  they  cannot  be  re- 
newed after  falling  away  if  they  persist  in  crucifying.  **  Sorely  nothing  conld 
be  farther  from  the  writer's  meaning.  Some  of  the  older  commentators, 
referring  renew  them  to  baptism,  take  crucify  and  put  to  an  open  shame  as 
explanatory  of  draicatW^ir,  thus :  to  renew  tfiem  to  repentance  which  would 
be  a  recrucifying.  They  refer  to  Paulas  declaration,  Rom.  vi.  3,  that  in 
baptism  is  signified  the  crucifixion  of  the  old  man  with  Christ.  If  baptism 
were  repeated,  Christ  would  be  recrucified.  Bat  Christ  is  not  crucified  in 
baptism ;  only  the  old  titan. 


Ch.VI.]  the   epistle  to  the  HEBREWS.  447 

Meet  for  them  by  whom  it  is  dressed  (eMerov  itceivoi^ 
&'  ov^  ical  yenpytirai^.  For  eOderoVy  lit.  well  placed^  thence  ji^ 
or  appropriate^  see  L.  ix.  62;  xiv.  85.  Tempyeiv  to  till  the 
ground^  N.  T.^.  Rend,  tilled.  J>re$i  is  properly  to  trim. 
The  natural  result  of  the  ground's  receiving  and  absorbing 
the  rains  is  fruitfulness,  which  redounds  to  the  benefit  of 
those  who  cultivate  it. 

Receiveth  blessing  from  God  (^fjL€TaXafAl3dv&  evkoyla^ 
airi  rot)  ^eov).  Rend,  partaketh  of  hleuing.  The  blessing  is 
increased  fruitfulness.     Comp.  Matt.  xiii.  12 ;  J.  xv.  2. 

8.  But  that  which  beareth  thorns  and  briers  (Jbc^^ipowra 
Si  iucdvOtK  /caX  t/m)3JXou9).  Wrong.  As  given  in  A.  V.  the 
illustration  throws  no  light  on  the  subject.  It  puts  the  con- 
trast as  between  two  kinds  of  soil,  the  one  well-watered  and 
fertile,  the  other  unwatered  and  sterile.  This  would  illustrate 
the  contrast  between  those  who  have  and  those  who  have  not 
enjoyed  gospel  privileges.  On  the  contrary  the  contrast  is 
between  two  classes  of  Chriitians  under  equally  favorable 
conditions,  out  of  which  they  develop  opposite  results.  Rend. 
btU  if  it  (the  ground  that  receives  the  rain)  bear  thorns  and 
thistles^  etc.  "AtcavOai  thorns^  from  iuci^  a  point.  TpifioXtSj 
from  rpeh  three  and  /3^\w  a  dart;  having  three  darts  or 
points.  A  ball  with  sharp  iron  spikes,  on  three  of  which  it 
rested,  while  the  fourth  projected  upward,  was  called  tribidtu 
or  tribolue^  or  caltrop.  These  were  scattered  over  the  ground 
by  Roman  soldiers  in  order  to  impede  the  enemy's  cavalry. 
A  kind  of  thorn  or  thistle,  a  land-caltrop,  was  called  tribulue 

So  Virgil, 

•*  Snbit  Mpera  sQTa, 
LappMque  tribolique.** 

Otorg.  L168. 

Is  rejected  (&&ki/A09).  Lit.  unapproved.  See  on  repro- 
hate^  Rom.  i.  28. 

Nigh  unto  cursing  (tcardpa^  ^77^)-  See  on  QbI.  iii.  10. 
Enhancing  the  idea  of  rejected.  It  is  exposed  to  the  peril  of 
abandonment  to  perpetual  barrenness. 


448  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NBW  TESTAMENT.      [Ch.  VI. 

Whose  end  is  to  be  burned  (^  t6  r^Xts  ek  tcavaiv'j.  ^H? 
whose^  of  which,  may  be  referred  to  cursing — the  end  of  wbioh 
cursing :  but  better  to  the  main  subject,  yrj  the  land.  T/X09 
is  consummation  rather  than  termination.  *EU9  tcawriv,  lit.  unto 
burning.  Comp.  LXX,  Isa.  xl.  16.  The  consummation  of 
the  cursed  land  is  burning.  Comp.  J.  xv.  6.  The  field 
of  thorns  and  thistles  is  burned  over  and  abandoned  to 
barrenness.* 

9.  But  the  writer  refuses  to  believe  that  his  readers  will 
incur  such  a  fate. 

Beloved  (^ayairtfroi').  Only  here  in  the  epistle.  It  often 
suggests  an  argument.    See  1  Cor.  x.  14 ;  xv.  58 ;  2  Cor.  vii.  1. 

We  are  persuaded  (ireireUrii^a').  We  are  firmly  convinced. 
The  verb  indicates  a  past  hesitation  overcome. 

Better  things  (jk  Kpelaa-opa).  The  article  gives  a  collect- 
ive force,  the  better  state  of  things^  the  going  on  unto  perfec- 
tion (ver.  1).     For  tcpeUra-ova  better^  see  on  ch.  i.  4. 

That  accompany  salvation  (ixif^^a  awnipCas).  "ExetrOM 
with  a  genitive  is  a  common  Greek  idiom  meaning  to  hold 
one's  self  to  a  person  or  thing ;  hence  to  be  closely  joined  to  it* 
So  in  a  local  sense,  Mk.  i.  38 ;  in  a  temporal  sense,  L.  xiii.  33, 
next.  He  is  persuaded  that  they  will  give  heed  to  all  things 
which  attend  the  work  of  salvation  and  will  enjoy  all  that 
attaches  to  a  saved  condition. 

10.  He  is  encouraged  in  this  confidence  by  the  fact  that 
they  are  still  as  formerly  engaged  in  Christian  ministries. 

Your  work  and  labour  of  love  (rov  Ipyov  ifi&p  teal  r^ 
aydTTfj^').  Omit  labour.  The  A.V.  follows  T.  R.  rov  /cdirov. 
Rend,  your  work  and  the  love  which  ye  shewed^  etc. 

«  The  reference  to  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  (Lflnemanu,  Bleek)  is  fofoed, 
and  perhaps  equally  so  that  of  Westcott  to  Tolcanio  fires.  There  Is  no 
thought  otpwijiciaUm  by  fire,  which  would  be  foreign  to  the  salject 


Ch  VI.]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  449 

Which  ye  have  shewed  toward  his  name  (fit  hf^ifaaOt 
ek  TO  SvofJM  avToS).  The  verb  means,  strictly,  to  show  some- 
thing in  one's  self ;  or  to  show  one's  self  in  something.  Simi- 
lar praise  is  bestowed  in  ch.  x.  82.  They  have  shown  both 
love  and  work  toward  God's  name.  That  does  not  look  like 
crucifying  Christ.  God  is  not  ufytut^  as  he  would  show  him- 
self to  be  if  he  were  forgetful  of  this. 

11.  We  desire  (hndvfiovfjLev).  Strongly,  earnestly.  Comp. 
Matt.  xiii.  17 ;  L.  xxii.  15.  The  manifestations  just  men- 
tioned make  the  writer  desire  that  they  may  exhibit  more  of 
the  spirit  which  animates  their  beneficent  works. 

Each  (&a^Toy).  He  is  concerned,  not  only  for  the  body 
of  believers,  but  for  each  member. 

To  the  full  assurance  of  hope  unto  the  end  (wpi^  ripf 
w\ffpoif>oplav  T^  ikiriSoi  axpt  r^\ovt^.  That  is,  we  desire 
that  each  of  you  exhibit  the  same  diligence  to  develop  your 
hope,  which  is  in  danger  of  failing,  into  full  assurance,  unto 
the  end  of  the  present  season  of  trial  with  its  happy  consum- 
mation. Comp.  Rom.  viii.  24.  For  vXtfpo^pCa  see  on 
1  Th.  i.  5,  and  comp.  Rom.  iv.  21 ;  xiv.  5.  It  is  practically 
the  same  whether  we  translate  full  devdopment  ot  full  a$9ur- 
ance.  The  two  meanings  coalesce.  Hope  develops  into  full 
assurance. 

12.  Slothful  (ycoOpol).    See  on  ch.  v.  11.    Or  dugguh^  as 

you  will  become  if  you  lose  hope. 

Followers  (fu/if^rol).     Rend,  imitaton. 

Faith  and  patience  (irimo^  /cci  fAoxpoOvfUasy  For  pa- 
tience rend.  longMuffering^  and  see  on  Jas.  v.  7.  Faith  and 
longsuffering  go  together.  Faith  does  not  win  its  inherit- 
ance without  persevering  endurance;  hence  longsuffering 
is  not  only  presented  as  an  independent  quality,  bat  is  predi- 
cated of  fiuth. 

TOL.  IT.— ss 


450  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Gte.  VL 

Inherit  (jcktipovoiuwinrnv).  Notice  the  present  participle, 
are  inheriting.  Their  present  faith  and  perseverance  are 
now  making  for  their  final  inheritance.     Comp.  Eph.  L  14. 

18.  Illustration  of  the  longsoffering  of  faith  by  the  exam- 
ple of  Abraham.  The  necessitj  for  emphasising  this  element 
of  faith  lay  in  the  growing  discouragement  of  the  Jewish 
Christians  at  the  long  delay  of  Christ's  second  coming. 
Comp.  ch.  xi.  Abraham  became  a  sojourner  in  the  land  of 
the  promise,  looking  for  the  heavenly  city  (ch.  xi.  9,  10). 
All  the  instances  cited  in  that  chapter  illustrate  the  £911^ 
outlook  of  faith,  involving  patient  waiting  and  endurance. 
The  example  of  Abraham  shows,  first,  that  the  promise  of 
God  is  sure. 

Because  he  could  swear  by  no  greater  (^irei  iua^  ouScyvk 
€t%cv  fjLei^ovo^  ofiSaai).  Lit.  tinee  he  had  (the  power)  to  9mear 
hy  no  one  greater. 

By  himself  {icaff  iauroO).  Comp.  Gen.  xxii.  16.  N.  T.^ 
but  see  LXX,  Am.  vi.  8. 

14.  Surely  blessing  I  will  bless  thee  (el  fi^v  euXoyAv  edXo^ 
7170-0)  ae).  'Ea  fi^p  as  a  formula  of  swearing  N.  T.®.  In 
LXX,  see  Num.  xiv.  23,  28,  35;  Isa.  xlv.  28;  Ezek.  xxxiii. 
27;  xxxiv.  8.  Blessing  I  will  bless  is  a  Hebraism,  emphasis- 
ing the  idea  contained  in  the  verb.  Comp.  LXX,  Gen.  xxii. 
17;  Num.  xxv.  10;  Deut.  xv.  4.* 

15.  After   he   had    patiently  endured   (iMucpoOviJi^af:). 

Pointing  back  to  fiaKpoOvfiui  langsuffering^  ver.  12. 


«  Bleek  holds  that  the  form  e^  n^iwtt,T08e  from  a  confusion  of  the  HebrmlaUe 
€l  fv/j  (comp.  Heb.  DK)  and  the  Greek  1i  iiiiv.  Thayer  {Lex.)  says  this  most 
be  the  explanation  unless  e^  came  by  itacism  from  fj.  So  Winer-Schmiedel, 
N.  T.  Oramm.  §5,  16.  Deissmann,  however  (Neue  BibeUtudien^  Pt.  II., 
p.  33  fl.),  gives  instances  of  e!  (e^  ?)  m^*'  from  papyri  before  Christ,  a  himdred 
years  older  than  this  epistle,  and  from  the  same  country  in  which  the  LXX 
was  prepared.    See  also  Blaas,  N,  T,  Oramm,  Ss.  0,  60,  264. 


Cb.  VI.]  TEDE  EPI8TLB  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  451 

He  obtained  (hrdrvxev)'  The  compounded  prepositioii 
iwX  has  the  force  of  upon:  to  light  or  hit  upon.  The  verb 
indicates  that  Abraham  did  not  personally  receive  the  entire 
fulfilment  of  the  promise,  but  only  the  germ  of  its  fulfilment. 
It  was  partially  fulfilled  in  the  birth  of  Isaac.  See  Rom. 
iv.  18. 

The  security  of  the  divine  promise  illustrated  by  the  ana- 
logy of  human  practice. 

16.  And  an  oath  for  confirmation  is  to  them  an  end  of 
all  strife  (acoI  irJun^  ainoV;  iamXoyla^  iripof:  tk  fiefialaaiv  6 
ipKo^}.  For  ^^an  oath,"  rend,  ^^the  oath":  generic.  Const. 
for  confirmation  with  end.  ^^  The  oath  is  final  for  confirma- 
tion." U^pa^  is  the  outermoit  point ;  the  point  beyond  which 
one  cannot  go.  With  this  exception  always  in  N.  T.  in  the 
plural,  of  the  ende  of  the  earth.  See  Matt.  xii.  42 ;  Rom.  x.  18. 
So  often  in  LXX.  *AvriKoyla^  strictly  contradiction^  only  in 
Hebrews  and  Jude  11,  on  which  see  note. 

17.  Wherein  (iv  f).  Referring  to  the  whole  previous 
clause.     In  accordance  with  this  universal  human  custom. 

Willing  (fiovkiikowi).  Rend,  being  minded.  See  on 
Matt.  i.  19. 

The  immutability  (rd  hiktrdOerov).  The  adjective  used 
substantively.     Only  here  and  ver.  18. 

Confirmed  (ifuairewrey).  Rend,  interpoeed  or  mediated. 
Comp.  fjLea-irffi  mediator.  From  fiAroi  midst.  Placed  himself 
between  himself  and  the  heritors  of  the  promise. 

18.  Two  immutable  things  (Svo  wpajfAdrmv  hikeraShe^v). 
His  word  and  his  oath. 

Strong  consolation  (iayypi^v  wa/HUXqaui).  *Iaxypi9  itrong 
implies  indwelling  strength  embodied  or  put  forth  either 


452  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ck.  VL 

aggressively  or  as  an  obstacle  to  resistance ;  as  an  army  or  a 
fortress.  For  consolation  rend,  eneourtxgementy  and  see  on 
L.  vi.  24 ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  3. 

Who  have  fled  for  refuge  {ol  Kara^v^dvTei).  Only  here 
and  iVcts  xiv.  tJ.  The  compound  verb  is  well  rendered  by 
A.  V.>  since,  as  distinguished  from  the  simple  if>€vy€ip  to  flee^ 
it  expresses  flight  to  a  definite  place  or  person  for  safety. 
Hence  often  used  in  connection  with  an  altar  or  a  sanctuary. 
The  distinction  between  the  simple  and  the  compound  verb 
is  illustrated  in  Hdt.  iv.  23,  where,  speaking  of  the  bar- 
barous tribe  of  the  lyrcae,  he  says,  "  Whoever  ^e«  (j4>dymp) 
and  betakes  himself  for  refuge  (^/eaTa<f>vyrj}  to  them,  receives 
wrong  from  no  one."  So  Xen.,  Hellen,  1,  6, 16  :  "  Conon 
fled  (l<^€i/7€)  in  swift  vessels,  and  betakes  himself  for  refuge 
{KaTa(f>€vy€i)  to  Mitylene." 

To  lay  hold  upon  the  hope  set  before  us  (^/eparrja-iu  r^ 
irpoK€Lfi€vri^  iXirlho^).  For  feparrjaai  to  lay  fast  hold^  see  on 
Mk.  vii.  3  ;  Acts  iii.  11 ;  Col.  ii.  19.  TlpoKeifAA^i^  lying  before 
or  set  before;  destined  or  appointed.  Mostly  in  Hebrews. 
Comp.  2  Cor.  viii.  12 ;  Jude  7.* 

19.   An  anchor  of  the  soul  (ayxvpav  tQ?  '^^^v^^).     The 

same  figure  is  implied  1  Tim.  i.  19. 

Sure  and  steadfast  {ao4>a\r)  re  xal  fie/Salav).  The  dis- 
tinction between  the  two  adjectives  expresses  the  relation 
of  the  same  object  to  diflferent  tests  applied  from  without. 
*A<r<^aX^,  a  noU  <r<t>d\\€iv  to  make  totter^  and  so  to  baffle  or 
foil.  Hence,  secure  against  all  attempts  to  break  the  hold. 
Be/Salav  sustaining  one^s  steps  in  going  (^/Saiveiv  to  go^:  not 
breaking  down  under  what  steps  upon  it. 

Which  entereth  into  that  within  the  veil  (eUrepxofiAnfp 
€*9  TO  iawrepov  rov  tcarairerdapuTo^^.     Const,  the  participle 

*  Liinemann  takes  frara0v76rref  absolutely,  and  makes  irpar^cu  r^t  wpotu 
At.  depend  on  rapdK.  iX'  that  voe  who  have  JUd  for  refuge  might  have  strong 
consolation  to  lay  hold^  etc 


Ch.  VL]  the  epistle  to  the  HEBREWS.  453 

elcrepxofJiAniv  entering  with  anchor.  ^Eaanepov  only  here  and 
Acts  xvi.  24.  Comparative,  of  something  farther  within. 
So  iamripav  <l>v\aKijv  "the  inner  prison,"  Acts  xvi.  24.  Kara- 
ir^oATfia  veiU  ^Class.  Commonly  in  N.  T.  of  the  veil  of  the 
temple  or  tabernacle.  See  Matt,  xxvii.  51 ;  Heb.  ix.  8. 
That  within  the  veil  is  the  unseen,  eternal  reality  of  the  heav- 
enly world.*  Two  figures  are  combined:  (a)  the  world  a 
sea;  the  soul  a  ship;  the  hidden  bottom  of  the  deep  the 
hidden  reality  of  the  heavenly  world.  (6)  The  present  life 
the  forecourt  of  the  temple  ;  the  future  blessedness  the  shrine 
within  the  veil.  The  soul,  as  a  tempest-tossed  ship,  is  held 
by  the  anchor :  the  soul  in  the  outer  court  of  the  temple  is 
fastened  by  faith  to  the  blessed  reality  within  the  shrine. 

20.  Whither  the  forerunner  is  for  us  entered  (Jhrov  irpd- 
BpofjLOf;  inrep  fifi&v  €taij\0€p}.  "Ottoi;,  strictly  where^  instead  of 
oTToi  whither  (not  in  N.  T.),  but  more  significant  as  indicating 
an  abiding  there.  UpSSpofiof:  forerunner^  N.  T.^.  It  expresses 
an  entirely  new  idea,  lying  completely  outside  of  the  Leviti- 
cal  system.  The  Levitical  high  priest  did  not  enter  the 
sanctuary  as  a  forerunner,  but  only  as  the  people's  representa- 
tive. He  entered  a  place  into  which  none  might  follow  him  ; 
in  the  people's  stead,  and  not  as  their  pioneer.  The  peculiar- 
ity of  the  new  economy  is  that  Christ  as  high  priest  goes 
nowhere  where  his  people  cannot  follow  him.  He  introduces 
man  into  full  fellowship  with  God.  The  A.  V.  entirely 
misses  this  point  by  rendering  ^^the  forerunner,"  as  if  the 
idea  of  a  high  priest  being  a  forerunner  were  perfectly  famil- 
iar. Rend,  whither  a$  a  forerunner  Jesus  entered.  Corap. 
ch.  X.  19. 

Made  a  high  priest  (^apxtepevi  yepSfjLcvo^^.  Rend,  having 
become  a  high  priest^  etc.  Become^  because  his  office  must  be 
inaugurated  by  his  suffering  human  life  and  his  death. 

*  Two  other  anangementB  are  proposed :  (a)  d^^Xi|,  ptfialav,  ttat^o/U- 
wti9  with  ikviia  undentood :  Aope,  ntrt^  tteadfaat^  entering^  etc.  (V)  d^^Xi| 
and  fi9^aiaw  with  dyicvpaw,  and  tl^tpx*  with  Ar.  a  hope  which  efUerM^  etc.  (oiid 
^ehieh  i$)  an  anehcj  $ure  and  Uea^faaL 


154  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  KBW  TESTAMENT.      [CSs.  VOL 


Additional  Note  on  Verses  4-6. 

The  passage  has  created  much  discussion  and  mach  disUaWy  as  i^peaiv 
ing  to  teach  the  impossibility  of  restoration  after  a  moral  and  spiritual 
lapse.    It  is  to  be  observed :  (1)  That  the  case  stated  is  that  of  persons 
who  once  knew,  loyed,  and  believed  Christian  truth,  and  who  experieneed 
the  saving,  animating,  and  enlightening  energy  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and 
who  lapsed  into  indifference  and  unbelief.    (2)  The  qnestiona  whether  it 
is  possible  for  those  who  have  once  experienced  the  power  of  the  gospel 
to  fall  away  and  be  lost,  and  whether,  supposing  a  lapse  possible,  those 
who  fall  away  can  ever  be  restored  by  repentance  —  do  not  belong  here. 
The  possibility  of  a  fall  is  clearly  assumed.     (3)  The  sin  in  the  case  sup- 
posed is  the  relinquishment  of  the  spiritual  gifts  and  powers  aooompany- 
ing  faith  in  Christ,  and  rejecting  Christ  himself.    (4)  The  significance 
of  this  sin  lies  in  the  mental  and  spiritual  condition  which  it  betrays. 
It  is  the  recoil  of  conviction  from  Christ  and  the  adoption  of  the  con- 
trary conviction.    (5)  The  writer  does  not  touch  the  question  of  the 
possibility  of  GwTt  renewing  such  to  repentance.    He  merely  pats  his 
own  hypothetical  case,  and  says  that,  in  the  nature  of  such  a  case,  the 
ordinary  considerations  and  means  which  are  applied  to  induce  men  to 
embrace  the  gospel  no  longer  appeal  to  the  subjects  supposed.     He  con- 
templates nothing  beyond  such  agencies,  and  asserts  that  these   are 
powerless  because  the  man  has  brought  himself  into  a  condition  where 
they  can  no  longer  exert  any  power.    Whether  (xod  will  ever  reclaim  by 
ways  of  his  own  is  a  point  which  is  not  even  touched.    Destruction  of 
the  faculty  of  spiritual  discernment  is  the  natural  outcome  of  deliberate 
and  persistent  sin,  and  the  instrument  of  its  punishment.    Note,  ^  renew 
unto  repentance**    Grod  promises  pardon  on  penitence,  but  not  penitence 
on  sin.    See  a  powerful  passage  in  Coleridge's  MoraL  and  RtUgiaui  Apk- 
orisms,  Amer.  ed.,  YoL  L,  p.  191. 


CHAPTER    Vn. 

The  Melchisedec-priesthood  of  Christ.  —  Christ  can  be  a 
priest  without  Aaronic  descent,  and  his  priesthood  is  of  a 
higher  and  older  type  than  the  Levitical. 

1.  For  this  Melchisedec,  etc.  See  Gen.  xiv.  18-20 ; 
Ps.  ex. 

2.  First  being  by  interpretation  King  of  righteousness 
(irpSnvp  flip  epfirjvewifJLevo^  ficuriXev^  Biicaioavprj^^,     The  first 


Oh.  Vn.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  455 

designation  is  the  literal  interpretation  of  the  Hebrew  name. 
Being  interpreted  belongs  only  to  this  designation.  So  Joseph. 
Ant.  1,  10,  2:  ^nifAadfa  Se  rovro  fiaaiXei^  SUaio^  ^^and  this 
(the  name  Melchisedec)  signifies  righteatAi  hingJ*^ 

And  after  that  also  (Jhreira  Si  koX).  Then  follows  a  des- 
ignation derived  from  his  character,  king  of  peace.  Supply 
being;  not  being  interpreted. 

Salem.  Commonly  regarded  as  the  site  of  Jerusalem.  It 
lias  also  been  suppos^  to  represent  laXeifi  Salim^  mentioned 
in  J.  iii.  28.  Jerome  says  that  the  place  retained  that  name 
in  his  day,  and  that  the  ruins  of  Melchisedec's  palace  were 
shown  there.*  The  ancient  name  of  Jerusalem  was  Jebus. 
Others,  again,  suppose  that  Salem  is  not  the  name  of  a  place, 
but  is  merely  the  appellation  of  Melchisedec.  The  passage 
in  Genesis,  however,  points  to  a  place,  and  the  writer  might 
naturally  have  desired  to  indicate  the  typical  meaning  of 
the  city  over  which  Melchisedec  reigned. 

3.    Without  father,  without  mother,  without  descent 

Q&irdrwp^  afiifrap^  ayeveaXdyrfTO^'),  The  three  adjectives 
N.  T.^,  ^LXX.  The  meaning  is  that  there  is  no  record  con- 
cerning his  parentage.  This  is  significant  as  indicating  a 
different  type  of  priesthood  from  the  Levitical,  in  which  gen- 
ealogy was  of  prime  importance.  No  man  might  exercise 
priestly  functions  who  was  not  of  the  lineage  of  Aaron. 

Having  neither  beginning  of  days  nor  end  of  life.    That 

is  to  say,  history  is  silent  concerning  his  birth  and  death. 

But  made  like  unto  the  Son  of  God  (iul>»fAou»fUiw  Si 
Tip  vl^  Tov  0€ov).  The  verb  N.  T.^.  Mctde  like  or  likened^ 
not  like.  ^^The  resemblance  lies  in  the  Biblical  representa- 
tion, and  not  primarily  in  Melchisedec  himself''  (Westcott). 

*  Ep,  ad  Evangelium,  §  7.  Stanley  thinks  thAt  the  meeting  of  Abraham 
and  Melchisedec  was  at  Gerizim.    Ewald  at  a  point  north  of  Jerusalem. 


456  WORD  8TI7DIBS   IS  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Cb.  VII 

Son  of  God^  not  Son  of  man^  for  the  likeness  to  Jesus  as  Son 
of  man  would  not  hold ;  Jesus,  as  man,  having  had  both  birth 
and  death.  The  words  likened  unto  the  San  of  G-od  stand 
independently.  Not  to  be  connected  with  the  following  sen- 
tence, so  as  to  read  abideth  a  priest  continually  like  the  San  of 
Q-od;  for,  as  a  priest,  Melchisedec,  chronologically,  was  prior 
to  Christ ;  and,  tlierefore,  it  is  not  likeness  with  respect  to 
priesthood  that  is  asserted.  The  likeness  is  in  respect  to  the 
thingfs  just  predicated  of  Melchisedec.  Christ  as  Son  of  God 
was  without  father,  mother,  beginning  or  end  of  daj^ ;  and, 
in  these  points,  Melchisedec  is  likened  in  Scripture  to  him. 

Abideth  a  priest  continually  (/t^i  Upeis  ek  r^  BitfPCKdf). 
t^iriv&cTfi  from  huiif>4peiv  to  bear  through;  borne  on  through 
ages,  continuous.  Only  in  Hebrews.  There  is  no  historical 
account  of  the  termination  of  Melchisedec's  priesthood.  The 
tenure  of  his  office  is  uninterrupted.  The  emphasis  is  on  the 
eternal  duration  of  the  ideal  priestliood,  and  the  writer 
explains  the  Psalm  as  asserting  eternal  duration  as  the  mark 
of  the  Melchisedec  order.  Accordingly,  he  presents  the  fol- 
lowing characteristics  of  the  ideal  priesthood :  royal^  right- 
eous^ peace-promotinff^  personal  and  not  inherited^  eternal. 
Comp.  Isa.  ix.  6,  7 ;  xi.  4,  10 ;  xxxii.  17  ;  lii.  7.  It  is,  of 
course,  evident  to  the  most  superficial  reader  that  such  ex- 
position of  O.  T.  scripture  is  entirely  artificial,  and  that  it 
amounts  to  nothing  as  proof  of  the  writer's  position.  Mel- 
chisedec is  not  shown  to  be  an  eternal  high  priest  because  his 
death-record  is  lost ;  nor  to  be  properly  likened  unto  the  Son 
of  God  because  there  is  no  notice  of  his  birth  and  parentage. 

4.  The  superiority  of  the  Melchisedec  priesthood  to  the 
Levitical. 

Consider  {dempeire).  Only  here  in  Hebrews  and  ^P. 
Except  this  passage,  confined  to  the  Synoptic  Gospels,  Acts* 
and  Johannine  writings.     See  on  L.  x.  18 ;  J.  i.  18. 

How  g^eat  (wrfXUo^').     Only  here  and  Gral.  vi.  11. 


Ch.  VU.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  457 

The  patriarch  (o  irarpidpxqsi).     Only  here  and  in  Acts. 

The  tenth  (Jkicdrriv).  Properly  an  adjective,  but  used  as 
a  noun  for  tithe.  Only  in  Hebrews,  as  is  the  kindred  verb 
hwarovv  to  impose  or  take  tithes.  ^ AiroheKarolv  to  exact  tithes^ 
Heb.  vii.  5.     Comp.  Matt,  xxiii.  23 ;  L.  xi.  42. 

Of  the  spoils  (he  r&v  oKpoOivlnv).  The  noun  N.  T.^ 
from  ajcpov  topmost  pointy  and  0k  a  heap.  The  top  of  the 
pile :  the  "pick"  of  the  spoil. 

5.  If  Melchisedec  was  greater  than  Abraham,  he  was 
greater  than  Abraham's  descendants,  including  the  tribe  of 
Levi. 

They  that  are  of  the  sons  of  Levi  who  receive,  etc. 

(oi  €K  r&v  vi&v  Aet/el  Xafifidvovre^).  Those  out  of  the  sons  of 
Levi  who  become  priests.  Not  those  who  receive  the  priest- 
hood from  the  sons  of  Levi.  Not  aU  Levites  were  priests, 
but  only  those  of  the  house  of  Aaron. 

The  office  of  the  priesthood  (r^v  Upar(a»).  Only  here 
and  L.  i.  9. 

A  commandment  (hnoXiiv).    A  special  injnnotioii.    See 

on  Jas.  ii.  8 ;  Eph.  ii.  15. 

To  talce  tithes  (hiroheicaroiif).    See  on  ver.  4. 

That  is  of  their  brethren,  though  they  come  out  of 
the  loins  of  Abraham.  The  people,  the  brethren  of  the 
Levites,  are  descended  from  their  common  ancestor,  Abra- 
ham, yet  the  Levites  exact  tithes  from  them. 

6.  But  he  whose  descent  is  not  counted  from  them 

(6  8i  fiii  y€V€a\oyovfJL€vof;  i^  ainr&v).  Lit.  he  who  is  not  gene- 
alogically derived  from  them:  Melchisedec.    The  verb  N.  T.^. 


458  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ch.  VH 

Received  tithes  of  Abraham.  Melchisedec,  who  has  no 
part  in  the  Levitical  genealogy,  and  therefore  no  legal  right 
to  exact  tithes,  took  tithes  from  the  patriarch  himself.  Hence 
he  was  greater  than  Abraham.  The  right  of  the  Levitical 
priest  to  receive  tithes  was  only  a  legal  right,  conferred  by 
special  statute,  and  therefore  implied  no  intrintie  superiority 
to  his  brethren;  but  Melchisedec,  though  having  no  legal 
right,  received  tithes  from  Abraham  as  a  voluntary  gift,  which 
implied  Abraham's  recognition  of  his  perianal  greatness. 

And  hath  blessed  him  that  had  the  promises.  Mel- 
chisedec accepted  the  position  accorded  to  him  by  Abraham's 
gift  of  tithes  by  bestowing  on  Abraham  his  blessing,  and 
Abraham  recognised  his  superiority  by  accepting  his  blessing^. 
He  who  had  received  the  divine  promises  might  have  been 
supposed  to  be  above  being  blessed  by  any  man.  The  sig- 
nificance of  this  acceptance  is  brought  out  in  the  next  verse. 

7.  Without  all  contradiction  (x»P^  irdarry:  avriXoylai^y. 
Asserting  a  principle  which  no  one  thinks  of  questioning :  it 
is  the  les$  who  is  blessed,  and  the  greater  who  blesses. 

8.  Here  (&&).     In  the  Levitical  economy. 

Men  that  die  receive  tithes.  The  emphasis  is  on  Axotf- 
vfjiTKovTei  dying.  The  Levites  are  dying  men,  who  pass  away 
in  due  course,  and  are  succeeded  by  others. 

But  there  (iK€t  Si).     In  the  case  of  Melchisedec. 

(He  receiveth  them  of  whom)  it  is  witnessed  that  he 
liveth  (/jLapTvpovfievo^  Sri  55).  The  Greek  is  very  condensed : 
being  attested  that  he  liveth.  The  A.  V.  fills  it  out  correctly. 
Melchisedec  does  not  appear  in  Scripture  as  one  who  dies, 
and  whose  office  passes  to  another.  See  on  ahideth  continu- 
ally^ ver.  3. 

9.  Levi  himself,  in  the  person  of  Abraham,  was  tithed  by 
Melchisedec. 


Ch.  Vn.]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  459 

As  I  may  say  («9  hro^  elireip).  =s  $o  to  ipeak.  N.  T.^. 
^LXX.  Introducing  an  unusual  statement,  or  one  which 
may  appear  paradoxical  or  startling  to  the  reader,  as  this 
statement  certainly  is,  to  a  modem  reader  at  least. 

In  Abraham  (&'  'AfipaiLfi).     Lit.  through  Abraham. 

10.  In  the  loins  of  his  father  (^  r^  6a<l>vl  rod  warpifi). 

His  ovm  father ;  not  of  Abraham. 

When  Melchisedec  met  him.  In  the  person  of  Abraham. 
The  whole  Jewish  law,  its  ordinances  and  priesthood,  are 
regarded  as  potentially  in  Abraham.  When  Abraham  paid 
tithes,  Levi  paid  tithes.  When  Abraham  was  blessed,  Israel 
was  blessed.  It  is  a  kind  of  reasoning  which  would  appeal 
to  Hebrews,  who  so  strongly  emphasised  the  solidarity  of 
their  race.     Comp.  Rom.  ix.  4,  5. 

11.  In  Christ,  as  the  Melchisedeo-priest,  the  ideal  of  the 
priesthood  is  realised. 

Perfection  (reXc^SoMri?).  Only  here  and  L.  L  46.  The 
act  or  process  of  consummating.  By  this  word  is  signified 
the  establishment  of  a  perfect  fellowship  between  God  and 
the  worshipper.     See  ch.  ix.  9 ;  x.  1. 

Priesthood  (Upwnnnf;).  Only  in  Hebrews.  See  w.  12, 
14.  It  expresses  the  abstrcut  notUm  of  the  priest's  office; 
while  UparCck^  ver.  5,  expresses  the  priestly  service. 

For  under  it  the  people  received  the  law  (7^  hr  ainrjii 
vevofioddTTjTcu).  Under ^  rather  on  the  Inuis  of.  The  verb  lit. 
the  law  hcu  been  laid  down.     Only  here  and  ch.  viii.  6. 

What  further  need  (rk  iri  XP^U) .  "En  after  that,  Mmming 
that  there  was  perfection  through  the  Levitical  priesthood. 

Another  priest  (trepop  Upda).  Not  merely  another^  but  a 
different  kind  of  priest.     See  on  Matt.  vi.  24. 


460  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ck.  VIL 

Should  rise  {avUrrcurOaC).  In  Hebrews  only  here  and 
ver.  15,  both  times  in  connection  with  priest. 

12.  Being  changed  (/Aerart^e/A^^).  Or  tranrferred  to 
another  order.     See  on  Gal.  i.  6. 

A  change  Qfierd0€<ri^^.  A  trantfer  to  a  new  basis.  Only 
in  Hebrews.  See  ch.  xi.  5 ;  xii.  27.  The  inferiority  of  the 
Levitical  priesthood  is  inferred  from  the  fact  that  another 
priesthood  was  promised.  If  perfection  was  possible  at  all 
under  the  Mosaic  economy,  it  must  come  through  the  Leviti- 
cal priesthood,  since  that  priesthood  was,  in  a  sense,  the  basiB 
of  the  law.  The  whole  legal  system  centred  in  it.  The  fun- 
damental idea  of  the  law  was  that  of  a  people  united  with 
God.  Sin,  the  obstacle  to  this  ideal  union,  was  dealt  with 
through  the  priesthood.  If  the  law  failed  to  effect  complete 
fellowship  with  God,  the  priesthood  was  shown  to  be  a  fail- 
ure, and  must  be  abolished ;  and  the  change  of  the  priesthood 
involved  the  abolition  of  the  entire  legal  system. 

13.  As  the  law  prescribed  that  the  priesthood  should  be 
of  the  order  of  Aaron,  a  new  priesthood,  not  of  that  order, 
must  set  aside  the  law. 

Pertaineth  to  another  tribe  (^vX^  Mpa^  iut^xik€v). 
Lit.  hath  partaken  of  another  tribe.  Not  only  another^  but  a 
different  tribe  ;  one  not  specially  set  apart  to  sacerdotal  ser- 
vice. 

Of  which  no  man  gave  attendance  at  the  altar  (a4>  t^ 
ovh^h  irpoaeaxnKcv  r^  OviruurrqpUp) ,  Upoaexeiv  originally  to 
hritig  to;  bring  the  mind  to;  attend  to.  See  on  ch.  ii.  1. 
Sv<ruum]piov  altar^  ^Class.  Strictly  an  altar  for  the  sacri- 
fice of  victims ;  but  used  of  the  altar  of  incense,  L.  i.  11 ; 
Apoc.  viii.  8;  comp.  Ex.  xxx.  1.  See  on  Acts  xvii.  28. 
It  was  also  used  of  the  enclosure  in  which  the  altar  stood. 
See  Ignat.  JSjpA.  v ;  Trail,  vii.  See  Lightfoot's  interesting 
note,  Ignatius  and  Polycarp^  Vol.  IL,  p.  43. 


Ch.VII.]  THB  epistle  to  the  HEBREWS.  461 

14.  Evident  (^^((Si^Xoy).     Obvious.    See  on  1  Tim.  y.  24. 

Sprang  (^hvariraXicai).  Rend,  hath  9prung.  In  N.  T. 
always  of  the  rising  of  a  heavenly  body,  sun  or  star,  except 
L.  xii.  54,  of  a  cloud,  and  here.  See  LXX,  Gen.  xxxii.  31 ; 
Ex.  xxii.  3 ;  Num.  xxiv.  17 ;  Judg.  ix.  33 ;  Isa.  xiv.  12 ; 
Ix.  1;  Mai.  iv.  2.  Also  of  the  springing  up  of  plants, 
Gen.  ii.  5 ;  iii.  18 ;  Deut.  xxix.  28 ;  of  ^e  growing  of  the 
beard,  2  Sam.  x.  5. 

15.  Evident  Qcard^Xov).  N.  T.^.  Thoroughly  evident. 
Not  referring  to  that  which  is  declared  to  be  wpi&rjXov  evi- 
dent in  ver.  14,  viz.,  that  Christ  sprang  out  of  Judah,  but  to 
the  general  proposition — the  unsatisfactory  character  of  the 
Levitical  priesthood. 

Similitude  (fiyyoiJrnira).  Better,  Ukeneu:  answering  to 
made  like^  ver.  8,  and  emphasising  the  personal  resemblance 
to  Melchisedec. 

16.  The  law  of  a  carnal  commandment  (i^fu>i/ ^irroX^ 
aapiciinfsi).  The  phrase  N.  T.^.  H6fjiov  the  norm  or  etandard^ 
as  Rom.  vii.  21,  23.  'EvtoX^,  the  yf^ecific  precept  of  the 
Mosaic  law  regarding  Levitical  priests.  Comp.  Eph.  ii.  15. 
lapxipTj^  fleahlif^  indicates  that  the  conditions  of  the  Levitical 
priesthood  had  reference  to  the  body.  Fitness  for  office  was 
determined  largely  by  physical  considerations.  The  priest 
must  be  of  proper  descent,  without  bodily  blemish,  cere- 
monially pure.  See  ch.  ix.  1-5,  10,  and  comp.  Rom.  viii.  3. 
Such  a  priesthood  cannot  be  eternal. 

After  the  power  of  an  endless  life  (^xarii  Swafuv  ^€^ 
aKaTaXvTov),  £ivvafuv  inherent  virtue.  Rend,  for  endleM^ 
indissoluble.  Comp.  icaraXvdp  loosened  doum^  of  a  tent, 
2  Cor.  V.  1 ;  of  the  stones  of  the  temple.  Matt.  xxiv.  2. 
Jesus  was  high  priest  in  virtue  of  the  energy  of  indissoluble 
life  which  dwelt  in  him,  unlike  the  priests  who  die,  ver.  8. 
This  truth  the  writer  finds  in  the  Psalm. 


462  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMEO^.       pjfcVa 

18,  19.  The  structure  of  the  passage  is  as  follows :  The 
two  verses  contain  a  proposition  in  two  parts.  The  verb 
yivercu  is  or  comes  to  pass  is  common  to  both  parts.  *OvSip — 
o  v6/ia:  is  parenthetical.  Rend.  ^^  for  there  is  a  disannulling 
of  a  foregoing  commandment,  because  of  its  weakness  and 
unprofitableness  (for  the  law  made  nothing  perfect^,  and  the 
bringing  in  thereupon  of  a  better  hope  through  which  we 
draw  nigh  unto  God." 

18.  There  is  verily  a  disannulling  of  the  commandment 
going  before  (iOdTrjai^  fiiv  yeip  yiif€T(U  wpoayovatf^  ivroXfj^^. 
Verily  is  superfluous.  *A04TTj<ri9  only  here  and  eh.  ix.  26  ;  a 
very  few  times  in  LXX :  The  fundamental  idea  is  the  doing 
away  of  something  established  (jSer6v).  The  verb  hBerw  to 
make  void^  do  away  witk,  is  common  in  N.  T.  and  in  LXX^ 
where  it  represents  fifteen  different  Hebrew  words,  meaning 
to  deal  falsely^  to  make  merchandise  of^  to  abhor^  to  tran9gre99^ 
to  rebel,  to  break  an  oath^  etc.  The  noun,  in  a  technical,  legal 
sense,  is  found  in  a  number  of  papyri  from  98  to  271  A.D., 
meaning  the  making  void  of  a  document.  It  appears  in  the 
formula  ek  aOdrqfUv  maX  iucvpwTivfor  annulling  and  eancellinff. 
Upoayowrrj^  ivroXrj^^  rend,  of  a  foregoing  commandment.  The 
expression  is  indefinite,  applying  to  amy  conmiandment  which 
might  be  superseded,  although  the  commandment  in  ver.  16 
is  probably  in  the  writer's  mind.  Foregoing^  not  emphasising 
mere  precedence  in  time,  but  rather  the  preliminary  character 
of  the  commandment  as  destined  to  be  done  away  by  a  later 
ordinance.     With  foregoing  comp.  1  Tim.  i.  18;  v.  24. 

For  the  weakness  and  unprofitableness  thereof  (&^  ri 

avrrj^  aaOeve;  xal  ava><f>€\^).  Rend.  '^  because  of  its  weakness 
and  unprofitableness."  It  could  not  bring  men  into  close 
fellowship  with  God.  See  Rom.  v.  20;  viii.  8;  Gral.  iii.  21. 
*Aw»<^X?j9  unprofitable^  only  here  and  Tit.  iii.  9. 

19.  For  the  law  made  nothing  perfect  (pvBhf  yitp  ir^Xet- 
vaep  6  i^/i09) .  Parenthetical.  The  A.  V.  overlooks  the  paren« 
thesis,  ignores  the  connection  of  bringing  in  with  disannulling^ 


Ch.  Vn.]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  463 

trauslates  Si  hut  instead  of  and^  and  supplies  did  ;  thus  making 
an  opposition  between  the  law  which  made  nothing  perfect  and 
the  bringing  in  of  a  better  hope^  which  did  make  something 
perfect.  What  the  writer  means  to  say  is  that,  according  to 
the  Psalm,  there  takes  place,  on  the  one  hand,  a  disannulling 
of  the  preliminary  commandment  because  it  was  weak  and 
unprofitable,  unable  to  perfect  anything,  and  on  the  other 
hand,  the  introduction  of  a  better  hope. 

The  bringing  in  of  a  better  hope  (ine^aaymyi^  KpeCrrovo^ 
ikviBo^).  'EweuraycDyif  N.  T.^  ^LXX,  is  **a  bringing  in 
upon ''  (jhrX)^  upon  the  ground  formerly  occupied  by  the  com* 
mandment.  So  Rev.,  correctly,  **a  bringing  in  thereupon.^^ 
For  Kpetnwv  better^  see  on  ch.  i.  4.  The  comparison  is  not 
between  the  hope  conveyed  by  the  commandment,  and  the 
better  hope  introduced  by  the  gospel,  but  between  the  com- 
mandment which  was  characteristic  of  the  law  (Eph.  ii.  15) 
and  the  hope  which  characterised  the  gospel  (Rom.  y.  2-5 ; 
viii.  24). 

By  the  which  we  draw  nigh  to  God  (hC  ffi  iyyC^ofutf  r^ 
0€^) .  Gi  ving  the  reason  why  the  hope  is  better.  Christianity 
is  the  religion  of  good  hope  because  by  it  men  first  enter 
into  intimate  fellowship  with  God.  The  old  priesthood  could 
not  effect  this. 

20-24.  A  third  argument  to  show  the  inferiority  of  the 
old  priesthood.  It  is  twofold :  (a)  the  new  priesthood  was 
established  with  the  oath  of  God  ;  (£)  it  is  held  perpetually 
by  one  person,  in  contrast  with  the  old  priesthood  which  was 
administered  by  a  succession  of  priests. 

20.  Not  without  an  oath  (ov  x'^P^  opiMiuHrUwi).  The 
A.y.  is,  on  the  whole,  better  than  Rev.  by  inserting  he  wa$ 
made  priest.  ^OpicmfAoala  only  in  Hebrews.  In  LXX  see 
Ezek.  xvii.  18 ;  1  Esdr.  ix.  98.  For  an  oath  rend,  the  taking 
of  an  oath. 


464  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ck.  VH 

21.  For  those  priests  were  made  (pi  iih  yhp — elah^  UpA 
yeyopdre^^.  Rend,  for  they  have  been  made  prieiU.  Lit.  are 
priests^  having  become  sttch. 

Without  an  oath.  Without  the  taking  of  an  oath  by  God. 
Scripture  says  nothing  of  an  oath  of  God  when  he  appointed 
Aaron  and  his  posterity  to  the  priesthood. 

But  this  with  an  oath  (6  Si  fieri.  opicmfAoalaif),  Rend,  ha 
he  with  the  taking  of  an  oath.  The  ti^ng  of  the  oath  eieeom' 
panted  (fierii^  the  inauguration  into  the  priesthood. 

That  said  (X^oin^>9).  Better,  eaith.  Still  says,  sinoe  the 
promise  is  realised  in  Christ's  priesthood. 

22.  Was  Jesus  made  a  surety  of  a  better  testament 
(tcpelrrovo^  SiaO'q/crf^  y^ovev  iyyvo^  *Ii7<rou9).  "£77^09  surety, 
N.  T.^.  Comp.  Sir.  xxix.  15,  16  ;  2  Mace.  x.  28.  Occasion- 
ally in  Class.,  where  also  occur  iyyvav  to  give  as  a  pledge^ 
iyyvf)  surety^  iyyvijai^  giving  in  surety^  ^771/177179  one  who  giveM 
security^  and  iyywfnk  plighted^  always  of  a  wife.  The  idea 
underlying  all  these  words  is  that  of  putting  something  into 
one's  hand  (iv  in^  yvaXop  hollow  of  the  hand)  as  a  pledge.  For 
testament  rend,  covenant  and  see  on  ch.  ix.  16.  The  thought 
of  a  covenant  is  introduced  for  the  first  time,  and  foreshadows 
ch.  viii.  6-13.  It  adds  to  the  thought  of  the  inferiority  of 
the  Levitical  priesthood  that  of  the  inferiority  of  the  diS" 
pensation  which  it  represented. 

23.  Were  many  priests  (^Xe&i^  elaip  yeyovJrei  Upek). 
Comp.  ver.  21  for  the  construction.  Rend,  have  been  made 
priests  many  in  number. 

Because  they  were  not  suffered  to  continue  (&^  rh  xeskA' 

€<r0aL  irapafiJi/eiv).     Rend,    because   they  are  hindered  from 
continuing,     TlapapJveiv  'Ho  abide  by  their  ministration.  *' 

24.  Hath  an  unchangeable  priesthood (a^api£^aTov  Ix^  ''^^ 
lepmavprjv).  Rend,  hath  his priestfiood  uncJiangeable.  TheA.V. 


Ch.  Vn.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  465 

misses  the  possessive  force  of  the  article,  hi$  priesthood,  and  the 
emphasis  on  unchanffetibley  awapdfiaro^^  N.T.^.  ^LXX.  This 
may  be  explained  either  as  invioUibley  or  which  does  not  paw 
over  to  another.  Comp.  Ex.  xxxu.  8  ;  Sir.  xxiii.  18.  Usage  is 
in  favour  of  the  former  meaning,  but  the  other  falls  in  better 
with  the  coarse  of  thought. 

25.  To  the  uttermost  (jek  rh  waimXk").  UavrtXt^  aU- 
complete^  only  here  and  L.  xiii.  11.  Not  perpetiuUly^  but 
perfectly. 

Come  unto  God  (irpocepxofUvov^  r^  Btfi).  The  verb  ^P., 
and  in  this  sense  only  in  Hebrews  and  1  Pet.  ii.  4.  See  a 
peculiar  usage  in  1  Tim.  vi.  8.  Comp.  iyyt^etP  to  draw  near^ 
Jas.  iv.  8 ;  Heb.  vii.  19. 

To  make  intercession  for  them  (ek  rh  ivrvyxdveiv  vwip 
avT&v),  The  verb  only  here  in  Hebrews.  Comp.  vwtpmmrf- 
X^veiv^  Rom.  viii.  26,  see  note.  See  also  on  hrrev^t^  $up^ 
plications^  1  Tim.  ii.  1.  The  idea  is  not  intercession,  but 
intervention.  It  includes  every  form  of  Christ's  identifying 
himself  with  human  interests.*  The  attempt  has  been  made 
to  trace  this  idea  to  Philo,  who  aUudes  to  the  Xtlyoi  U^nfi  the 
suppliant  Logos^  and  the  Xifyo^  irapduckriTo^  the  advocate-Logos. 
But  the  Logos  is  not  treated  by  Philo  as  a  divine-human 
personality  intervening  for  men,  but  as  a  poetical  personifi- 
cation allegorically  considered.  In  one  instance  the  suppliant 
Logos  is  the  cry  of  the  oppressed  Israelites ;  in  another,  Moses, 
as  the  allegorical  representative  of  the  universal  reason  of 
mankind.  It  represents  certain  functions  of  human  reason 
and  speech.  Again,  the  suppliant  is  the  visible  Cosmos 
striving  to  realise  its  ideal. 

26-28.   Sketch  of  the  ideal  priest. 

26.  Became  us  (iiiuv  hrpeireii).  See  on  ch.  ii.  10.  For 
the  verb  see  on  Tit.  ii.  1.  There  was  an  essential  fitness  in 
the  gift  of  our  great  high  priest.     Comp.  ch.  ii.  17. 

*  See  Weftoott*t  nole. 

VOL.   IT.  —  80 


i66  WOBD  STDDIES  IK  THS  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Cii.  YIL 

Holy  (&ri09).  See  on  L.  i.  75.  Always  with  a  relation  to 
God;  never  of  moral  excellence  as  related  to  men.  Of  Chriflt, 
Acts  ii.  27;  xiii.  85  :  of  a  bishop,  Tit.  i.  8. 

Harmless  (j/va/co^).  Rend.  guUeleu.  Free  from  malioe 
and  craft.  Only  here  and  Rom.  xvi.  18.  UndefiUd  (iifdea^ 
T09),  see  on  1  Pet.  i.  4. 

Separate  (jcex^p^i'^^voi).  Rend.  $eparated:  denoting  a 
condition  realised  in  Christ's  exaltation.    Comp.  Rom.  vi.  10. 

Higherthan the  heayen%(in^\dT€po^T&vovpap&p).  Comp. 
Eph.  iv.  10 ;  Heb.  iv.  14. 

27.  Who  needeth  not  dally  (/ca^  iiiUpav).  Apparently  in* 
consistent  with  ch.  ix.  7 :  but  the  sense  is,  ^^  who  hath  no  need 
day  by  day  as  the  high  priest  had  (year  by  year)  to  offer 
sacrifices,'*  etc.  The  great  point  is  repetttiati,  whe^er  daily 
or  yearly.* 

Once  (i^ira^).  Rend,  mce  far  dU.  Contrasted  with 
daily. 

When  he  offered  up  himself  {kavihv  aveu^ica^^.  A  new 
thought.  For  the  first  time  Christ  appears  as  victim.  Comp. 
ch.  ix.  12,  14 ;  Eph.  v.  2. 

28.  Summarising  the  contents  of  w.  26,  27. — The  law 
constitutes  weak  men  high  priests.  God's  sworn  declaration 
constitutes  a  son,  perfected  forevermore.  *Av0p{Snrov^  men^ 
many  in  number  as  contrasted  with  one  Son.     "Exovra^  cur- 

*  All  explanations  most  be  rejected  which  seek  to  modify  the  sense  of 
Ka0*  iiftdpav,  as  **  on  each  day  of  atonement  ^\-  or  **  very  often  ^*;  or  **  as  the 
high  priest  daily  feels  the  need.'^  It  is  urged  by  some  (as  M^n^oz)  tbat 
the  high  priest  took  part  in  the  daily  sacrifices ;  but  if  such  participation 
took  place  it  was  only  occasional.  Bleek  thinks  that  the  ceremonies  of  the 
great  Day  of  Atonement  were  throughout  before  the  writer^s  mind  as  the 
archetypal  features  of  the  high  priest^s  ministry,  and  that  these  were  in 
■ome  sort  reproduced  in  the  daily  sacrifices. 


CB.Vin.]  THB  EPISTLB  TO  THB  HBBBSWB.  467 

OiveuLv  having  infirmity^  stronger  than  aadeuek  weak^  which 
might  imply  only  special  exhibitions  of  weakness,  while  having 
infirmity  indicates  a  general  characteristic.    See  on  J.  xvi.  22. 

A  son.    Again  the  high-priesthood  is  bound  up  with  son 
ship,  as  in  ch.  v.  6,  6. 


CHAPTER  nn. 

Christ's  fulfilment  of  his  high-priestly  office  as  related  to 
the  Aaronic  priesthood.  —  Christ's  ministry  is  superior  to 
that  of  the  Levitical  priests  as  he  himself  is  superior  to  them. 

1.  Of  the  things  which  we  have  spoken  (M  rovs  Xtyofj^ 
iifoisi').  The  A.  V.  is  wrong.  'EttI  is  in  the  ea$e  of^  or  in  the 
etmeideration  of:  not  of  nor  in  addition  to.  To!?  XefOfiSfovi 
*'  the  things  which  are  being  spoken  " :  the  matters  now  under 
discussion. 

The  sum  (xe^dkaiov).  Rend,  the  ehitf  point.  It  is  not 
the  sum  of  what  precedes,  but  the  main  point  of  the  present 
discussion.  This  point  is  that  Christ  is  the  minister  of  a 
better  sanctuary,  connected  with  a  better  coyenant. 

Such  an  high  priest  (Toiovroy).   Taken  up  from  ch.  vii.  26. 

Is  set  (iKd0ur€ii).    Repeating  ch.  i.  8.    Rend,  eat  dawn. 

The  throne  of  the  majesty  (rev  0p6vov  tQ9  fieyaXaMvi^ ). 
See  on  ch.  i.  8.     The  phrase  N.  T.<>. 

In  the  heavens  (hf  roii  ovpavoU}.  Const,  with  eat  down^ 
not  with  majeety^  which  is  complete  in  itself  and  needs  no 
qualifying  epithet. 

2.  A  minister  (XdroifpTdv).  Sat  down  as  a  minister.  From 
an  old  adjective  Xc«to9  or  Xilre^  (found  only  in.  this  con^ 


468  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Cs.  VUL 

pound),  belonging  to  the  people^  and  ip^ov  work.  Hence,  orig- 
inally, the  service  of  the  state  in  a  public  office.  In  LXX 
and  N.  T.  X^irovp^h^  minitter^  Xeirovpyelv  to  mini$ter^  and  Xci- 
rovpyCa  ministrg  are  used  both  of  priestly  service  to  God  and 
of  service  to  men.  AeirovpyCa  in  LXX  rarely  of  the  service 
of  the  priests,  often  of  the  Levites.  See  1  K.  i.  4 ;  xix.  21 ; 
2  K.  iv.  43 ;  vi.  15.  Aeirovpyoi^j  Heb.  i.  7,  in  the  general 
sense  of  $ervant9  of  God. 

Of  the  sanctuary  (j&v  irflmv).  The  heavenly  sanctuary. 
T^  irfia  the  moat  holyphice^  Heb.  ix.  8, 12,  25 ;  x.  19  ;  xiii.  11. 
Comp.  &yM  irfbov  holy  of  holies^  Heb.  ix.  3.  ""Ayia  holy  plaeeM 
generally^  but  with  special  reference  to  the  innermost  sanctu- 
ary, Heb.  ix.  24. 

The  true  tabernacle  (tQ9  aKtfvfi^  tQ9  aXi/^ii^).  Explan* 
atory  of  r&v  drfioov.  The  form  of  expression  is  emphatic :  the 
tabernacle^  the  genuine  one^  as  compared  with  the  tabernacle 
in  the  wilderness.  For  aXrfdiiHk  real^  genuine^  see  on  J.  i.  9. 
^Kffvii  a  tent.  For  different  shades  of  meaning,  comp. 
Matt.  xvii.  4 ;  L.  xvi.  9 ;  Acts  vii.  43.  In  this  epistle  always 
of  the  tabernacle  in  the  wilderness. 

3.  A  priest  is  appointed  to  offer  gifts  and  sacrifices. 
Therefore  Christ,  a  high  priest,  must  have  gifts  and  sacri- 
fices to  offer,  and  a  sanctuary  in  which  to  offer  them. 

Wherefore  it  is  of  necessity  (^Bdev  apayxaiop).     Rend. 

wherefore  it  is  necessary. 

Somewhat  to  offer  (J  irpoaa^Krf).  Lit.  what  he  may  offer. 
The  construction  is  unusual.  Comp.  Acts  xxi.  16.  The 
statement  is  a  truism,  unless  it  be  assumed  that  the  Hebrew 
Christians  were  ignorant  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  priest- 
hood. 

4.  Rend.  **Now  if  he  were  on  earth  he  would  not  be  a 
priest  at  all,  seeing  that  there  are  those  who  offer  the  gifts 


Ch.  Vm.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  469 

according  to  the  law."  Christ  could  not  be  a  priest  on  earth, 
because  there  is  an  order  of  priests  already  established  by  law ; 
and  as  Christ  was  not  of  Uie  tribe  of  Levi  (ch.  vii.  13, 14) 
he  could  have  nothing  in  common  with  them. 

5.  Who  serve  unto  the  example  and  shadow  of  heavenly 
things  (oXtlv^  inroSeiyfutn  koI  cki^  Xarpevovaiv  r&v  hrovpav- 
icop).  The  connection  is,  ^^  there  are  those  who  offer  the  gifts 
according  to  the  law,  such  as  (ofripw)  serve,"  etc.  For  Xar- 
peuovmv  serve^  see  on  2  Tim.  i.  3.  Omit  unto.  Rend,  serve 
the  copy  and  shadow^  etc.,  or,  as  Rev.,  that  which  i$  a  copy  and 
,  ihadofv.  For  inrSSeiyfut  copy^  see  on  1  Pet.  y.  3 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  6. 
Comp.  Heb.  ix.  23.  T&v  hrovpavlmv  *^of  heavenly  things J*^ 
T^  hrovpdvia  in  N.  T.  usually  *^ heavenly  places.^^  See 
Eph.  i.  3 ;  ii.  6 ;  iii.  10 ;  vi.  12  :  "  heavenly  things^''  J.  iii.  12 ; 
PhiUp.  ii.  10;  Heb.  ix.  23.* 

As  Moses  was  admonished  (xadia^  xexpVM^Turrai  Mivua^). 
By  God.  This,  and  the  remainder  of  the  verse,  explain  the 
words  copy  and  shadow.  For  xjprnuiTC^tiv  see  on  Matt.  ii.  12 ; 
L.  ii.  26 ;  Acts  xi.  26.  Comp.  xpVf^'''^F'^  answer  (of  God), 
Rom.  xi.  4.  In  Ex.  xl.  1,  where  Moses  is  commanded  to 
make  the  tabernacle,  God  is  expressly  named. 

To  make  (^iinrekelv).  The  margin  of  Rev.  complete  may 
easily  convey  a  wrong  idea.  The  sense  is  to  carry  out  or  exe^ 
cute  the  plan  given  to  him. 

For^  See  (5/>a  ydp^.  Tap  for  is  not  a  part  of  the  quotation, 
but  is  argumentative.  Moses  was  admonished,  for  God  said 
"See,"  etc. 

That  thou  make  (Troiifo-ec^).  A  direct  command.  "See, 
thou  shalt  make." 

Pattern  (rthrov).  See  on  1  Pet.  v.  8.  The  meaning  is 
that,  in  all  essential  features,  the  Levitical  system  of  worship 

•  Westoott  anggMts  **  heavenly  order.'*  Lflnemann  mppUes  iyUtp  sanetu- 


470  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Gk.  Vm. 

was  a  copy  of  a  heavenly  reality.  This  was  pressed  into  an 
absurd  literaUsm  by  the  Rabbins,  who  held  that  there  were 
in  heaven  original  models  of  the  tabernacle  and  of  all  its 
appurtenances,  and  that  these  were  shown  to  Moses  in  the 
Mount.  The  writer  draws  out  of  this  vulgar  conception  the 
thought  that  the  material  tabernacle  was  an  emblem  of  a 
spiritual,  heavenly  sanctuary.  The  Levitical  priests,  there- 
fore, serve  only  a  copy  and  shadow. 

6.    But  now  (vw  8i^.     Nw  is  logical:  as  the  case  now 
stands.     The  statement  of  ver.  4  is  taken  up.     ^*  If  he  were 
on  earth  he  could  not  be  a  priest,"  etc.,  but  now^  since  Christ , 
i$  a  priest,  and  must  have  a  sanctuary  and  an  offering,  he  has 
a  more  excellent  ministry. 

He  hath  obtained  a  more  excellent  ministry  (Sio^pm- 
r4fHK  T^rv^cv  Xurovp^lasi').  The  ministry  of  the  heavenly 
sanctuary. 

He  ie  the  mediator  of  a  better  covenant  (jcpthrovi^  Anw 
SuiOijicfi^  ficairt)^^.  For  fAeairtf^  mediator^  see  on  Gal.  iii.  19. 
Both  here  and  in  the  following  chapter,  the  ideas  of  the 
sanctuary  and  the  covenant  are  closely  united.  6od*s  coven- 
ant was  embodied  in  the  sanctuary.  The  ark  was  *^  the  ark 
of  the  covenant";  the  tables  of  the  law  were  "the  tables  of 
the  covenant."  The  essence  of  a  covenant  is  the  establish- 
ment of  a  relationship.  The  sanctuary  was  the  meeting-place 
of  God  and  man.  The  ritual  of  sacrifice  adjusted  the  sinner's 
relation  to  a  holy  God.  All  the  furniture  and  all  the  ordin- 
ances of  the  tabernacle  assumed  the  covenant  between  God 
and  his  people.  Thus  the  two  ideas  belong  together.  The 
minister  of  the  Levitical  sanctuary  was  the  mediator  of  the 
old  covenant.  A  new  covenant  implies  a  new  ministry,  a 
better  covenant  implies  a  better  ministry.  Christ's  priest- 
hood implies  a  sanctuary.  The  new  sanctuary  implies  a  new 
covenant.     This  covenant  is  a  better  covenant  because  it 

Was  established  upon  better  promises  (iwl  xpelmauf 
i7rayy€\i(M  vevofiod^rai).      For   established  rend,  enacted. 


Ch.  Vm.]  THB  EPISTLB  TO  THE  HBBBSWS.  471 

iHOfjLodenlv  to  enact  a  law^  only  here  and  ch.  yii.  11.  A  few 
times  in  LXX :  liofioO^rCa  enacting^  only  Rom.  ix.  4 :  vofAo- 
04tjj^  lawgiver^  only  Jas.  iv.  12.  The  better  covenant  was 
enacted  as  truly  as  was  the  law.  See  ver.  10.  The  new 
covenant  was  a  new  law — the  perfect  law,  the  law  of  liberty, 
Jas.  i.  25. 

7.  The  statement  that  a  better  covenant  was  enacted 
upon  better  promises  is  justified  by  the  very  existence  of  that 
second  covenant.  ^  If  that  first  covenant  had  been  faultless, 
there  would  no  place  have  been  sought  for  a  second.*'  The 
argument  is  like  that  in  ch.  vii.  11  (see  note).  Notice  the 
imperfect  tense  i^rireiro^  lit.  would  have  been  being  mmght.  A 
search  would  not  have  been  going  on.  This  implies  a  sense 
of  dissatisfaction  while  the  old  covenant  was  still  in  force, 
and  a  looking  about  for  something  better.  This  hint  is  now 
expanded.  It  is  to  be  shown  that  the  Licvitical  system  an- 
swered to  a  covenant  which  was  recognised  as  imperfect  and 
transitory  by  an  O.  T.  prophet,  since  he  spoke  of  a  divine 
purpose  to  establish  a  new  covenant. 

8.  For  finding  fault  with  them  (^ficft^fiow  avro^).* 
Them  signifies  the  possessors  of  the  first  covenant.  The 
prophet  says  what  follows  by  way  of  blame.  The  passage 
cited  is  Jer.  xxxviii,  LXX  (A.V.  xxxi),  81-84.  The  writer 
assumes  that  Jeremiah's  new  covenant  means  the  Christian 
covenant. 

I  will  make  (ovtmkArui).  Rend.  I  will  conclude  or  con- 
mmmate.  See  on  L.  iv.  13.  Only  here  in  Hebrews,  and  once 
in  Paul,  Rom.  ix.  28,  a  citation. 

With  the  house  (M).  The  preposition  marking  direction 
toward. 

*  Westoott  ftnd  Hort  sod  Tiaebeiidorf  read  ftdro^.  Wels  sod  Rer.  T. 
roUin  the  T.  B.  miroit.  If  the  latter,  the  more  probable  oonstraction  ia  with 
he  watth  .•  *«he  aaith  to  them,*'  taking  /iM/jb^d/itw  absolutely.  If  a^ro^,  the 
pronoun  will  be  goTened  by  /i^^a^^pm,  **  blaming  them.** 


472  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Gk.  TUL 

A  new  covenant  (iiaOriictiv  kou^v).  Always  KOivii  in  the 
phrase  new  covenant^  except  Heb.  xii.  24,  where  we  have  vda. 
For  the  distinction  see  note  there,  and  on  Matt.  xxvi.  29. 

9.  In  the  day  when  I  took  (iv  fii^ipa  iinXafiofiivov  fiov). 
An  unusual  construction.  Lit.  in  the  day  of  me  hatfing  taken 
hold.     Comp.  J.  iv.  89. 

10.  The  covenant  which  I  will  make  (i^  BiaOiiiCff  tjp  Sia- 
Oiiaofjuu).  The  noun  and  the  verb  are  cognate  —  the  arrange- 
ment  which  I  will  arrange.  A  covenant  (JkaOrJKri)  is  something 
arranged  (^BiarlO&rOai)  between  two  parties.  See  the  same 
combination,  Acts  iii.  25. 

I  will  put  my  laws  (&So^  i^/iou?  fAov).  Lit.  giving  my 
laws:  const,  with  /  will  make:  ^Hhe  covenant  which  I  will 
make  by  giving  my  laws.'' 

Mind  (SitiCvoiay).  The  moral  understanding.  See  on 
Mk.  xii.  30 ;  L.  i.  51.  HearU^  xapBCa^^  see  on  Rom.  i.  21 ; 
X.  10. 

A  God  —  a  people  (ek  Oeiv — ek  \a6v).  Lit.  unto  a  God, 
etc.  A  Hebraistic  form  of  expression,  cfc  signifying  the  des- 
tination of  the  substantive  verb.  The  sense  is,  I  will  be  to 
them  to  serve  as  a  God ;  or  my  being  as  related  to  them  will 
amount  to  my  being  a  God  to  them.  Comp.  Matt.  xix.  5 ; 
2  Cor.  vi.  18 ;  Heb.  i.  5. 

11.  His  neighbour  {riv  iroXinip).  Lit.  his  citizen:  his 
fellow-citizen.* 

Know  the  Lord  (yv&Oi  rov  tevpiov).  As  if  commending 
God  to  the  knowledge  of  one  who  is  ignorant  of  him. 

All  shall  know  Qtravre^  eHrjaovaiv).  Observe  the  two  words 
for  kncfw :  yv&0i  of  the  recognition  of  a  stranger ;  el^i^ovo'ip 

«  Codex  A,  LXX,  has  rdr  dKcX^r  his  brother,  and  for  rhp  iUK^p  in  the 
lollowiiig  clauae,  t6w  wXti^Uw  hi$  neighbour. 


CH.Vm.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TUE  HEBREWS.  478 

of  an  absolute  acquaintance  as  of  one  born  under  God's 
covenant. 

From  the  least  to  the  greatest  (^liirh  fiixpov  ^  fteydkov 
avT&v).  Lit.  fr(ym  the  little  unto  the  great  of  them.  This  knowl- 
edge of  God  wiU  be  without  distinction  of  age  or  station. 

12.  Merciful  (TXcw).  Only  here  and  Matt.  xvi.  22,  see 
note. 

Unrighteousness  (aSor^).  UnrtghteouineeBee.  The  only 
occurrence  of  the  word  in  the  plural.  For  ahucla  see  on 
2  Pet.  ii.  13. 

Their  sins  and  their  iniquities  (j&v  afuipriAp  ainAv).  Omit 
and  their  iniguitiee.*  For  ifAoprla  «in,  see  on  Matt.  i.  21; 
and  for  both  aSuela  and  aiuifnUi^  on  1  J.  i.  9.    Comp.  1  J.  y.  17. 

Will  I  remember  no  more  (ov  ^  fivrfoOA  fri).  Lit.  IwiU 
hy  no  means  remember  any  more. 

13.  In  that  he  saith  a  new  covenant  (<h  r^ Xdyup  kou^p). 
Lit.  "in  his  saying  new.'' 

He  hath  made  the  first  old  (irewaXalmcof  rifp  irpwniv). 
lla\axovv  to  make  old^  only  in  Hebrews  and  L.  xii.  88.  Comp. 
Heb.  i.  11. 

Now  that  which  decayeth  and  waxeth  old  (to  ik  itoXm- 
ovfA€vov  Kal  yrfpdatcov).  Rend.  btU  that  which  i$  becoming  old 
and  waxing  aged.  TfipdaKOv  (only  here  and  J.  xxi.  18)  adds 
the  idea  of  infirmity  to  that  of  age. 

Is  ready  to  vanish  away  (irp^  iuf^tpurfiov).  Lit.  it  n^h 
unto  vanishing.  *Ait>apurfuk  vanishing^  N.  T.^.  Often  in  LXX. 
Class,  rare  and  late.  The  whole  statement  indicates  that  the 
writer  regarded  the  Sinaitic  covenant,  even  in  Jeremiah's 

*  gml  TUP  ikmiuMw  miArup,  T.  R. 


4T4  WOBD  Wti^Ui  U 

itme,  m  obioicste,  and  thai  Jcfcmiali  hi— rlf  m  regmidad  it. 
When  God  anDMueed  a  new  corenauu  he  pfodaimed  the 
uirafficieDe J  of  the  old,  and  the  promise  of  a  new  covenant 
carried  vitb  it  the  prondae  of  the  abrogatian  of  the  old. 
The  new  corenant  is  lo  shaped  as  to  aroid  the  d^eds  of 
ttie  old  one,  and  some  one  has  remarked  that»  in  one  aspect, 
it  Li  a  criticism  of  the  Sinaitic  corenant.  The  foUowing 
are  its  provisions:  (1)  The  law  will  no  more  be  merely 
external^  but  a  law  written  in  the  heart.  C<mip.  2  Cor.  iiL  S. 
(2)  The  people  will  be  en  intimate  and  affectionate  terma 
with  God,  so  that  the  knowledge  of  God  will  be  geneiaL 
(8)  Sin  win  be  dealt  with  more  radically  and  ellectiTely. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

The  new  scene  and  ccmditions  of  Christ's  high-priestly  woik 
— the  higher  sanctoarj  and  the  better  ooTcnant  (ch.  yiii.  1-6) 
— are  presented  with  more  detail. 

1.  Ordinances  of  divine  service  (iuuuAiuKra  Xarpdn). 
For  iucaimfjLa  ordinance^  see  on  Rom.  y.  16.  For  Xarpdti 
urviee^  tiee  on  L.  i.  74 ;  Apoc.  xxii.  8 ;  Philip,  iii.  8 ; 
2  Tim.  i.  8.  The  meaning  is  ordinances  directed  to  or 
adapted  for  divine  service. 

A  worldly  sanctuary  (to  £710^  tcwrfiucSv).  The  A.  V.  misses 
the  force  of  the  article.  Rend,  and  it$  Mnetiutry  a  ianctuary 
of  this  world.  To  irfiov  in  the  sense  of  sanctuary  only  here. 
Elsewhere  the  plural  r^  ayia.  KoiTfjLuc6v  of  this  world  in  con* 
trast  with  the  heavenly  sanctuary  to  be  mentioned  later.* 

2.  Was  made  (^fcareafcevdaOtf).     See  on  ch.  iii.  3. 

•  The  rendering  weU-ordered,  seemly,  is  contrary  to  usage.  Ko^fuxAt  has 
three  meanings  •  relating  to  tke  univene ;  of  the  world ;  worldly,  with  aa 
ethical  sense — having  the  cliaracter  of  the  sinful  world.  The  word  lor 
P' ,  mly  is  ithaiMi,  1  Tim.  ii.  9  ;  Ui.  2. 


Gb.  IX.]  THE  SPIBTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  475 

The  first.  The  first  tabemaele^  that  is,  the  first  dimnan 
of  the  tabernacle.  He  speaks  of  the  two  divisions  as  two 
tabernacles. 

Candlestick  (Xux^Ca).  Rend.  lampUand.  See  on  Matt. 
V.  15 ;  Apoc.  i.  12.  Description  in  Ex.  xxv.  81-87.  Comp. 
Zech.  iv. 

The  table  and  the  shewbread  (^  rpdir^^  koX  ^  irfMeani 
T&p  apr&p).  See  Ex.  xxv.  23-^0 ;  xxxv.  18 ;  2  Chron.  ii.  4 ; 
xiii.  11.  The  table  and  the  loaves  are  treated  as  one  it^m. 
Lit.  the  table  and  the  utting  forth  of  the  loaves^  that  is,  the  table 
with  ite  loaves  set  forth.     See  on  Mk.  ii.  26 ;  Acts  xi.  28. 

Which  is  called  the  sanctuary  (Jlrm  —  &ytd).  Since  it 
was  thus  furnished.     See  on  ch.  viii.  2. 

3.  After  the  second  veil  (^fierh  t&  Mrepov  icarairh'aaiui). 
According  to  Ex.  xxvi.  31-37  there  were  two  veils,  the  one 
before  the  door  of  the  tent  and  the  other  before  the  sanctu- 
ary. After  passing  the  first  veil  and  entering  the  tent,  the 
worshipper  would  see  before  him  the  second  veil  behind 
which  was  the  holy  of  holies.  The  writer  caUs  this  also  a 
tabernacle^  ver.  2. 

4.  The  golden  censer  (ypwrovv  Ovfuan^piop),  The  noun 
N.  T.^.  It  may  mean  either  eemer  or  aUar  of  incense.  In 
LXX  the  altar  of  incense  is  called  Ovauumjpiov  Ovfudfiaro^^ 
Ex.  XXX.  1,  27 ;  Lev.  iv.  7  :  comp.  L.  i.  11.  Svfuanipiov 
is  used  of  a  censer^  2  Chron.  xxvi.  19 ;  Ezek.  viii.  11 ; 
4  Mace.  vii.  11.  These  are  the  only  instances  of  the  word 
in  LXX  :  accordingly,  never  in  LXX  of  the  altar  of  incense. 
Josephus  uses  it  for  both.  The  golden  censer  is  not  men- 
tioned in  O.  T.  as  a  part  of  the  furniture  of  the  holy  of 
holies.  The  facts  of  the  case  then  are  as  foUows :  (a)  accord- 
ing to  Ex.  xxxi  the  incense-altar  was  in  the  holy  place,  not 
in  the  holy  of  holies ;  (i)  Philo  and  Josephus  use  Ovfuan^piop 


476  WOBD  STUDIES  19  THE  KEW  TESTAMENT.      [Gb.  DL 

for  the  altar  of  inoense ;  *  («)  there  is  no  mention  in  O.  T. 
of  a  censer  aet  apart  for  the  day  of  atonement ;  (d)  the  high 
priest  was  to  enter  with  inoense,  so  that  the  ark  mi^t  be 
veiled  by  the  smoke  (Lev.  zvi.  12).  Hence  the  censer  oonld 
nfjt  have  been  kept  in  the  holy  of  holies ;  («)  the  writer 
clearly  speaks  of  an  abiding-place  of  the  tfv/cionjpcor  in  a 
[jarticular  division  of  the  tabernacle.  There  is  evidently  a 
diMcrepancy,  probably  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  writer  drew 
his  information  from  the  O.  T.  by  which  he  might  have  been 
led  into  error.  Thus  Ex.  xxvi.  35,  there  are  mentioned  in 
the  holy  place  without  the  veil  only  the  candlestick  and  the 
table,  and  not  the  incense-altar.  Again,  when  the  standing- 
place  of  the  incense  altar  was  mentioned,  the  expressions 
were  open  to  misconstruction:  see  Ex.  xxx.  6;  xl.  5.  On 
the  day  of  atonement,  the  incense-altar,  like  the  most  holy 
place,  was  sprinkled  with  blood.  This  might  have  given  rise 
to  the  impression  that  it  was  in  the  holy  of  holies. 

With  gold  Txpw^^)-     Properly,  wrought  gold. 

Wherein  (iv  §).  But  according  to  Ex.  xvi.  84;  Num. 
xvii.  10,  neither  the  pot  of  manna  nor  Aaron's  rod  was  in 
the  ark,  but  ^^ before  the  testimony";  while  in  Ex.  xxv.  16, 
Moses  was  commanded  to  put  only  the  tables  of  the  law  into 
the  ark ;  and  in  1  K.  viii.  9  it  is  said  of  the  ark  in  the  tem- 
ple, ^^  there  was  nothing  in  the  ark  save  the  two  tables  of 
stone. '^  The  writer  follows  the  rabbinical  tradition  that  the 
{X)t  of  manna  and  the  rod  were  inside  of  the  ark. 

Golden  pot  (ordfAvo^  XP^^V)'  Srcf^vcK,  N.  T.®,  a  few 
times  in  LXX,  rare  in  Class.  Golden  is  an  addition  of  the 
LXX.     Comp.  Ex.  xvi.  33. 

5.  Cherubim  of  glory  (xepovfieiv  Sd^).  Setting  forth  or 
exhibiting  the  divine  glory.     The  word  signifies  livitu/  cre€h 

•  Philo,  (iuU  Ber,  Divin.,  Mangey's  e<L,  p.  604.  De  VUa  Mo$,  MMnge^ 
p.  608.    Joseph.  B,  J,  v.  6,  5;  Ant.  iii.  6,  8. 


CH.  IX.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  477 

ture$^  and  they  are  described  as  ^&a.  Hence  usually  with  the 
neuter  article  rh.  See  Isa.  vi.  2,  8 ;  Ezek.  i.  5-10 ;  x.  5-20, 
and  comp.  Apoc.  iv.  6-8.  Nothing  could  be  more  infelici- 
tous than  the  A.V.  rendering  of  ^&a  beasts. 

Shadowing  the  mercy-seat  (^KaraaKid^ovra  t6  iKaanipiov). 
KaraaKui^eiVy  N.  T.^,  ^LXX,  occasionally  in  Class.  Throw- 
ing their  shadow  daum  upon  the  mercy nseat.  For  tKcurrripiov^ 
see  on  Rom.  iii.  25.  Used  in  LXX  to  translate  rrp9  the 
place  of  covering  riuy  the  throne  of  mercy  above  the  ark. 

Particularly  (jcarh  iiifm).  In  detail ;  his  main  point  being 
the  twofold  division  of  the  tabernacle.  The  phrase  N.  T.^. 
Note  the  completeness  of  the  list  of  articles  of  furniture  in 
the  tabernacle,  even  to  the  inclusion  of  things  which  had  no 
connection  with  worship ;  also  the  emphasis  on  the  costliness 
of  the  articles  —  gold.  The  writer  will  say  all  that  can  be 
said  for  this  transitory,  shadowy  tabernacle ;  but  all  that  he 
can  say  about  the  costliness  of  the  apparatus  only  emphasises 
the  inferior  and  unspiritual  character  of  the  worship.  The 
vessels  are  superior  to  the  service.* 

6.  The  inferiority  of  the  ancient  sjrstem  was  proved  by 
the  old  tabernacle  itself :  by  its  division  into  two  parts,  both 
of  which  were  inaccessible  to  the  people. 

Always  (&^  iravrisi).  Rend.  eowtinuaUyn  The  phrase 
is  usually  found  in  connection  with  matters  involving  rela- 
tions to  God  —  worship,  sacrifice,  etc.  See  Matt,  xviii.  10; 
L.  xxiv.  58;  Acts  ii.  25;  x.  2;  2  Th.  iii.  16;  Heb.  xiii.  6. 

Accomplishing  (^^ircXovin-e?).  See  on  ch.  viii.  5,  and 
Gal.  iii.  3.  The  verb  is  used  of  performing  religious  services 
by  Herodotus.     See  i.  167;  ii.  63,  122;  iv.  186. 

7.  Errors  (^iypotffAdiwv).    Lit.  ignorances.    See  on  ch.  v.  2. 

•  ProfeflBor  Bracers  remarks  on  thit  point  are  worth  reading :  The  BpittU 
to  the  HebrewMt  p.  810  ft 


i78  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ch.  UL 

8.  The  Holy  Ghost.  Speaking  through  the  applianoea 
and  forms  of  worship.  The  intimation  is  that  God  intended 
to  emphasise,  in  the  old  economy  itself,  the  fact  of  his  inac- 
cessibility, in  order  to  create  the  desire  for  fall  access  and  to 
prepare  the  way  for  this. 

The  way  into  the  holiest  of  all  (r^y  r&v  a^lmv  iSiti). 
Lit.  the  way  of  the  holiee.  For  the  construction  comp.  oSir 
iOv&v  way  of  the  Gentiles^  Mk.  x.  5.  The  phrase  N.  T.^. 
T£i^  dylnv  as  in  w.  12,  24,  25 ;  x.  19. 

While  as  the  first  tabernacle  was  yet  standing  (tn  t^ 

irp&mfi  atcffvfj^  ixowrtf^  ardaiv}.  By  the  first  tabernacle  is 
meant  the  first  dimeion.  The  point  is  that  the  division  of 
the  tabernacle  showed  the  limitations  of  the  Levitical  system, 
and  kept  the  people  from  coming  directly  to  God.  Of  this 
limitation  the  holy  place,  just  outside  the  second  veil,  was 
specially  significant;  for  the  holy  place  barred  priests  and 
people  alike  from  the  holy  of  holies.  The  priests  could  not 
pass  out  of  it  into  the  holy  of  holies ;  the  people  could  not 
pass  through  it  to  that  sanctuary,  since  they  were  not  allowed 
in  the  holy  place.  The  priests  in  the  holy  place  stood  between 
the  people  and  God  as  revealed  in  the  shrine.  'E^ouo^ 
oTcuTiv^  lit.  had  standing.  The  phrase  N.  T.^.  2t<w-a9,  every- 
where in  N.  T.  except  here,  is  used  in  its  secondary  sense  of 
faction^  sedition^  insurrection.  Here  in  its  original  sense. 
Note  that  the  sense  is  not  physical  and  local  as  the  A.V. 
implies,  but  remained  a  recognised  institution. 

9.  Which  (^Tt9).  The  first  division  of  the  tabernacle. 
The  double  relative  directs  attention  to  the  emphasis  which 
belongs  to  the  first  tabernacle.  The  way  into  the  holiest 
was  not  yet  manifest  while  the  first  tabernacle  continued  to 
be  a  recognised  institution,  seeing  that  the  first  tabernacle 
was  a  parable,  etc. 

A  figure  (irapafioXii).  Outside  of  the  Synoptic  Gospels. 
only  here  and  ch.  xi.  19.  Here  of  a  visible  symbol  or  type. 
See  on  Matt.  xiii.  3. 


Ch.  IX.]  THB  epistle  to  the  HEBREWS.  479 

For  the  time  then  present  (cfc  Toy  Kcupov  top  ivarrqicdTd). 
Rend,  now  present,  as  contrasted  with  the  ^^  time  of  reforma- 
tion/' ver.  10.  See  on  these  last  days^  ch.  i.  2.  ^En^for;  with 
reference  to ;  applying  to.  Kaipoi  season  is  used  instead  of 
aia}v  age^  because  **  the  time  "  is  conceived  by  the  writer  as  a 
critical  point,  —  a  turning-point,  at  which  the  old  system 
is  to  take  its  departure.  For  ivwrqicAra  present^  see  on 
Gal.  i.  4,  and  comp.  Rom.  viii.  38 ;  1  Cor.  iii.  22. 

In  which  (jcaSt  tjv).  The  A.  V.  wrongly  assumes  a  reference 
to  tJie  tabernacle;  whereas  the  reference  is  to  tA^  parable. 
Rend,  according  to  which. 

Were  offered  —  could  not  (irpoa^^ipovnu  fjbff  SwdfAOfai). 
Rend,  ^^are  offered"  or  ^^are  being  offered ^^;  and  for  "could 
not,"  "cannot." 

Make  him  that  did  the  service  perfect  (reXei&aai  top 
XarpevoPTa^.  Rend,  as  Rev.  "  make  the  worshipper  perfect." 
See  ch.  vii.  11. 

As  pertaining  to  the  conscience  (^tcari  <rvpei&rja-ipy  Having 
shown  that  the  division  of  the  tabernacle  proved  the  imper- 
fection of  the  worship,  the  writer  will  now  show  that  the 
Levitical  ritual  did  not  accomplish  the  true  end  of  religion. 
The  radical  defect  of  the  Licvitical  system  was  its  inability  to 
deal  with  the  conscience^  and  thus  bring  about  the  "perfection" 
which  is  the  ideal  of  true  religion.  That  ideal  contemplated 
the  cleansing  and  renewal  of  the  inner  jnan ;  not  merely  the 
removal  of  ceremonial  uncleanness,  or  the  formal  expiation 
of  sins.  Comp.  Matt,  xxiii.  25,  26.  For  avpe&rfo-i^  conscience^ 
see  on  1  Pet.  iii.  16. 

10.  The  impotence  of  the  gifts  and  sacrifices  lay  in  the  fact 
that  they  were  only  symbolic  ordinances. 

Which  stood  in  (M).  The  passage  should  be  read  thus : 
^according  to  which  are  offered  gifts  and  sacrifices  which 


480  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NSW  TBSTAMSNT.       [Gr.  IX. 

cannot  perfect  the  worshipper  as  touching  the  conscience, 
being  mere  ordinances  of  the  flesh  on  the  ground  qf  (iwl 
resting  upon)  meats,"  etc. 

Meats  and  drinks  and  divers  washings  (^fipAfuuruf  xal 
irdfiaaip  teal  Sia<f>6poL^  fiaimafAoh).  Bfmfuunv^  clean  and  un- 
clean meat*.  TlSfuunv  drinks^  concerning  which  the  Levitieal 
law  laid  down  no  prescriptions  except  as  to  abstinence  in  the 
case  of  a  Nazarite  vow,  and  of  the  priests  when  they  were 
about  to  oflSciate.  See  Num.  vi.  S ;  Lev.  x.  9.  For  /Scnr- 
Tia-fjiok  washings  see  on  ch.  vi.  2. 

And  carnal  ordinances  (^^amfjLara  aapxi^).  Omit  and. 
The  phrase  is  a  general  description  of  tneats^  etc.  Lit.  ord* 
inanees  of  the  flesh. 

Imposed  (hrucelii^iHi).  Some  interpreters  find  in  this  the 
suggestion  of  a  burden^  which  these  ceremonial  observances 
assuredly  were.  Comp.  Acts  xv.  10.  This,  however,  is  not 
probable. 

Until  the  time  of  reformation  (/a^i  icaipov  hiopOAaem). 

Auipdaxri^  N.  T.^,  ^LXX,  occasionally  in  Class.  Aulp0esfia 
correction^  amendment^  Acts  xxiv.  2.  AulpOcoai^  lit.  making 
straight :  used  by  medical  writers  of  straightening  a  distorted 
limb.  The  verb  BiopOovv  (not  in  N.  T.)  in  LXX  of  mending 
one's  ways^  Jer.  vii.  3,  5 ;  Wisd.  ix.  18.  Of  setting  up  or 
establishing^  Isa.  xvi.  5  ;  Ixii.  7.  "  The  time  of  reformation  " 
is  the  Christian  age,  when  God  made  with  his  people  a  better 
covenant.  It  was  inaugurated  by  the  death  of  Christ.  See 
on  ch.  i.  2.  The  gifts  and  offerings  were  only  provisional,  to 
tide  the  people  over  to  the  better  time. 

11 .  The  time  of  reformation  introduces  a  higher  sanotoaryy 
a  better  offering,  a  more  radical  salvation. 

Having  come  (^TrapayevS/iepo^').  Having  appeared  in  the 
world.  Only  here  in  Hebrews,  and  only  once  in  Panl^ 
1  Cor.  xvi.  8.     Most  frequent  in  Luke  and  Acts. 


Ch.  IX.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  481 

Of  good  things  to  come  (t&p  yevofUiwp  hyaO&v).  Accord- 
ing to  this  reading  the  A.  V.  is  wrong.  It  should  be  "  of  the 
good  things  realisedj*^  or  that  have  came  to  pa»$.  The  A.  V. 
follows  the  reading  ficXKdvTwv  about  to  be.  So  Tischendorf 
and  Rev.  T.  Weiss  with  Westcott  and  Hort  read  yevofiAwv. 
Blessings  not  merely  prophetic  or  objects  of  hope,  but  actually 
attained ;  free  approach  to  God,  the  better  covenant,  personal 
communion  with  God,  the  purging  of  the  conscience. 

Through  a  greater  and  more  perfect  tabernacle  (&^).  The 
preposition  is  instrumental.  Comp.  ver.  12.  Const,  with 
afyxjL€p€is  high  priest^  and  as  qualifying  it.  ^*A  high  priest 
with  a  greater  and  more  perfect  tabernacle.'*  It  has  been 
shown  that  the  new  high  priest  must  have  a  sanctuary  and 
an  offering  (ch.  viii.  2-6).  Accordingly,  as  the  LfCvitical 
priests  were  attached  to  (were  priests  with^  an  inferior  taber- 
nacle, so  Christ  appears  with  a  greater  and  more  perfect 
tabernacle.  For  this  use  of  Bih  see  Rom.  ii.  27;  xiv.  20; 
2  Cor.  ii.  4;  iii.  11.  Note  the  article  with  tabetnaele^  hi$ 
greater,  etc.* 

•  By  some  interpreten  aid  is  explained  as  local,  patting  through^  and  rft 
fuliitwot^vmipUt  is  oonstraed  with  c(^X0fr,  yer.  12.  Thus:  '*  Christ  having 
appeared  as  a  high  priest  of  the  good  things  accomplished,  entered  into  tht 
holiest,  patting  through  the  greater  and  more  perfect  tabernacle.*'  That  is,  as 
the  Leyitical  high  priest  had  to  pass  through  the  holy  place  in  order  to  reach 
the  holy  of  holies,  so  Christ  passed  through  a  holy  place  greater  and  more 
perfect  than  that  of  the  ancient  tabernacle,  in  order  to  reach  the  heavenly 
sanctuary.  All  Idnds  of  explanations  are  given  of  this  intermediate  holy 
place ;  as,  the  lower  tpacet  of  the  heavent :  ChritVt  human  nature :  hit  holg 
life :  the  church  on  eaHh :  the  toorld,  etc.  It  is  to  be  said  that  this  local 
sense  of  dcd  emphasises  a  subordinate  point,  of  which  nothing  is  made  in  the 
epistle ;  which  is  not  even  stated.  In  other  words,  nothing  in  the  epistle  is 
made  to  turn  on  the  fact  of  the  hig^  priest's  passing  through  one  place  in 
order  to  reach  another.  The  emphatic  point  is  Christ's  entering  the  heavenly 
sanctuary.  His  passing  through  the  heavens  (ch.  iv.  14)  or  throng  ansrthing 
else,  is  a  mere  incident  having  no  typical  significance.  The  construction 
advocated  by  Kendall,  J^iHttle  to  the  Hebrewt,  should  be  noticed:  "High 
priest  of  good  things  which  came  through  the  greater  and  more  perfect  taber- 
nacle." But  not  the  greater  tabernacle,  but  Christ  is  everywhere  represented 
as  the  agent  of  the  good  things  of  the  new  dispensation.  Hie  new  sanotnaiy 
which  Christ  must  have  as  hi^gti  pEiest  is  an  aceoflUNmlmeiil  of  his  podtlott 
and  ministry. 

▼OL.  rv. — 81 


4SS        woftD  mrutxA  t3 

That  b  to  say  not  of  this  buSUm^  (rmr/ 
siffgriattm).  VfxImiUim^rtn/Leremtism^  See  on  Raai.iiiL  19; 
2  Cor.  T.  17;  Col.  i.  15.  The  mfaning  k,  hoc  bdongiii^  to 
tUf  oatofal  creation  eitber  in  iu  materials  or  its  i 


12.  By  Ifis  btood  of  goato  and  calvas  (&' 
tuu^k6ffXf^).  ^aiirirA.uver.  11.  M^gyg  originally  a  ftwifr 
$k»€4  ffr  ftr^fMt :  tben  ^ffftprimg  generally.  Everywliere  in  the 
BiMe  eaJff^  htBoek^  and  always  mascoline. 

HisownMood.  The  distinction  is  not  between  the  different 
Uo0(U,  hut  between  the  rietimM,  The  difference  of  Mood  is 
nnimportant.  Regarded  merely  as  blood.  Chriat^s  offering  is 
not  superior  to  the  Leritical  sacrifice.  If  Christianity  gives 
ns  <mljf  the  shedding  of  blood,  even  Christ's  blood,  it  does  not 
give  us  a  real  or  an  efficient  atonement.  Whatever  signifi- 
cance may  attach  to  the  blood  is  derived  fnmi  something  else. 
See  on  ver.  14. 

Ones  (i^waO.     Rend,  (mcefor  all. 

Having  obtained  eternal  redemption  (oMir^ur  XArpmatm 
eupd^po^).  Having  found  and  trcm  by  his  act  of  entrance 
\xiUy  the  heavenly  Hanctoary.  This  is  better  than  to  explain 
^  entered  the  sanctuary  after  having  obtained  redemption  by 
his  life,  death,  and  resurrection  ";  for  the  work  of  redemption 
is  crowned  and  completed  by  Christ's  ascension  to  glory  and 
his  ministry  in  heaven  (see  Rom.  vi).  Even  in  the  old  sanctu- 
ary the  rite  of  the  Day  of  Atonement  was  not  complete  until 
the  blwid  had  been  offered  in  the  sanctuary.  EtemaU  see  on 
ch.  vi.  2.  Not  mere  duration  is  contemplated,  but  quality  ;  a 
redemption  answering  in  its  quality  to  that  age  when  :«11  the 
Cf)nditions  of  time  shall  be  no  more  :  a  redemption  not  ritual, 
but  profoundly  ethical  and  spiritual.  Avrpaxriv  redemption^ 
only  here,  L.  i.  68 ;  ii.  38.     See  on  might  redeem^  Tit.  ii.  4. 

18-14.  Justifying  the  preceding  words,  and  answering  the 
question.  What  hat  Christ  to  offer  f 


Cb.  DL]  the  epistle  to  the  HEBREWS.  488 

13.  Ashes  of  a  heifer  (cwo&k  BafidXem).  IwoB^k  a$he$^ 
only  here.  Matt.  xi.  21 ;  L.  x.  13,  in  both  instances  in  the 
phrase  $(u:kcloth  and  a$he$.  Often  in  LXX.  A(£/iaXi9  hetfer^ 
N.  T.^.  The  two  examples  selected  cover  the  entire  legal 
provision  for  removing  uncleanness,  whether  contracted  by 
sin  or  by  contact  with  death.  ^^The  blood  of  bulls  and  goats** 
refers  to  the  sin-offerings,  perhaps  especially  to  the  annual 
atonement  (Lev.  xvi) ;  ^^  the  ashes  of  a  heifer  *'  to  the  occas- 
ional sacrifice  of  the  red  heifer  (Num.  xix)  for  purification 
from  uncleanness  contracted  by  contact  with  the  dead.  The 
Levitical  law  required  ttco  remedies :  the  Christian  economy 
furnishes  one  for  all  phases  of  defilement. 

Sprinkling  the  unclean  (Jtavri^ovaa  to^  KocoawfUvov^^. 
For  9prinkling  see  on  1  Pet.  i.  2.  The  verb  only  in  Hebrews, 
except  Mk.  vii.  4.  For  the  unclean  rend,  them  that  have  been 
defied.  The  literal  rendering  of  the  participle  brings  out 
better  the  incidental  or  oceational  character  of  the  defilement. 

14.  Through  the  eternal  spirit  (hih  mmifum^  aU^viov). 
For  the  rend.  an.  Ai^  through  =  by  virtue  of.  Not  the  Holy 
Spirit,  who  is  never  so  designated,  but  Christ's  own  human 
spirit :  the  higher  element  of  Christ's  being  in  his  human  life, 
which  was  charged  with  the  eternal  principle  of  the  divine 
life.  Comp.  Rom.  i.  4 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  45 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  18 ; 
Heb.  vii.  16.  This  is  the  key  to  the  doctrine  of  Christ's 
sacrifice.  The  significance  and  value  of  his  atonement  lie  in 
the  personal  quality  and  motive  of  Christ  himself  which  are 
back  of  the  sacrificial  act.  The  offering  was  the  offering  of 
Christ's  deepest  self — his  inmost  personality.  Therein  con- 
sists the  attraction  of  the  cross ; '  not  to  the  shedding  of  blood, 
but  to  Christ  himself.  This  is  Christ's  own  declaration, 
J.  xii.  82.  ^^I  will  draw  all  men  unto  me.^^  Therein  con- 
sists its  potency  for  men :  not  in  Christ's  satisfaction  of 
justice  by  suffering  a  legal  penalty,  but  in  that  the  cr6ss 
is  the  supreme  expression  of  a  divine  spirit  of  love,  truth, 
mercy,  brotherhood,  faith,  ministry,  unselfishness,  holiness, — 
a  spirit  which  goes  out  to  men  with  divine  intensity  of  pur- 


484  WOBD  8Tt'Df»  rX  THE  XKW  TBBTAMKNT.      [Gte.  IZ 

po«e  and  jearning  to  draw  them  into  itv  own  sphere,  and  to 
make  them  partakers  of  ita  own  eternal  quality.  This  was  a 
fact  liefore  the  foundation  of  the  world,  is  a  fact  to-day,  and 
will  be  a  fact  ho  long  as  any  life  remains  unreconciled  to  God* 
AUmeiDent  i»  eternal  in  virtue  of  the  eternal  spirit  of  Christ 
through  which  he  offered  himself  to  God. 

Offered  himself  without  spot  (hunip  wpoa^fepeem  Sftm" 

ficv).  The  two  otLer  eiemeiiis  which  give  superior  validity 
to  Christ's  sacrifice.  It  was  voluntary^  a  ulf-offering^  unlike 
that  of  brute  beasts  who  had  no  volition  and  no  sense  of  the 
reason  why  they  were  offered.  It  was  spotless.  He  was  a 
perfectly  righteous,  sinless  being,  perfectly  and  voluntarily 
obedient  to  the  Father's  will,  even  unto  the  suffering  of  death. 
The  legal  victims  were  only  physically  unblemished  according 
to  ceremonial  standards.  "A/m^^ao?  in  LXX,  technically,  of 
victims,  Ex.  xxix.  1 ;  Lev.  i.  3,  10,  etc. 

Purge  your  conscience  (^xaffapul  rifv  trwe&riaiv  fiiiAii). 

For  your  rend.  our.  The  superior  nature  of  Christ^s  sacrifice 
ap[x;arH  in  its  deej>er  effect.  While  the  Levitical  sacrifice  ac- 
complished only  formal,  ritual  expiation,  leaving  the  inner 
man  unaffected,  while  it  wrought  externally  and  dealt  with 
sjiccific  sins,  the  effect  of  Christ's  sacrifice  goes  to  the  centre 
of  the  moral  and  spiritual  life,  and  cleanses  the  very  fountain- 
head  of  being,  thus  doing  its  work  where  only  an  eternal 
spirit  can  do  it.  KaOapl^eiv  to  purge  is  not  a  classical  word. 
In  Class.  Ka0aip€lp  (also  in  LXX):  but  icaOapO^eiv  appears  in 
inscriptions  in  a  ritual  sense,  and  with  airo  from^  as  here,* 
thus  showing  that  the  word  was  not  confined  to  biblical  and 
ecclesiastical  Greek. 

From  dead   works  (airo  vexp&p  Spytov).     The  effect  of 

Christ's  sacrifice  upon  the  conscience  transmits  itself  to  the 
works,  and  fills  them  with  the  living  energy  of  the  eternal 

•  See  Deiisnuum  Neue  BibeUtudien,  Pt  11 ,  p.  4a    He  gives  one  specimen, 
»3  or  91  B.C. 


Ch.  IX.J  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  486 

spirit.  It  changes  the  character  of  works  by  purging  them 
of  the  element  of  death.  This  element  belongs  not  only  to 
works  which  are  acknowledged  as  sinful  and  are  committed 
by  sinful  men,  but  to  works  which  go  under  the  name  of 
religious,  yet  are  performed  in  a  merely  legal  spirit.  None 
the  less,  because  it  is  preeminently  the  religion  of  faith,  does 
Christianity  apply  the  severest  and  most  radical  of  tests  to 
works.  Professor  Bruce  truthfully  says  that  "  the  severest 
test  of  Christ's  power  to  redeem  is  his  ability  to  loose  the 
bonds  springing  out  of  a  legal  religion,  by  which  many  are 
bound  who  have  escaped  the  dominion  of  gross,  sinful  habits." 

15.  The  efiBcacy  of  Christ's  sacrifice  is  bound  up  with  a 
covenant.  His  priesthood  involves  a  new  and  a  better  coven- 
ant.    See  ch.  viii.  6-13.     That  covenant  involves  his  death. 

For  this  cause  (&A  roOro).  Indicating  the  close  relation 
between  the  cleansing  power  of  Christ's  blood  and  the  new 
covenant. 

Mediator  of  the  new  testament  (hutSriKft^  tcaivtjfi  ik&rhrfi). 
For  the  new  testament  rend,  a  new  covenant.  See  on  next  verse. 
For  fjLeatnfi  mediator^  see  on  (ral.  iii.  19,  20. 

By  means  of  death  (Oavdrov  jeuofAAfov).  Rend,  a  death 
having  taken  place. 

For  the  redemption  of  the  transgressions  (ek  airoXv' 
rpwTip  T&v  wapa/Scuremv).  The  phrase  redemption  of  tran%* 
ffreesions  (that  is^  from  transgressions)  only  here.  ^AiroXtrrpwri^ 
m  N.  T.  mostly  absolutely  :  the  redemption,  or  your  redemp- 
tion, or  simply  redemption.  Twice  with  genitive  of  that 
which  is  redeemed,  Rom.  viii.  28 ;  Eph.  i.  14.  Only  once 
in  LXX,  Dan.  iv.  82.  For  wapdfiaaiq  tran%gre$$ion^  see  on 
Rom.  ii.  28. 

Under  the  first  testament  (hrX).  On  the  basis  of:  estim- 
ated according  to  the  standard  of  the  provisions  of  the  first 


486  WORD  BTUmiBB  IN  THE  KXW  TEBTAMKST.      fOL  DC 


covenant,  and  to  be  atoned  for  in  the  way  which  it  j 
By  this  expression  he  emphasises  the  insnflBciencj  of  ereij 
other  atoning  provision^  selecting  the  sjrstem  which  lepte- 
sented  the  most  elaborate  and  complete  atonement  tar  mn 
prior  to  Christ.  The  intimation  is  in  the  same  directaoo  with 
that  of  the  phrase  through  an  eternal  epirit — that  the  ided 
redemption  must  be  eternal. 

They  which  are  called  (^ol  xacXtf^Uifoi).  Withoat  reg^ 
to  nationality.  The  scope  of  the  new  covenant  was  wider 
tlian  that  of  the  old.  Comp.  Acts  ii.  89.  In  ch.  iii.  1,  the 
readers  are  addressed  as  ^*  partakers  of  a  heavenly  caUing,** 
which  corresponds  with  *^ eternal  inheritance**  here.  Thoee 
who  obtain  this  inheritance  are  designated  as  ^called."  See 
Eph.  i.  18;  1  Th.  ii.  12;  v.  24;  1  Pet.  iii.  9. 

Of  eternal  inheritance  (t^  aiwvlov  KXtfpovofUaif).  Bend. 
**the  eternal  inheritance'':  something  recognised  as  a  fact* 
For  fcXfjpovo/Ala  inheritance^  see  on  1  Pet.  i.  4,  and  c<»np. 
Eph.  i.  14.  The  whole  statement  implies  that  the  provisions 
of  the  Levitical  system  were  inadequate  to  procure  and  insure 
full  salvation. 

16.    For  where  a  testament  is  ^iirov  yhp  &a^i^).    ^The 

EngliHh  Version  has  involved  this  passage  in  hopeless  obscur- 
ity by  introducing  the  idea  of  a  testament  and  a  testator.'* 
Hiis  statement  of  Kendall  (^Epietle  to  the  Hebrewt^  p.  159}  is 
none  too  strong.  That  interpretation,  however,  is  maintained 
by  a  very  strong  array  of  modern  expositors.*  It  is  based 
uiK)n  K\f)povofiia  inheritance;  it  being  claimed  that  this  word 
changeH  the  whole  current  of  thought.  Hence  it  is  said  that 
the  new  covenant  established  by  Christ  is  here  represented 

•  As  Bleek,  Alford,  LUnemann,  Dwight,  De  Wette,  Weiss,  Briggs,  Brace, 
Rev.  Vera.,  Lightfoot  (on  Gal.  iii.  15),  Thayer  (Lex.),  Edwards.  Weizsftcker 
and  von  SodcMi  both  nmder  Stiftung  *'  foundation  "  ;  a  basis,  formally  estab- 
lished, on  which  certain  benefits  are  inHured  to  those  who  accept  it.  Such  a 
basis  might  be  of  the  nature  either  of  a  covenant  or  a  testament.  Bruce  in- 
ciudifs  both  under  the  word.  Vaughan  renders  '*  arrangement,**  whether  ol 
relations  (covenant)  or  of  possessions  (testament). 


Ch.  DL]  the  epistle  to  the  HEBREWS.  487 

as  a  testamentary  disposition  on  his  part,  which  could  become 
operative  in  putting  the  heirs  in  possession  of  the  inheritance 
only  through  the  death  of  Christ.  See  Additional  Note  at 
the  end  of  this  chapter. 

There  must  also  of  necessity  be  the  death  of  the  tes- 
tator (^Odvarov  avdytcrf  ^p€(r0ai,  rov  hia0€f»^ivov).  Rend,  it  i$ 
neceti%ary  that  the  death  of  the  inetittUor  (of  the  covenant)  ihauld 
be  borne.  With  the  rendering  testament^  <f>^p€aO<u  is  well-nigh 
inexplicable.  If  covenant  the  meaning  is  not  difficult.  If  he 
had  meant  to  say  it  is  necenary  that  the  institutor  die^  he  might 
better  have  used  ydveaOeu :  ^^  it  is  necessary  that  the  death  of 
the  institutor  take  place'';  but  he  meant  to  say  that  it  was 
necessary  that  the  institutor  die  representatively;  that  death 
should  be  borne  for  him  by  an  animal  victim.  If  we  render 
testament^  it  follows  that  the  death  of  the  testator  himself  is 
referred  to,  for  which  Odvarov  ^ipeaOoA  is  a  very  unusual  and 
awkward  expression. 

17.  For  a  testament  is  of  force  after  men  are  dead 

(htadtfK'q  yhp  hrl  vexpoi^  fie/SaUi).  Rend.  ^*  for  a  covenant  is 
of  force  (or  sure)  over  (or  upon)  dead  (victims).**  Comp. 
Soph.  Uleet.  287;  Eurip.  Ion.  228;  Aesch.  Humen.  816; 
Hdt.  iv.  162.     See  also  Lev.  xxi.  5. 

Otherwise  it  is  of  no  strength  at  all  while  the  testator 
liveth  (eTfcl  fitf  T&r€  laxyet  2t€  ^  6  BiaO^fiaw).  Rend.  ^^  since 
it  hath  not  then  force  when  the  institutor  is  alive*' :  until  he 
has  been  representatively  slain. 

18.  Whereupon  (Mev).  Rend,  wherefore^  or  for  which 
reason:  on  the  general  principle  that  a  covenant  must  be  rati- 
fied by  death. 

Neither  the  first  testament  was  dedicated  without  blood 

(ovBi  ^  irpdnrf  x^P^  aXfJMTO^  iv/eetcaipurreu).  Rend.  ^^  neither 
hath  the  first  (covenant)  been  inaugurated  without  blood." 
There  is  surely  no  excuse  for  inserting  testament  here,  as 


4^4  WORD  STTDIB  IS  THK  SEW  TEBTA31Crr.       [Cte.  K. 

A.  v.,  mnc-e  the  allnsum  is  demrlj  to  the  rrtifiritfinn  of  a 
coTenant  with  blood.  Bat  further,  as  this  and  the  TCfBca 
immediately  foUowing  are  intended  to  furnish  a  historical 
illiMtration  of  the  statements  in  rr.  16, 17.  we  seem  fosoed 
eitlier  to  render  cf^enani  in  those  renes,  or  to  aasome  that 
tlie  transaction  here  related  was  the  ratification  of  a  will  and 
testament,  or  to  find  oar  writer  goilty  of  using  an  illiutration 
which  turns  on  a  point  entirely  different  from  the  matter 
wliich  he  is  illustrating.  Thus :  a  testament  is  of  force  after 
men  are  dea^l.  It  has  no  force  so  long  as  the  testator  is  allTe. 
Where/ere^  the  first  ccvenant  was  ratified  by  slaying  victims 
and  sprinkling  their  blood.  For  the  incident  see  Ex. 
xxiv.  8.  *EPiC€uvi^v  only  here  and  ch.  x.  20.  LXX,  to 
renew^  1  Sam.  xi.  14 ;  2  Chron.  xv.  8  ;  Ps.  1. 10 :  to  dedicate, 
1  K.  viii.  63;  1  Mace.  iv.  36.  Comp.  ra  hmabna  the  feati 
of  dedication^  J.  x.  22.  Rend.  oHk  neither,  as  A.  V.,  and  not 
not  even^  in  which  case  the  meaning  would  be,  ^not  even  the 
firHt  covenant,  although  its  ministries  did  not  perfect  the 
worHhipper  as  touching  the  conscience/'  a  thought  which 
would  be  foreign  to  the  point,  which  is  merely  the  analog;* 
in  the  matter  of  death. 

19.  The  statement  of  verse  18  historically  confirmed  by 
the  Htorj'  of  the  establishment  of  the  law-covenant,  Ex.  xxiv. 

Of  calves  and  goats  (r&v  fuiaxo^v  Kal  r&v  rpdywv).     Not 

iiientioiied  in  the  O.  T.  account.  The  goat  was  always  for 
a  Hin-oflfering,  and  the  sacrifices  on  this  occasion  were  oxen, 
and  are  descril>ed  as  burnt  offerings  and  sacrifices  of  peace, 
Ex.  xxiv.  5.  In  the  original  covenant  with  Abraham  a 
she-goat  and  a  heifer  are  specially  mentioned,  Gen.  xv.  9. 

Water,  scarlet  wool,  hyssop — sprinkled  the  book  (uSaro9, 
ipiov  KOKKlvoVy  xHTaoyirov  aurd  re  to  /3i/3\iov  ipdvrurev).  None 
of  these  are  mentioned  in  the  O.  T.  account,  which  the  writer 
api)ear8  to  have  filled  up  from  the  details  of  subsequent  usage. 
Comp.  the  additions  in  vv.  6,  10.  It  will  also  be  observed 
that  the  sacrifices  on  the  occasion  of  establishing  the  law- 


Ch.  IX.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  489 

covenaDt  were  not  made  according  to  the  Mosaic  ritual. 
They  were  offered,  not  by  the  priests,  but  by  the  young 
men,  Ex.  xxiv.  5.  For  k6kklvo^  scarlet^  see  on  Matt, 
xxvii.  6.  'TP(ro-anro9  hy$8op  appears  in  Ex.  xii.  22;  Lev. 
xiv.  4,  6, 49 ;  Num.  xix.  6, 18 ;  Ps.  li.  9 ;  J.  xix.  29.  Mostly 
in  connection  with  lustral  ceremonies.  The  vexed  question 
of  the  precise  botanical  character  of  the  plant  has  never  been 
decisively  settled.* 

22.  The  historical  facts  are  summed  up,  emphasising  one 
point — cleansing  by  blood. 

Almost  all  things  (^trxeSbv — wdprd).  The  A.  V.  is  wrong. 
2;^€Soi/  almost  or  nearly  is  prefixed  to  the  entire  clause,  and 
applies  to  both  its  members.  Rend.  *^and  I  may  almost  say, 
it  is  in  blood,"  etc.  Almost  provides  for  such  exceptions  as 
Ex.  xix.  10 ;  xxxii.  30-32 ;  v.  11-13 ;  Lev.  xv.  5 ;  xvi.  26-28 ; 
xxii.  6;  Num.  xvi.  46-48;  xxxi.  28,  24;  Ps.  li.  1-17; 
xxxii.  1,  2. 

And  without  shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission  (jcaX 
Xf»ph  alfAareKxya-la^  oi  yivercu  aAf>eaK).  This  sentence  also 
is  covered  by  ^^I  may  almost  say.''  It  does  not  state  that 
without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission  of  sins,  which 
^^  would  be  in  conflict  with  the  history  and  literature  of  the 
Old  Testament.*'!  See  exceptions  above.  *Kt^T€Kj(y<rCa 
shedding  of  blood,  N.  T.^,  ^LXX,  ^Class.  Ov  yiverai  a<^t9, 
lit.  remission  does  not  take  place  or  ensue.  For  a^ai^  see  on 
Jas.  V.  15 ;  most  frequent  in  Luke  and  Acts.  In  Hebrews 
only  here  and  ch.  x.  18.  Commonly  with  a  genitive,  in  the 
phrase  remission  of  sins:  but  sometimes  absolutely  as  here, 
Mk.  iii.  29;  L.  iv.  18. 


*  Those  who  are  curious  about  the  matter  will  find  it  discniwed  in  Biehm^s 
HandwMerbueh  des  biblisehen  Alterthums,  and  in  the  article  in  Hastings's 
Dictionary  of  ihe  Bible^  by  Dr.  George  E.  Post  of  Beyroat,  than  whom  there 
is  no  more  competent  authority. 

r  Dr.  BrigBB,  Messiah  of  the  Apostles,  p.  S05. 


490  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Gte.  DC 

23.  The  heavenly  sanctuary  required  a  better  pmdficatioii 
than  the  Levitical. 

The  patterns  of  things  in  the  heavens.     The  eartUj 

tabernacle  and  its  furniture.     See  on  ch.  viii.  5. 

With  these  (roimw).     Things  specified  in  yer.  19. 

With  better  sacrifices  (^tcpelrroai,  dwriavi).  How  can  it 
be  said  that  the  heavenly  things  needed  cleansing?  It  is  not 
easy  to  answer.  Various  explanations  have  been  proposed, 
which  the  student  will  find  collected  in  Alford's  note  on  this 
passage.  The  expression  is  rhetorical  and  figurative,  and 
appears  to  be  founded  on  that  feature  of  the  Levitical  ritual 
according  to  which  the  high  priest  was  required,  on  the  Great 
Day  of  Atonement,  to  make  an  atonement  for  the  sanctuary, 
^^  because  of  the  uncleanness  of  the  children  of  Israel.**  He 
was  to  do  this  also  for  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation, 
and  for  the  great  altar.  See  Lev.  xvi.  16flf.  The  rite 
implied  that  even  the  holy  of  holies  had  contracted  defile- 
ment from  the  people's  sin.  Similarly,  the  atoning  blood  of 
Christ  is  conceived  as  purifying  the  things  of  the  heavenly 
sanctuary  which  had  been  defiled  by  the  sins  of  men.  ^  If 
the  heavenly  city  of  God,  with  its  Holy  Place,  is,  conform- 
ably with  the  promise,  destined  for  the  covenant-people,  that 
they  may  there  attain  to  perfect  fellowship  with  God,  then 
their  guilt  has  defiled  these  holy  things  as  well  as  the  earthly, 
and  they  must  be  purified  in  the  same  way  as  the  typical  law 
appointed  for  the  latter,  only  not  by  the  blood  of  an  imper 
feet,  but  of  a  perfect  sacrifice"  (Delitzsch).* 

24.  Under  the  old  covenant,  the  bloodshedding  was  sym- 
bolical :  the  death  of  the  institutor  was  by  proxy.  In  the 
ratification  of  the  new  covenant,  Christ  himself  was  the  cov- 
enant-victim, and  a  real  cleansing  power  attaches  to  his  blood 
as  the  offering  of  his  eternal  spirit. 

•  See  also  Riehm,  Lehrhegriff  dea  Hehrderbriefes,  p.  642. 


Ch.  IX.]  the  epistle  to  the  HEBREWS.  491 

The  holy  places  made  with  hands  (xEipoirolfjfra  Srfia). 
For  holy  placet  rend,  a  holy  plaee^  the  plural  being  used  of 
the  sanctuary.  Christ  is  not  entered  into  a  hand-made  sanc- 
tuary. 

Figures  (avr/Twira).  Or  fyure.  Only  here  and  1  Pet. 
iii.  21,  see  note.  Answering  to  the  patterns  in  the  heavens, 
ch.  viii.  5.     Rev.  like  in  pattern. 

Now  to  appear  (yw  ifM^vurdriPeu).  Naw^  not  only  in 
contriist  with  the  time  of  the  old,  typical  economy,  but  also 
implying  a  continually-present  manifestation,  for  im,  now^  as 
^t  his  first  entrance  into  the  heavenly  sanctuary.  ^Eia^vut- 
0fivai^  rend,  to  he  man\fe9ted.  Better  than  to  appear^  because 
it  exhibits  the  manifestation  of  Christ  as  something  brought 
about  as  the  result  of  a  new  and  better  economy,  and  distinctly 
contemplated  in  the  institution  of  that  economy.  Christ  is 
made  openly  manifest  before  the  face  of  God.  The  Levitical 
priest  was  compelled  to  shroud  the  ark  and  the  shekinah 
with  incense-smoke,  that  he  might  not  look  upon  GhxL  face 
to  face. 

25.  Nor  yet  that  (pi  S  Tva).  Supply  did  he  enter.  ''Nor 
yet  did  he  enter  that  he  might  offer,"  etc. 

He  should  offer  himself  often  (woWdKi/f;  wpoa^>^  iauriv). 
His  offering  did  not  need  repetition  like  the  Levitical  sacri- 
fices. Offer  himtelf  refers  rather  to  Christ's  entrance  into 
the  heavenly  sanctuary  and  presentation  of  himself  before 
God,  than  to  his  offering  on  the  cross.  See  on  ver.  14. 
The  sacrifice  on  the  cross  is  described  by  iraOtiv  euffer^  ver. 
26,  and  is  introduced  as  a  distinct  thought.  The  point  is 
that,  being  once  in  the  heavenly  sanctuary,  Christ  was  not 
compelled  to  renew  often  his  presentation  of  himself  there, 
since,  in  that  case,  it  would  be  necessary  for  him  to  euffer 
often.  Each  separate  offering  would  necessitate  a  corre- 
sponding suffering. 


492  WORD  HTUmiBB  IN  THB  NEW  TBBTAMKNT.       [CiL  IX. 

26.  Since  the  foundation  of  the  worid  (inri  teara/SoXSjit 

Koa-fjLov).  For,  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,  sin  required 
atonement  by  sacrifice  ;  and,  therefore,  if  Christ  had  been  a 
victim  like  others,  which  must  be  offered  repeatedly,  he  would 
have  had  to  suffer  repeatedly  from  the  foundation  of  the 
world.  If  his  sacrifice,  like  the  animal  atonements,  had 
availed  for  a  time  only,  he  would  have  been  obliged  to  repeat 
liis  offering  whenever  that  time  expired;  and,  since  his 
atonement  was  designed  to  be  universal,  it  would  have  been 
necessary  for  him  to  appear  repeatedly  upon  earth,  and  to 
die  repeatedly  from  the  foundation  of  the  world.  Comp. 
1  Pet.  i.  20;  Apoc.  xiii.  8.* 

In  the  end  of  the  world  (M  awreXeC^  r&v  aUnwp).    In 

N.  T.  ffvirr^Xeia  consummation^  always  with  alwp  age.  With 
the  plural  auovmv  only  here.  Everywhere  else  trwriX&a 
ai&po^.  The  A.  V.  gives  a  wrong  impression  as  of  the  end 
of  this  visible  world.  The  true  sense  is  tfie  consummation  of 
the  ages :  that  is  to  say,  Christ  appeared  when  the  former 
ages  had  reached  their  moral  consummation  under  the  old 
Levitical  economy.     Comp.  ch.  i.  2. 

To  put  away  sin  (cfc  aOdrrfaiv  r^  aiMprUK),  Lit.  for 
the  putting  away  of  sin.  For  aOdrrjai^  see  on  ch.  vii.  18. 
Note  the  singular  number,  sin.  The  sacrifice  of  Christ  dealt 
with  sin  as  a  principle :  the  Levitical  sacrifices  with  individ- 
ual transgressions. 

27.  That  there  is  no  place  for  a  repeated  offering  of  Christ 
is  further  shown  by  reference  to  the  lot  of  men  in  general. 
Hie  very  idea  is  absurd ;    for  men  die  once,  and  judgment 

*  If  the  question  of  the  retrospective  value  of  Chriat'R  sacrifice  is  raised 
here,  some  light  is  thro¥m  upon  it  by  the  expression  '^through  his  eternal 
spirit^**  ver.  14.  An  eternal  spirit  is  independent  of  time,  and  acts  performed 
under  its  inspiration  are  valid  for  all  time.  Christ  offered  himself  in  spirtt 
before  the  foundation  of  the  world.  Was  not  the  act  of  his  eternal  spirit  the 
core  of  the  whole  preparatory  system  of  sacrifice  ?  What  I  take  to  be  the 
correct  interpretation  of  Rom.  iii.  26,  as  given  in  the  notes  on  that  passage, 
agrees  with  this. 


Ch.  IX.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  493 

follows.  Christ  was  man,  and  Christ  died.  He  will  not 
come  to  earth  to  live  and  die  again.  Christ  died,  but  judg- 
ment did  not  follow  in  his  case.  On  the  contrary,  he  became 
judge  of  all. 

It  is  appointed  (aTrJfceircu).  Lit.  is  laid  by  in  $tore. 
Comp.  L.  xix.  20 ;  Col.  i.  5  (see  note) ;  2  Tim.  iv.  8. 

28.  Christ.  Emphasising  him,  as  the  figure  to  which  the 
old  economy  pointed. 

Was  once  offered  (Sira^  irpocevexOeU^.  Lit.  having  been 
offered  once  for  all.  Note  the  passive  in  contrast  with  offer 
himself^  ver.  25.  He  was  appointed  to  die  as  truly  as  we. 
Comp.  L.  xxiv.  26 ;  Matt.  xxvi.  53,  54 ;  Ps.  xl.  7,  8. 

To  bear  (av€vriK€lv).  Not  in  the  sense  of  bearing  a  nn* 
offering  up  to  the  cro$$  ;  for  ifiafnla  never  means  a  sin-offer- 
ing ;  nor  in  the  sense  oi  putting  away;  but  signifying  to  take 
upon  himself  and  bear  as  a  burden. 

Unto  them  that  look  for  him  (roh  ainhv  air€ici€Xpii4uoi^^. 
Rend,  await  him.  For  the  verb,  see  on  Philip,  iii.  20.  This 
second  coming  with  salvation  is  only  for  those  who  await 
him  in  faith. 

Shall  he  appear  (p4>0i^er<u).  The  usual  verb  for  the 
appearance  of  Christ  after  his  resurrection. 

The  second  time  (^«c  Setn^pov}.  A  phrase  quite  common 
in  N.  T.,  but  not  in  Paul.  The  idea  is,  beginning  from  the 
second :  the  second  in  a  series  taken  as  the  point  of  depart- 
ure. As  among  men  judgment  follows  as  the  second  thing 
after  death,  so,  when  Christ  shall  appear  for  the  second  time, 
he  will  appear  as  the  sinless  Saviour. 

Unto  salvation  (ej?  attrrfpCav).  Not  as  a  sinner  to  be 
judged,  but  as  the  Saviour  of  mankind.     It  is  not  said  that 


494  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TB8TA1££NT.       [Ch.  BL 

he  will  appear  as  judge,  but  only  that  he  will  not  share  the 
judgment  which  befalls  all  men  after  death.  Still  the  phrase 
may  imply  that  he  will  award  salvation,  as  judge,  to  such  as 
have  believed  on  him. 


Additional  Note  on  Vbbsb  16, 

Against  the  rendering  testament  for  &aA|feiy,  and  in  faTour  of  retaining 
covenan/,  are  the  following  considerations :  (a)  neabruptnesMo/tkedUingef 
and  its  interruption  of  the  line  of  reasoning.  It  is  introduced  into  the  middle 
of  a  continuous  argument,  in  which  the  new  covenant  is  compared  and 
contrasted  with  the  Mosaic  covenant  (ch.  viii.  6-z.  18).  (6)  The  turning- 
point,  both  of  the  analogy  and  of  the  contrast,  is  that  both  covenants  were 
inaugurated  and  ratified  by  death :  not  ordinary^  natural  death,  but  sacri- 
ficial, violent  death,  accompanied  with  bloodshedding  as  an  essential  feat- 
ure. Such  a  death  is  plainly  indicated  in  ver.  15.  If  SiaA;ici|  signifies 
testament  J  Savarw  death  in  ver.  16  must  mean  natural  death  without  blood- 
shed, (c)  The  figure  of  a  testament  would  not  appeal  to  Hebrews  in 
connection  with  an  inheritance.  On  the  contrary,  the  idea  of  the  icAiipo- 
wofiioL  was  always  associated  in  the  Hebrew  mind  with  the  inheritance  of 
Canaan,  and  that  inheritance  with  the  idea  of  a  covenant  See  Dent, 
iv.  20-23;  1  Chron.  xvi.  15-18;  Ps.  cv.  ^11.  (d)  In  LXX,  from  which 
our  writer  habitually  quotes,  iuiBrjicrf  has  universally  the  meaning  of 
covenant.  It  occurs  about  350  times,  mostly  representing  nna  eooenasa. 
In  the  Apocryphal  books  it  has  the  same  sense,  except  in  Sir.  xxxviii.  83, 
where  it  signifies  disposition  or  arrangement,  AiaTt$w$aA  to  dispose  or 
arrange  represents  npD  to  ctU  off,  hetc^  divide.  The  phrase  n^a  p|^  to  cut 
(i.e.,  make)  a  covenant,  is  very  common.  The  verb  marks  a  disposing  by 
the  divine  will,  to  which  man  becomes  a  party  by  assent ;  while  ovnri^^crAu 
indicates  an  arrangement  between  two  equal  parties.  There  is  not  a  trace 
of  the  meaning  testament  in  the  Greek  O.  T.  In  the  classics  StoBi^Kfi  is 
usually  testament.  Philo  uses  the  word  in  the  sense  of  covenant,  but  also 
shows  how  it  acquired  that  of  testament  (De  Mutatione  Nominunij  §  6  ff.). 
The  Vulgate  has  tesfamentum,  even  where  the  sense  of  covenant  is  indispu- 
table. See  Ex.  xxx.  26 ;  Num.  xiv.  44 ;  2  K.  vi.  15 ;  Jer.  iii.  16 ;  Mai.  iiL  1 ; 
L.  i.  72 ;  Acts  iii.  25 ;  vii.  8.  Also  in  N.T.  quotations  from  the  O.T.,  where, 
jn  its  translation  of  the  O.  T.,  it  uses  foedtts.  See  Jer.  xxxi.  31,  cit.  Heb. 
viii.  8.  For  BuiTiO€(r$ai  of  making  a  covenant,  see  Heb.  viii.  10 ;  Acts  iiL  25 ; 
Heb.  X.  16.  (e)  The  ratification  of  a  covenant  by  the  sacrifice  of  a  victim 
is  attested  by  Gen.  xv.  10;  Ps.  1.  5;  Jer.  xxxiv.  18.  This  is  suggested 
also  by  the  phrase  p^3  r-^^  to  cut  a  covenant,  which  finds  abundant  analogy 
in  both  Greek  and  Latin.  Thus  we  have  opKUL  Tdfiy€ty  to  cut  oaths,  that 
is,  to  sacrifice  a  victim  in  attestation  (Hom.  //.  ii.  124;  Od.  xxiv.  483: 
Hdt.  vii.  132).     Similarly,  airoySa^  rc/Aoi^icv  let  us  cut  (make)  a  league 


Ch.  X.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  495 

(Earip.  Hel.  1235) :  ^cXia  Tifi:^€a$ai  to  cement  friendship  by  sacrificing  a 
victim;  lit.  to  cut  friendship  (Earip.  SupjU,  375).  In  htXin^  foedus  ferire 
to  strike  a  league :  foedus  ictum  a  ratified  league,  ratified  by  a  Uow  {ictus). 
(/)  If  testament  is  the  correct  translation  in  vv.  16, 17,  the  writer  is  fairly 
chargeable  with  a  rhetorical  blunder ;  for  ver.  18  ff.  is  plainly  intended 
as  a  historical  iUustration  of  the  propositions  in  yv.  16, 17,  and  the  illus- 
tration turns  on  a  point  entirely  different  from  the  matter  illustrated. 
The  writer  is  made  to  say,  **  A  mil  is  of  no  force  until  after  the  testator's 
death ;  therefore  the  first  covenant  was  ratified  with  the  blood  of  victims. 


CHAPTER  X. 

1-18.  A  summary  restatement  of  the  matters  discussed 
from  ch.  viii.  1. 

1.  The  arrangement  of  the  verse  is  much  disputed.  Rend. 
^'  The  law,  with  the  same  sacrifices  which  they  continually 
renew  year  by  year,  can  never  make  the  comers  thereunto 
perfect."* 

A  shadow  (jTKtiip).  The  emphasis  is  on  this  thought. 
The  legal  system  was  a  shadow.  'Ltak  is  a  rude  outline^  an 
adumbration,  contrasted  with  €Uo>p,  the  archetypal  or  ideal 
pattern.  2/tiA  does  not  accurately  exhibit  the  figure  itself. 
Comp.  ch.  viii.  6. 

Of  good  things  to  come  (t&p  ikeXKjivmv  ijaO&v).  From 
the  point  of  view  of  the  law. 

The  very  image  of  the  things  (avr^y  rifv  eUSva  r&v  irpa^- 
fidrwv).  For  €iVa>v  image,  see  on  Apoc.  xiii.  14  ;  Philip,  ii.  7. 
UpayfjMTtDP  thingi  expresses  a  little  more  distinctly  than  fUK- 
\6vTtov  ayad&v  the  idea  oi  facte  and  realities. 

*  Others  take  rar  iwwurhw  with  the  whole  clause,  rtut  adrcut — wpoe^p- 
ovtf'cr,  and  c/t  t6  adyptWt  with  T9\tiAcai :  thus :  **  with  the  same  sacrifices  which 
they  offer  year  by  year  make  perfect  forever**  (Westcott  and  von  Soden). 
Others,  rar  inmvrbw  with  all  that  follows  to  rtXtiQeai  (Alford,  Ebrard, 
Delitzsch).  Others,  tear  iwuarrbw  with  roTt  adroTt,  and  c/t  t6  dnyptic^t  with 
wpoe^poveiw :  **  with  the  same  sacrifices  every  year  which  they  offer  continu- 
ally** (Lflnemann). 


496  WORD  8TUDIBB  IN  THX  KKW  TEBTAMKHT.        (Qb-  X 


Can  (StWproi).  Avwaroi  might  be  expected  with  o  i 
the  law  as  the  subject.  If  StWvroi,  the  pluraU  is  retained* 
the  clause  the  law — image  of  the  thinge  most  be  taken  abso- 
lutely, the  construction  of  the  sentence  breaking  off  suddenly, 
and  the  subject  being  changed  from  the  law  to  the  prieMM: 
*^The  priests  can  never/'  etc.  It  is  better  to  read  SHwrrsi  in 
the  singular,  with  Tischendorf,  Westcott  and  Hoit»  and 
Weiss. 

Continually  (jk  t6  iirfvexk^.  See  on  oh.  yii.  8,  and  oomp. 
vv.  12,  14.     Const,  with  offer. 

2.  To  be  offered  (wpoa^pSfiewu).  The  present  partici- 
ple brings  out  more  forcibly  the  continuous  repetition: 
** Ceased  being  offered.'' 

3.  A  remembrance  of  sins  (^apd/Avrf^if;  afiafm&v).  Each 
successive  sacrifice  was  a  fresh  reminder  of  sins  to  be  atoned 
for ;  so  far  were  the  sacrifices  from  satisfying  the  conscience 
of  the  worshipper.  'Ai^a^u^o-i?,  lit.  a  calling  to  mind.  Comp. 
ver.  17,  and  see  LXX,  Num.  v.  15. 

5.  Confirming  the  assertion  of  ver.  4  by  a  citation,  Ps. 
xl.  7-9,  the  theme  of  which  is  that  deliverance  from  sin  is 
not  obtained  by  animal  sacrifices,  but  by  fulfilling  God's  will. 
The  quotation  does  not  agree  with  either  the  Hebrew  or  the 
LXX,  and  the  Hebrew  and  LXX  do  not  agree.  The  writer 
supposes  the  words  to  be  spoken  by  Messiah  when  he  enters 
the  world  as  Saviour.  The  obedience  to  the  divine  will, 
which  the  Psalmist  contrasts  with  sacrifices,  our  writer  makes 
to  consist  in  Christ's  offering  once  for  all.  According  to  him, 
the  course  of  thought  in  the  Psalm  is  as  follows :  "Thou,  O 
God,  desirest  not  the  sacrifice  of  beasts,  but  thou  hast  prepared 
my  body  as  a  single  sacrifice,  and  so  I  come  to  do  thy  will,  as 
was  predicted  of  me,  by  the  sacrifice  of  myself."  Christ  did 
not  yield  to  God's  will  as  authoritative  constraint.  The  con- 
straint lay  in  his  own  eternal  spirit.  His  sacrifice  was  no  less 
his  own  will  than  God's  will. 


Ch.  X.]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  497 

Sacrifice  and  offering  (Owrlav  icaX  wfHKr^pkv).  The 
animal-offering  and  the  meal-offering. 

6.  Burnt  offeringe  and  sacrifices  for  sin  (pKoKavrmiuvra 
KoX  irepl  afjLafnia^^.    The  burnt-offering  and  the  sin-offering. 

7.  In  the  volume  of  the  book  (^h  tc^\(Bi  fiiffklov). 
Kc^X^,  N.  T.^,  is  a  diminutive,  meaning  litUe  head.  Lat. 
capitellum  or  capitulwn.  The  extremity  or  end<t  as  the  capital 
of  a  column.  See  Ex.  xxvi.  32,  87.  Sometimes  the  col- 
umn itself,  as  Ex.  xl.  18 ;  Num.  iii.  86.  Said  to  be  used 
of  the  tipe  or  hnohe  of  the  rollers  around  which  parchments 
were  rolled,  but  no  instances  are  cited.  A  roll  of  parchment^ 
a  hook-roily  Ezek.  ii.  9.  Meaning  here  the  Scriptures  of  the 
O.  T.  for  Hebrew  n^^.  Kc^X/?  is  found  in  LXX  with 
fiifiXlov  hooky  only  Ezek.  ii.  9 ;  Ps.  xxxix.  7.  For  fiifiXlop 
hooky  see  on  2  Tim.  iv.  18. 

8.  Above  when  he  said  (JtvArepov  TJymv).  Lit.  eaying 
above.     Introducing  a  partial  repetition  of  the  quotation. 

9.  He  taketh  away  the  first  that  he  may  establish  the 
second.  Removes  that  which  God  does  not  will,  the  animal- 
sacrifice,  that  he  may  establish  that  which  Gkxl  does  will,  the 
offering  of  an  obedient  will. 

10.  By  the  which  will  (h  ^  OeX^fiaTi).  The  will  of  God 
as  fulfilled  in  Christ. 

We  are  sanctified  (^^laa-fUvoi  ic/jkiv).  Lit.  we  are  having 
heen  eanetified  ;  that  is,  in  a  sanctified  state,  as  having  become 
partakers  of  the  spirit  of  Christ.  This  is  the  work  of  the 
eternal  spirit,  whose  will  is  the  very  will  of  God.  It  draws 
men  into  its  own  sphere,  and  makes  them  partakers  of  its 
holiness  (Heb.  xii.  10). 

Once  for  all  (^^7ra{).    Const,  with  are  eaneUfied.    The 
sanctification  of  the  Levitical  offerings  was  only  temporary, 
VOL.  IV. — 82 


498  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Gk.  X 

and  had  to  be  repeated.  Christ's  one  offering  ^^perfected 
forever  them  that  are  sanctified''  (ver.  14).*  This  thought 
is  elaborated  in  w.  11-14. 

11.  Every  priest  (tto?).  Suggesting  many  priests.  Comp. 
ch.  vii.  23. 

Standeth  (Am^iecy).  Servile  attitude,  contrasted  with  that 
of  the  exalted  Saviour,  ch.  i.  8. 

Daily  —  often  —  the  same.  The  wearisome  round  of  daily 
offerings,  always  the  same,  contrasted  with  the  one  offering, 
once  for  all. 

Take  away  (wepuKelv).  Only  here  in  connection  with  sin. 
See  on  2  Cor.  iii.  16.  The  verb  literally  means  to  itrip  off 
all  round.  See  Gen.  xli.  42  (of  a  ring):  Gen.  xxxviii.  14; 
Deut.  xxi.  13  (of  clothes).  Comp.  einrepUrraro^^  Heb.  xii.  1, 
see  note,  and  irepUeircu  aaOA^iav  is  compassed  about  with  weak" 
ness^  Heb.  v.  2.  See  also  clothed  with  shame^  and  with  cursing^ 
Ps.  XXXV.  26 ;  cix.  18. 

12.  Forever  (efc  ro  Sir)V€Kh^.  Const,  with  offered.  The 
reason  appears  in  ver.  14.  It  is  according  to  the  usage  of  the 
epistle  to  place  this  phrase  after  that  which  it  qualifies.  Thus 
one  sa^fice  forever  is  contrasted  with  the  same  sacrifices  often. 
This  agrees  also  with  what  follows.  He  offered  one  sacrifice 
forever,  and  then  sat  down,  awaiting  its  eternal  result,  f 

14.  He  hath  perfected  forever  (rercTielaicev  ek  ro  Sir)V€Kk). 
Note  the  continued  emphasis  upon  the  reXeionn^  perfection. 
Comp.  ch.  vii.  11, 19  ;  ix.  9 ;  x.  1 ;  xii.  2.  No  more  sacrifices 
are  needed.  The  reign  of  the  Great  High  Priest  is  not  to  be 
interrupted  by  the  duty  of  sacrifice. 

•  Westcott  takes  i^pdra^  with  the  entire  sentence :  Alford  with  offering. 
It  is  true  that  the  writer  insists  on  the  offering  of  Christ  being  '*  onoe  for  aU** 
(ch.  yii.  27  ;  iz.  12,  26,  28 ;  z.  12,  14),  but  here  this  connection  would  i 
to  require  the  article  rrjt  i^wa^. 

t  Others  construe  with  sat  down.    So  Lttnemann,  Bleek,  De  Wette. 


Cb.  X.]  THB  BPISTLB  TO  THB  HEBREWS.  499 

15-17.  Repetition  of  the  passage  already  cited  from  Jere- 
miah in  ch.  viii.  10-12.    The  nerve  of  the  citation  is  ver.  17. 

18.  There  is  no  more  offering  for  sin.  Forgiveness  of 
sin  is  the  characteristic  of  the  new  covenant.  In  Jeremiah 
complete  pardon  of  sins  is  promised.  If  the  pardon  is  com- 
plete, there  is  left  no  place  for  the  Levitical  sacrifices  under 
the  new  covenant.  At  this  point  the  doctrinal  portion  of  the 
epistie  ends. 

19.  To  enter  into  the  holiest  (cfc  r^v  Arohov  r&v  dyl»v). 
Lit.  far  the  entering  of  the  holiest.  The  phrase  wctppffirla 
€k  boldne$$  untOj  N.  T.^.  napptfala  with  wepl  eoneeming^ 
J.  xvi.  25;  with  7rf>^  urith  reference  tOj  2  Cor.  vii.  4; 
1  J.  iii.  21 ;  v.  14.  "EuroSo^  in  N.  T.  habituallj  of  the 
act  of  entering. 

By  the  blood  (iv  r^  aXium).    Lit.  ''m  the  blood  '* :  in  the 

power  or  virtue  of. 

20.  By  a  new  and  living  way  which  he  hath  consecrated 

for  us  (^y  iv€icalpuT€y  fiiiSv  i&dv  wpda^rov  icaX  ^Aaav).  The 
A.  V.  is  wrong.  *Hy  tahieh  is  to  be  construed  with  Aro&op 
entrance.  Thus :  ^^  having  boldness  for  the  entrance  which 
he  has  inaugurated  (or  opened)  for  us — a  way  new  and 
living."  For  iv&caivurev  see  on  ch.  ix.  18.  The  way  must 
be  opened^  for  every  other  way  is  closed.  *Evicaiv{^€iv  in  LXX 
of  the  inauguration  of  a  house,  kingdom,  temple,  altar.  See 
Deut.  XX.  5 ;  1  Sam.  xi.  14 ;  IK.  viii.  68 ;  2  Chron.  xv.  8. 
UpSat^arov  new^  N.  T.®.  In  LXX,  see  Num.  vi.  3 ;  Deut. 
xxxii.  17;  Ps.  Ixxx.  9 ;  Eccles.  i.  9.  The  derivation  appears 
to  be  irpi^  near  to^  and  ^ixfc  slain  (from  ir^aiko^  the  perfect 
of  ^^iv  to  kill).  According  to  this  the  original  sense  would 
be  newly-slain;  and  the  word  was  used  of  one  so  recently 
dead  as  to  retain  the  appearance  of  life :  also,  generally,  of 
things  which  have  not  lost  their  character  or  appearance  by 
the  lapse  of  time ;  of  fishes,  fruits,  oil,  etc.,  which  are  fresh; 
of  anger  which  has  not  had  time  to  cooL     Later  the  meaning 


500  WOBD  SniDIES   IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Gk.  X. 

wa8  weakened  into  new.*  Note  that  the  contrast  is  not 
between  a  new  and  an  old  way,  but  between  a  new  way  and 
no  way.  So  long  as  the  old  division  of  the  tabernacle  existed, 
the  way  into  the  holiest  was  not  opened,  eh.  iz.  8.  Z&aop 
living.  A  living  way  seems  a  strange  expression,  but  comp. 
Peter's  living  9tone$^  1  Pet.  ii.  5.  Christ  styles  himself  both 
way  and  life.  The  bold  fig^ure  answers  to  the  fact.  The  new 
way  is  through  a  life  to  life. 

Through  the  veil  (&^  rov  Karairerdafiaro^y  The  veil  of 
the  holy  of  holies  is  rent.  Christ's  work  does  not  stop  short 
of  the  believer's  complete  access  to  God  himself. 

That  is  to  say  his  flesh  (roOr   iariv  t^  aaptchfi  airmH). 

Const,  with  veil :  the  veil  which  consisted  in  his  flesh.  His 
flesh  was  the  state  through  which  he  had  to  pass  before  he 
entered  heaven  for  us.  See  ch.  ii.  9-18 ;  v.  7-9 ;  x.  6. 
When  he  put  off  that  state,  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent. 
He  passed  through  humanity  to  glory  as  the  forerunner  of 
his  people,  ch.  vi.  20. 

21.  A  high  priest  (Up4a  li^av).  Lit.  a  great  priest. 
Comp.  Lev.  xxi.  10,  LXX.  Not  merely  =  apx^epeif^  high 
priesty  but  emphasising  Christ's  superior  greatne$$  as  high 
priest. 

House  of  Qod  Qoucov  rov  Oeov),  In  the  Gospels  always  of 
the  temple.  Not  found  in  Paul.  Once  in  the  Pastorals, 
of  the  church,  1  Tim.  iii.  15,  and  so  1  Pet.  iv.  17.  Here 
the  whole  Christian  family.  Comp.  1  Cor.  iii.  16,  17; 
2  Cor.  vi.  16 ;  Eph.  ii.  22. 

22.  Let  us  draw  near  (jrpoa€px<l>fi€0a).     See  on  ch.  iv.  16. 

With  a  true  heart  (fjicrii  oKqOivrfi  xapSCof:^.  A  right  and 
genuine  inward  attitude  toward  God.     For  the  phrase  comp, 

*  The  deriTtttion  from  irpd  b^ore  and  o-^^etr  to  slay  ia  more  than  suBpiciona. 


Ch.  X.]  THB   EPISTLE  TO  THE   HEBREWS.  601 

LXX,  Isa.  xxxviii.  3.  N.  T.^.  For  aXrjOivfi^  see  on  J.  i.  9, 
and  comp.  Heb.  viii.  2 ;  ix.  24.  A  true  heart  is  required  to 
enter  the  true  sanctuary.  The  phrase  means  more  than  in 
nncerity.  Sincerity  is  included,  but  with  it  all  that  enters 
into  a  right  attitude  toward  God  as  revealed  in  our  Great 
High  Priest,  —  gladness,  freedom,  enthusiasm,  bold  appro- 
priation of  all  the  privileges  of  sonship. 

In  full  assurance  of  faith  {iv  ir\r)po^pC(f  wUmm).  Full 
conviction  engendered  by  faith.  See  on  ch.  vi.  11.  Faith  is 
the  basis  of  all  right  relation  to  God. 

Sprinkled  from  an  evil  conscience  (/k/>ain-i<r/i^i  —  aird 
irvp€iS^€09^  iropfipa^^.  This  qualification  for  a  right  approach 
to  God  is  stated  typologically.  As  the  priests  were  sprinkled 
with  the  sacrificial  blood  and  washed  with  water  before  minis- 
tering, so  do  you  who  have  now  the  privilege  and  standing  of 
priests  in  approaching  God,  draw  near,  priestlike,  as  sharers 
in  an  economy  which  purges  the  conscience  (ch.  ix.  14), 
having  your  consciences  purged.  Your  own  hearts  must 
experience  the  effects  of  the  great  sacrifice  of  Christ, — 
pardon,  moral  renewal,  deliverance  from  a  legal  spirit.  On 
the  priesthood  of  believers  see  1  Pet.  ii.  5,  9 ;  Ex.  xix.  6 ; 
Isa.  Ixi.  6.  This  idea  is  dominated  in  our  epistle  by  that  of 
Christ's  priesthood ;  but  it  is  not  excluded,  and  is  implied 
throughout.    See  ch.  xiii.  15.    For  sprinkled^  see  on  1  Pet.  i.  2. 

Bodies  washed  (XeXowrfUvoi  to  a&fid).  Also  typological. 
Most  expositors  refer  to  baptism.  The  most  significant  pas- 
sage in  that  direction  is  1  Pet.  iii.  21 ;  comp.  Eph.  v.  26 ; 
Tit.  iii.  5.  It  may  be,  though  I  doubt  if  the  idea  is  emphas- 
ised. I  incline,  with  Dr.  Bruce,  to  think  that  it  indicates 
generally  the  thoroughness  of  the  cleansing  process  undergone 
by  one  who  surrenders  himself,  soul,  body,  and  spirit,  to  God. 

28.  Profession  of  our  faith  (r^y  ofioXayCav  r^  iXirCBo^). 
Rend.  ^^  confession  of  our  hope.'"  Faith  does  not  appear 
among  Ms.  readings.     It  is  an  innovation  of  the  translators. 


502  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ck.  X 

Hope  is  the  rendering  of  Tyndale,  Coverdale,  the  Great  Bible^ 
the  Geneva,  the  Bishops',  and  Rheims.  On  antfeuian  see  on 
2  Cor.  ix.  13,  and  comp.  notes  on  1  Tim.  vi.  12,  18.  The 
phrase  coftfeMum  of  hope  N.  T.^.  They  are  steadfastly  to 
confess  their  hope  in  God's  promise  and  salvation.  Comp. 
eh.  iii.  6 ;  vi.  11, 18 ;  vii.  19.    Hope  is  here&s  tA«  olgeet  qf  hope. 

Without  wavering  (JucXLvrj).    N.  T.^. 

24.  Let  us  consider  one  another  (jcaravo&ii^  AXXifXev?). 

Take  careful  note  of  each  other's  spiritual  welfare.  For  the 
verb  see  on  Jas.  i.  28.  It  denotes  attentive^  eovitinwm9  care. 
Comp.  Heb.  iii.  1. 

To  provoke  (cfc  irapo^afiov) .  Lit.  with  a  mew  to  ineitement. 
Only  here  and  Acts  xv.  39.  From  irapo^vpeiv  to  eharpen. 
Hence  to  ttimulate.  In  Acts  xv.  39,  the  reeuit  of  provocation ; 
irritation  or  contention.  Here  the  act  of  incitement.  Twice 
in  LXX,  Deut.  xxix.  28  (27);  Jer.  xxxix.  (xxxii.)  3,  7;  for 
the  Hebrew  *)^.  anger^  wrathy  altercation.  The  Hebrew  deri- 
vation is  from  »|^  a  splinter.  The  new  economy  demands 
mutual  care  on  the  part  of  the  members  of  the  Christian 
community.  Comp.  1  Cor.  xii.  25.  They  must  stir  up  each 
other's  religious  affections  and  ministries. 

25.  The  assembling  of  ourselves  together  (hrurwaywy^p 
iavT&p).  'EirLovpayayy'q  only  here  and  2  Th.  ii.  1,  see  note. 
The  act  of  assembling,  although  some  explain  assembly.  The 
antithesis  is,  ^^not  forsaking  assembling,  but  exhorting  in 
assembly."  Liinemann  aptly  says  that  the  idea  of  apostasy 
which  would  be  conveyed  by  the  rendering  assembly  or  con^ 
gregation  is  excluded  by  iOo^  habit  or  cu^tom^  which  implies  an 
often  recurring  act  on  the  part  of  the  same  persons. 

As  the  manner  of  some  is  (KaOm  iOo^  rurlv).  For  manner 
rend,  custom.  Lit.  as  is  custom  unto  some.  "£^09  mostly  ia 
Luke  and  Acts.     Comp.  L.  i.  9 ;  J.  xix.  40. 


Ch.  X.l  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  508 

Ye  see  the  day  approaching  (^fiX^ere  iyyi^ovtrav  t^» 
^fidpav).  The  day  of  Christ's  second  coming,  bringing  with 
it  the  judgment  of  Israel.  He  could  say  ^^ye  see/'  because 
they  were  familiar  with  Christ's  prophecy  concerning  the 
destruction  of  the  temple ;  and  they  woidd  see  this  crisis 
approaching  in  the  disturbances  which  heralded  the  Jewish 
war. 

26.  We  sin  wilfully  (^hcotHrlw  aiuipTavdvrmv  ^/i&v).  Ecou- 
aioK  wilfultyy  only  here  and  1  Pet.  v.  2.  Comp.  Philem.  14, 
icar  hcovaiov  of  free  unU.  See  LXX,  Num.  xv.  8.  The  wilful 
sin  is  the  abandonment  of  Christianity  for  Judaism. 

The  knowledge  (hrtpfwrw).  Only  here  in  Hebrews. 
Very  common  in  Paul.  For  the  word,  and  the  phrase 
knowledge  of  the  trutkt  see  on  1  Tim.  ii.  4.  The  truth  is 
the  revelation  through  Christ. 

There  remaineth  no  more  sacrifice  for  sins  (pvicin  irepi 
afjLafrruiv  kirokehrercu  OwrCa) .  Of  course  not.  For  the  Le viti- 
cal  sacrifices  are  abolished.     It  is  Christ's  sacrifice  or  none. 

27.  But  a  certain  fearful  looking  for  Q^fitph  Urv;  icSo;^). 
Rend,  ''a  kind  of  fearful  expectation."  *^hoxh  N.  T.^ 
OLXX. 

Fiery  indignation  (irvpi^  C^Xo?).  For  ^Xo^:  see  on  Jas. 
iii.  14.  The  radical  idea  of  the  word  \s  ferment  of  spirit  (X^S^ 
to  boil;  see  Acts  xviii.  25;  Rom.  xii.  11).  This  idea  takes 
on  different  aspects  in  (1^X09,  as  indignation^  Acts  v.  17;  zeal^ 
J.  ii.  17;  Rom.  x.  2;  2  Cor.  vii.  7;  xi.  2;  Philip,  iii.  6; 
envy^  Rom.  xiii.  13 ;  1  Cor.  iii.  3 ;  Gal.  v.  20.  In  the  last 
sense  often  with  ipv;  etrife.  The  phrase  fiery  indignation^  lit. 
indignation  of  fire  (N.  T.^  is  an  adaptation  from  Isa.  xxvi.  11. 

The  adversaries  (roi9  {nrofavrlov^^.  Only  here  and  OoL 
ii.  14.     Often  in  LXX. 


604  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAIOEMT.        COk.  X 

28.  He  that  despised  {&0enia<K  ni^).  Lit.  one  that  de- 
spised ;  any  transgressor.  The  verb  only  here  in  Hebrews. 
The  kindred  noun  kdirqai/^  only  in  Hebrews.  See  oh.  vii.  18; 
ix.  26. 

Died  (airoOvrfaicei).  Lit.  dieth.  According  to  the  ordin- 
ance as  it  funo  stands  in  the  law. 

Without  mercy  (x»P^  olsmpii&p).    The  phrase  N.  T.^. 

For  the  noun  see  on  2  Cor.  i.  8. 

Under  two  or  three  witnesses  (iirl  Swrlv  1j  rpiaXv  lutprwrui). 
As  in  LXX,  Deut.  xvii.  6.  'EttI  with  dative  signifying  im 
condition  of  two  or  three  witnesses  testifying.  Comp.  1  Tim. 
y.  17,  where  the  same  phrase  occurs  with  the  genitive,  brfore^ 
m  the  presence  of.     Comp.  also  Deut.  xix.  15. 

29.  Of  how  much  (ir6a(p).  Not  qualifying  x«4^vo9  sofvr, 
but  the  whole  clause :  ^^by  how  much  thbik  ye  shall  he  be 
thought  worthy  of  sorer  punishment." 

Punishment  (ri/uopicu:).  N.  T.^.  Occasionally  in  LXX^ 
frequent  in  Class.  Originally  (issistanee;  assistance  to  one 
who  has  been  wronged ;  punishment.  With  no  sense  of 
chastisement.     It  is  purely  retributive.* 

Trodden  under  foot  (#caTa7raT^<ra9)  Only  here  in  Hebrews. 
®P.  Frequent  in  LXX  for  spoiling^  defeating^  treating  con- 
temptuously.  The  strong  term  is  purposely  selected  in  order 
to  convey  the  sense  of  the  fearful  outrage  involved  in  forsak- 
ing Christ  and  returning  to  Judaism. 

*  The  distinction  sometimes  asserted  between  nfuapla  retribution^  and 
K6\eurit  chastisement  for  the  amendment  of  the  subject,  does  not  hold  in  N.  T. 
Neither  K6\a<ris  nor  KoXd^eiv  convey  any  sense  of  chastisement.  See  Acts  iv.  21 ; 
2  Pet.  ii.  9 ;  Matt.  zxv.  46 ;  1  J.  iv.  18  ;  nor  is  there  a  trace  of  this  meaning 
of  either  noon  or  verb  in  LXX.  See  Trench,  iVieto  Testament  Synonpms^  f  VII, 
and  Schmidt,  Synonymik,  §  167, 1, 3.  The  prevailing  sense  of  sdXarit  in  Claa^ 
is  a  check  applied  to  prevent  excess. 


Cr.  X.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  505 

Hath  counted  an  unholy  thing  (^tcoivdv  ^adfietfo^).  'Hyeltr- 
Oat  to  count  or  deem  means  a  conscious  judgment  resting  on  a 
deliberate  weighing  of  the  facts.  See  Rom.  xii.  10  ;  Philip, 
ii.  3.  Here  it  implies  a  deliberate,  contemptuous  rejection  of 
the  gifts  of  the  new  covenant.  The  fundamental  idea  of  icoivbfi 
is  shared  by  all,  public.  Thus  Acts  ii.  44  ;  iv.  32 ;  Tit.  i.  4 ; 
Jude  3.  Out  of  this  grows  the  idea  of  not  scurred ;  not  set 
apart  for  particular  uses  by  purification,  and  so  (ceremonially) 
unclean  or  defiled,  as  Mk.  vii.  2, 5 ;  Acts  x.  14,  28  ;  xi.  8.  In 
these  cases  it  is  not  implied  that  the  thing  is  defiled  or  filthy 
in  itself,  but  only  unclean  through  the  absence  of  that  which 
would  set  it  apart.  Comp.  Rom.  xiv.  14.  Here  the  word  ad- 
mits of  two  explanations :  (1)  that  Christ^s  blood  was  counted 
common,  having  no  more  sacred  character  or  specific  worth 
than  the  blood  of  any  ordinary  person  ;  (2)  that  in  refusing 
to  regard  Christ's  blood  as  that  of  an  atoner  and  redeemer, 
it  was  implied  that  his  blood  was  unclean  as  being  that  of  a 
transgressor.  The  former  seems  preferable.  There  was  no 
specific  virtue  in  Christ's  blood  as  blood;  but  a  peculiar  and 
unique  virtue  attached  to  it  as  the  offering  of  his  eternal  spirit 
(ch.  ix.  14),  as  the  blood  shed  in  ratification  of  a  sacred  cove- 
nant established  by  God,  and  as  having  sanctifying  virtue. 
This  view  is  further  justified  by  the  combination  of  bhod  and 
spirit,  as  sources  of  sanctification  allied  in  the  writer's  mind. 

Hath  done  despite  unto  the  spirit  of  grace  {ica\  rd  irveOfui 
T^  Xdpiro^  iwffpiaa^^.  ^Ew/Spi^eiv  to  insult,  N.  T.^.  The 
simple  verb  vfipH^eiv  in  Matthew,  Luke,  Acts,  and  Pastorals. 
It  will  be  observed  that  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  does  not 
receive  in  this  epistle  the  emphasis  which  marks  it  in  some 
other  portions  of  the  N.  T. 

30.  We  Icnow  him  that  hath  said  (ofSa/Acy  7^  top  thrdvra). 
The  retribution  (jituopld)  is  certain,  because  assured  by  the 
word  of  God  in  Scripture. 

Vengeance  (jUZUfiai/^).  An  unfortunate  translation,  since 
it  conveys  the  idea  of  vindictive ness  which  does  not  reside  in 


600  WORD  STUDISB  DT  THB  KEW  TESTAMBNT.        [Ol  X 

the  Greek  word.  It  is  the  full  meting  out  of  justice  to  all 
parties.  The  quotation  is  an  adaptation  of  tiie  LXX  of 
I)eut.  xxxii.  86.  The  second  citation  is  literally  from  LXX 
of  Deut.  xxxii.  86. 

81 .  To  fall,  etc.    Comp.  LXX,  2  Sam.  xxiv.  14;  Sir.  iL  18. 

Of  the  living  God.  The  living  God,  revealed  in  the  living 
Christ,  will  not  suffer  his  sacrificial  gift  and  his  covenant  to 
be  slighted  and  insulted  with  impunity.     See  on  ch.  iii.  12. 

82.  After  ye  were  illuminated  (j^urOiyrwi).  See  oo 
ch.  vi.  4. 

A  great  fight  (iroXX^y  SSXtiav).  "Affknavi  N.  T.^  ^LXX. 
See  on  iiffk^  $trive^  2  Tim.  ii.  6.  See  Litroduction,  on  the 
allusions  in  the  epistle  to  persecution. 

88.  Whilst  ye  were  made  a  gazing-stock  (jBearpi^fmrn). 
N.  T.^  ^LXX,  ^lass.  Lit.  exhibiUd  in  the  theatre.  Comp. 
1  Cor.  iv.  9. 

Whilst   ye   became    companions   (/coiywvol   yanjOAmii). 

Keiul.  by  becoming  partakers.  More  than  companionship  is 
implied.  For  tcoivo^ifol  see  on  L.  v.  10.  The  noun  and  its 
kindred  verb  in  N.  T.  almost  exclusively  of  ethical  and  spir- 
itual relations,  as  1  Tim.  v.  22 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  13 ;  2  J.  11 ; 
1  Cor.  X.  18 ;  2  Cor.  i.  7  ;  Philem.  17.  Even  when  applied 
to  [x>ouniary  contributions  they  imply  Christian  fellowship  as 
the  Ivasis  of  the  liberality.  See  on  Rom.  xii.  18;  xv.  27; 
Philip,  iv.  15. 

Of  them  that  were  so  used  {tAv  o&rw?  avaarp^/i Amm). 
Rend,  "of  them  that  fared  thus.''  Others  render  *»who  oon- 
duot^l  theni^lves  thus'";  endured  their  persecutions  wo 
bravely.  But  the  aSm^  can  refer  only  to  made  a 
$t0€i.  ' 


en.  X.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  607. 

84.  For  ye  had  compassion  of  me  in  my  bonds  (^xal  yiip 
Toh  Beafiioi^  awnraOiiaaTe^.  Entirely  wrong,  following  T.  R. 
70i9  SeafAoU  fiov.  Rend,  ^^ye  had  compassion  on  the  prison- 
ers.'* So  Vulg.  vinctU  campassi  estis.  The  corrupt  reading 
has  furnished  one  of  the  stock  arguments  for  the  Pauline 
authorship  of  the  Epistle. 

Took  Joyfully  (fierh  x^H^  irpoaeS^aoBe).  The  verb  prim- 
arily to  receive  to  one's  seff^  aeeepU  as  here.  Comp.  L.  xv.  2 ; 
Philip,  ii.  29.  Mostly,  in  N.  T.  however,  to  waitfor^  expect^ 
as  Mk.  XY.  43 ;  L.  ii.  25,  88;  Acts  xxiii.  21. 

Spoiling  (ipnra^v).  Only  here.  Matt,  xxiii.  25  ;  L.  xi.  89. 
Allied  with  ijfnrd^eiv  to  snatch  away. 

Of  your  goods  (r&v  {nrapxivnav  vfi&v).  The  verb  inrdp- 
X€iv  means  originally  to  begin^  or  begin  to  be  ;  hence  of  anything 
that  has  begun  to  be,  to  come  forth,  be  there;  then  simply  td 
be.  Accordingly  the  phrase  virdpyjei  /ao/  n  means  there  is  some- 
thing  to  me^  I  have  something.  See  Acts  iii.  6  ;  iv.  87 ;  xxviii.  7. 
Hence  ri,  vTrdpxovra  things  which  are  to  one  ;  possessions^  goods. 
See  Matt.  xix.  21 ;  xxiv.  27 ;  L.  viii.  8 ;  Acts  iv.  82.* 

Knowing  in  yourselves  that  ye  have,  etc.  (^yivaHrtcovre^ 
ix^iv  iavToifi).  Rend,  "knowing  that  ye  yourselves  have  a 
better,"  etc.  The  A.  V.  follows  T.  R.  iv  lavroJ^.f  Ye  your- 
selves in  contrast  with  your  spoilers. 

Substance  (Jhrap^iv).  Only  here  and  Acts  ii.  46.  Occas- 
ionally in  LXX.     Rend,  possession. 

•  It  is  sometimeB  claimed  that  ^dpx^w  as  distiiigaiBhed  from  elwu  implies 
a  reference  to  an  antecedent  condition.  That  is  true  in  some  instances,  but 
the  reference  is  not  inherent  in  the  verb ;  since  sometimes  there  is  implied  a 
reference  to  a  future  condition,  and  sometimes  the  verb  is  used  simply  in  the 
sense  of  elwu  to  be  absolutely. 

t  Others,  as  Alford  and  Lttnemann,  adopt  the  reading  iavroit  for  your- 
selves. Westcott,  and  Rev.  marg.,  reading  ^avrodt,  render  it  as  the  object  of 
dx^iw,  **  knowing  that  ye  had  yonrselres  for  a  better  possession,**  and  refer- 
ring to  L.  zzL  19.  According  to  this  the  sense  is,  ^'  your  true  selves  remain<Hl 
untouched.  Tou  saved  them  out  of  the  wreck  of  your  possessions.**  i  his 
Li  foreign  to  the  tone  of  the  epistle,  and  must  be  xegaided  as  artificial. 


508  WORD  8TUDIB8  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [<te.  Z 

35.  Confidence  (rifv  irappfitrlav).  Rend.  holdne9:  Tha 
boldness  and  courage  which  you  manifested  under  persecu* 
tion. 

86.  Ye  might  receive  the  promise  (^tcofUmia&t  r^  iM-a^ 
yeXlav).  Comp.  ch.  xi.  13,  39,  and  see  on  1  Pet.  i.  8.  The 
verb  implies,  not  mere  obtaining^  but  receiving  and  carrying 
away  for  use  and  enjoyment. 

37.  A  little  while  (^fwepov  6aov  Saov).  Strictly,  a  very  UttU 
while.  The  phrase  N.  T.^.  It  is  not  part  of  the  quotation, 
but  is  taken  from  Isa.  xxvi.  20,  the  only  instance.  See  Aris- 
toph.  Wa9pB,  218. 

He  that  shall  come  will  come  (6  ipx6iieiw:  fi^u).  Rend. 
"he  that  cometh  will  come."  In  the  Hebrew  (Hab.  ii.  8) 
the  subject  of  the  sentence  is  the  vision  of  the  extermination 
of  the  Chaldees.  "The  vision  —  will  surely  come.*'  As 
rendered  in  the  LXX,  either  Jehovah  or  Messiah  must  be 
the  subject.  The  passage  was  referred  to  Messiah  by  the 
later  Jewish  theologians,  and  is  so  taken  by  our  writer,  as  is 
shown  by  the  article  before  ipx^^H'^po^.  Comp.  Matt.  xi.  8 ; 
xxi.  9  ;  J.  xi.  27.  Similarly  he  refers  rifei  skaU  came  to  the 
final  coming  of  Messiah  to  judge  the  world. 

38.  Now  the  just  shall  live  by  faith  (o  Si  hUauk  (aaov)  he 
iriareas  fijcrerat).  Cited  by  Paul,  Rom.  i.  17 ;  Gal.  iii.  11.* 
In  the  original  prophecy  the  just  man  is  contrasted  with  the 
haughty  Chaldaean  invaders,  who  are  puffed  up  and  not 
upright.  Through  his  steadfast  obedience  to  God  he  shall 
be  kept  alive  in  the  time  of  confusion  and  destruction. 

But  if  any  man  draw  back  {xal  Hlv  inrooTeCKrfTcu),  Omit 
if  any  man.     Rend.  ^^  and  if  he  draw  back,''  that  is,  the  just 

•  The  Hebrew  reads,  **  the  ]nst  shall  live  by  hia  constancy.**  LXX,  «'  the 
just  shall  live  by  my  faith/*  or  (Cod.  A)  *'my  just  one  shall  liye  by  faith.** 
Mov  does  not  appear  in  Romans  or  Galatians. 


Oh.  XL]  THB   EPISTLE  TO   THE  HEBREWS.  509 

man.  The  poBsibility  of  the  lapse  of  even  the  just  is  assumed. 
See  on  ch.  vi.  4-6.  The  verb  only  here,  Acts  xx.  20,  27 ; 
Gal.  ii.  12.     See  on  Acts  xx.  20.     Rare  in  LXX. 

Shall  have  no  pleasure  (ovk  €vSok€i).  Rend,  ''hath  no 
pleasure."  "  If  he  draw  back  —  in  him,"  not  in  the  Hebrew, 
which  reads,  ''  behold,  puffed  up  within  him  is  his  soul,  it  is 
not  upright."    The  clauses  of  the  LXX  are  transposed  here. 

39.  But  we  are  not  of  them  who  draw  back  (^fuU  Bk  ovk 
iafuv  u7r<krroXij9).  Lit.  we  are  not  of  shrinking  back.  'Two- 
oToX^  N.T.^  ^LXX,  ^Class.  ^Eivai  with  genitive  marks  the 
quality  or  peculiarity  of  a  person  or  thing.  Comp.  ch.  xii.  11 
XapS^  €hai  to  be  of  joy  ^  joyful.  We  do  not  partake  of  draw- 
ing back,  which  is  characteristic  of  recreants. 

Unto  perdition  (ej?  inrAXnav).  Or  deitruetion.  Drawing 
back  makes  for  and  terminates  in  (efc)  destruction. 

Of  them  that  believe  (9r^<rrcw9).  Rend.  qffaUk.  The 
phrase  ehai  irUrreoK  to  be  of  faiths  N.  T.^. 

Saving  (irtpviroitfaiv).     See  on  1  Th.  v.  9. 


CHAPTER  XL 

The  concluding  statement  of  ch.  x  suggests  the  following 
discussion  of  the  nature  of  faith  and  of  its  fruits  as  called 
out  by  6od*s  revelation  from  the  earliest  time. 

1.  Faith  (irUrn^^.  Without  the  article,  indicating  that  it 
is  treated  in  its  abstract  conception,  and  not  merely  as  Christ- 
ian faith.  It  is  important  that  the  preliminary  definition 
should  be  clearly  understood,  since  the  following  examples 
illustrate  it.  The  key  is  furnished  by  ver.  27,  as  seeing  him 
who  is  invisible.  Faith  apprehends  as  a  real  fact  what  is  not 
revealed  to  the  senses.     It  rests  on  that  fact,  acts  upon  it. 


510  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.       [Ck.  XL 

and  is  upheld  by  it  in  the  face  of  all  that  seems  to  oontradict 
it.     Faith  is  a  real  seeing.     See  Introduction,  p.  8S8. 

Substance  (yir6<rraai^).  See  on  eh.  i.  3  and  iii.  14.  On 
the  whole,  the  Rev.  a99uranee  gives  the  true  meaning.  The 
definition  has  a  scholastic  and  philosophic  quality,  as  might 
be  expected  from  a  pupil  of  the  Alexandrian  schools.  The 
meaning  BvhBtanee^  real  being,  given  by  A.  V.,  Vulg.,  and 
many  earlier  interpreters,  suggests  the  true  sense,  but  is  philo* 
sophically  inaccurate.  Substance^  as  used  by  these  translat- 
ors, is  substantial  nature ;  the  real  nature  of  a  thing  which 
underlies  and  supports  its  outward  form  or  properties.  In 
this  sense  it  is  very  appropriate  in  ch.  i.  3,  in  describing  the 
nature  of  the  Son  as  the  image  or  impress  of  God's  essential 
being:  but  in  this  sense  it  is  improperly  applied  to  faith, 
which  is  an  act  of  the  moral  intelligence  directed  at  an 
object ;  or  a  condition  which  sustains  a  certain  relation  to 
the  object.  It  cannot  be  said  that  faith  is  substantial  being. 
It  apprehends  reality :  it  is  that  to  which  the  unseen  objects 
of  hope  become  real  and  substantial.  Assurance  gives  the 
true  idea.     It  is  the  firm  grasp  of  faith  on  unseen  fact. 

Evidence  (p^x^^-  N.  T.^.  Quite  often  in  LXX  for 
po;  to  reprove^  rebuke^  punish^  blame.  See  Prov.  i.  23; 
Wisd.  ii.  14 ;  Sir.  xvi.  12.  See  especially  on  the  kindred 
verb  iK4<yx€i.v^  J.  iii.  20.  Rend,  conviction.  Observe  that 
vTrArra^i^  and  SXeyxo^  are  not  two  distinct  and  independ- 
ent conceptions,  in  which  case  xal  would  have  been  added ; 
but  they  stand  in  apposition.  TEX€7xo9  is  really  included 
in  vTrJcrrcuri?,  but  adds  to  the  simple  idea  of  assurance  a 
suggestion  of  influences  operating  to  produce  conviction 
which  carry  the  force  of  demonstration.  The  word  often 
signifies  a  process  of  proof  or  demonstration.  So  von  Soden  : 
"  a  being  convinced.  Therefore  not  a  rash,  feebly-grounded 
hypothesis,  a  dream  of  hope,  the  child  of  a  wish." 

Of  things  (wpayfidroDv).  Upayfia  is,  strictly,  a  thing  done; 
an  accomplished  fact.  It  introduces  a  wider  conception  than 
i\7n^ofjiJp<DP  things  hoped  for  ;  embracing  not  only  future  real- 


Ch.  XI.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  511 

ities,  but  all  that  does  not  fall  under  the  cognisance  of  the 
senses,  whether  past,  present,  or  future. 

2.  For  by  It  (iv  ravrtf  yiip).  Lit.  for  in  this.  Rend. 
therein:  in  the  sphere  and  exercise  of  faith:  as  believers. 
Comp.  1  Tim.  v.  10.  For  introduces  a  proof  of  the  preced- 
ing statement  concerning  the  nature  of  faith.  Faith  has 
power  to  see  and  realise  the  unseen, /or  the  experience  of  the 
fathers  proves  it. 

The  elders  obtained  a  good  report  (ifAaprvpffOi^av  ot 
irpeafivrepoi).  The  elders  for  the  more  common  the  fathers: 
the  saints  of  the  O.  T.  dispensation,  many  of  whose  names 
are  recorded  in  this  chapter.  'EfAaprvprjOrfaav^  lit.  were  borne 
witness  to.  God  bore  witness  to  them  in  the  victory  of  their 
faith  over  all  obstacles,  and  their  characters  and  deeds  as 
men  of  faith  were  recorded  in  Scripture.  For  this  use  of 
fjMpTvpeiv  in  the  passive,  see  Acts  vi.  8 ;  x.  22 ;  xvi.  12 ; 
Rom.  iii.  21 ;  Heb.  vii.  8, 17.  Notice  that  the  statement  in 
this  verse  does  not  begin  the  list  of  examples,  which  com- 
mences with  ver.  4,  but  is  closely  attached  to  the  definition 
in  ver.  1  as  a  comprehensive  justification  of  it. 

8.  Neither  does  this  verse  belong  to  the  list  of  historical 
instances  from  Genesis,  in  which  men  exercised  faith.  It  is 
merely  the  first  instance  presented  in  O.  T.  history  of  an 
opportunity  for  the  exercise  of  faith  as  the  assurance  and 
conviction  of  things  not  seen.  Like  ver.  2,  it  is  closely  con- 
nected with  the  definition.  It  contains  the  exposition  of  the 
nature  of  faith,  by  showing  that  in  its  earliest  and  most  gen- 
eral expression — belief  in  the  creation  of  the  visible  universe 
by  God — it  is  a  conviction  of  something  not  apprehensible 
by  sense.* 

«  The  asBiimption  that  this  Terse  famishes  the  first  item  in  the  catalogue 
of  O.  T.  examples  of  faith,  gives  rise  to  such  explanations  as  that  of  Michaelis, 
which  is  indorsed  by  Bleek  ;  that  the  writer  thought  of  the  earliest  men  as 
attaining  only  by  faith  the  knowledge  that  God  made  the  world,  and  that  he 
expressed  himself  so  generally  becaose  that  fact  is  not  expressly  related  of 
them,  and  beoanse  their  conduct  did  not  indicate  a  liying  faith. 


512  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TBBTAHENT.       [C^  ZI 

We  understand  (poovfi€ii).  Nociv  signifies  to  pereeine  mik 
the  V0C9  or  reflective  intelligence.  In  Class,  of  seeing  with 
the  eyes,  sometimes  with  o^aXfAoU  expressed ;  but  as  early 
as  Homer  it  is  distinguished  from  the  mere  physical  act  ct 
visioa,  as  perception  of  the  mind  consequent  upon  seeing. 
Thus,  TOP  5^  IBoDv  ivdriffe  and  seeing  him  he  perceived  (JTl.  xL 
599)  :  oifK  Xhov  ovS'  ipirjaa  I  neither  saw  nor  perceived  ( Od. 
xiii.  318).  In  N.  T.  never  of  the  mere  physical  act.  Here 
is  meant  the  inward  perception  and  apprehension  of  the  visi* 
ble  creation  as  the  work  of  God,  which  follows  the  sight  of 
the  phenomena  of  nature. 

The  worlds  (rovf;  ai&va^).  Lit.  the  ogee.  The  world  or 
worlds  as  the  product  of  successive  aeons.     See  on  ch.  i.  2. 

Were  framed  (fcarrfprCaOai).  Put  together;  adjusted;  the 
parts  fitted  to  each  other.  See  on  Gal.  vi.  1 ;  Matt.  xxi.  16 ; 
L.  vi.  40.  Of  the  preparing  and  fixing  in  heaven  of  the 
sun  and  moon,  LXX,  Ps.  Ixxiii.  16  ;  Ixxxviii.  87 :  of 
building  a  wall,  2  Esdr.  iv.  12, 18, 16.  See  also  Ps.  xxxix.  6. 
Rend,  have  been  framed.  The  A.  V.  g^ves  the  impression  of 
one  giving  his  assent  to  an  account  of  creation ;  but  the  per- 
fect tense  exhibits  the  faith  of  one  who  is  actually  contem- 
plating creation  itself. 

By  the  word  of  Qod  Q^fiari  Oeotj).    Comp.  Gren.  i ;  Ps. 

xxxiii.  6;  cxviii.  5. 

So  that  things  which  are  seen  were  not  made  of  things 
which  do  appear  (etV  ro  fifj  ix  <t>aivofjL^v<op  to  fiX£ir6fuvov  yeyov- 
ivaC).  For  things  which  are  seen^  rend,  that  which  is  seen. 
For  were  not  made  rend.  JuUh  not  been  made.  'EU?  to  followed 
by  the  infinitive  signifies  result^  not  purpose.  We  perceive 
that  the  worlds  have  been  framed  by  the  word  of  God,  so 
that  (this  being  the  case)  that  which  is  visible  has  not  arisen 
out  of  that  which  is  seen.*     M^  not  negatives  the  remainder 

*  Some,  however,  insist  that  t/t  rl^  etc.,  indicates  purpose  or  design.  80 
Westoott,  who  says,  **  the  worlds  were  made,  etc.,  to  the  end  that  that  whiek 


Ch.  XI.]  THE  BPI8TLB  TO  THE  HBBBEWS.  518 

of  the  clause  taken  as  a  whole.  In  other  words,  the  proposi- 
tion denied  is,  that  which  U  seen  arose  atU  of  visible  things. 
By  many  early  interpreters  fi^  was  transposed,  and  construed 
with  ^oivoijyiiHov  alone,  signifying  ^^that  which  is  seen  has 
arisen  from  things  which  do  not  appear."  These  things  were 
explained  as  chaos,  the  invisible  creative  powers  of  God,  etc. 

4.  Abel  offered  unto  God  C^A^X  wpoaiiveyKeif  r^  de^). 
For  the  phrase  see  ch.  ix.  14. 

A  more  excellent  sacrifice  (wXelova  OvaCav).  Greater  in 
value  in  God's  eyes.  For  irXeUov  in  this  sense,  see  ch.  iii.  8 ; 
Matt.  vi.  25 ;  L.  xi.  81 ;  xii.  28.  In  Paul  never  in  this  sense. 
Others  explain  a  more  abundant  sacrifice,  referring  to  the 
material  character  of  the  offerings.  See  Gen.  iv.  4.  But 
the  difference  between  the  offerings  of  Abel  and  Cain,  con- 
sidered in  themselves,  is  largely  a  matter  of  speculation,  and, 
as  Liinemann  justly  remarks,  such  an  interpretation  accent- 
uates unduly  a  purely  external  feature.* 

By  which  he  obtained  witness  (&*  ^  itiaprrvpi/firi).  Lit. 
was  witnessed  to^  as  ver.  2.  The  pronoun  which  may  refer 
either  to  the  sacrifice  or  to  faith.  Better  the  latter,  as  is 
apparent  from  ver.  2,  and  probably  from  ver.  7,  although  the 
relation  there  is  somewhat  different. 

is  seen  (be  known)  to  have  arisen  not  from  things  which  i^ypear.**  Aocoid- 
Ing  to  this,  faith  certifies  not  only  the  fact  of  creation  by  the  word  of  God,  but 
also  God*s  design  that  creation  should  be  believed  to  have  taken  place  only  bj 
his  word,  calling  the  world  out  of  nothing ;  and  should  not  be  believed  to  have 
ariflen  out  of  visible  things.  It  must  be  allowed  that  c/t  rb  followed  by  the 
infinitive,  in  every  one  of  the  eight  other  instances  in  this  epistle,  ezpreeses 
purpose ;  and  further,  that  such  is  its  more  frequent  meaning  everywhere. 
But  (a)  such  is  not  its  universal  meaning.  See  Rom.  L  20 ;  xii.  8 ;  2  Cor. 
viii.  6 ;  OaL  iii.  17 ;  1  Th.  ii  16.  (6)  On  this  explanation  something  Is 
imported  into  the  passage  which  neither  the  sense  nor  the  oonstmction 
requires,  and  which  is  laboured  and  unnatural,  (c)  Trf994wfu  thus  becomes 
excessively  awkward.  Alford  justly  says  that,  on  this  hypothesis,  yrf^viwmi 
ought  to  have  been  some  subjective  word ;  not,  as  it  Is  now,  a  mere  record 
of  a  past  fact  The  sense  of  resstt  is  held  \fj  Bledc,  Alford,  Weiisttdker, 
Burton. 

«  That  some  external  diilennoe  was  recogniied  Is  most  likely.  See  tbs 
peculiar  reading  of  LXX,  Gen.  iv.  7. 

VOL.   IT.— .33 


514  WORD  STUDIBB  IN  THB  NEW  TESFTAMMST.      [dL  XL 

Righteous  (SUaw^  Abel  is  called  riffhteoM  hj  Cbiiat 
himself,  Matt,  xxiii.  35.  Comp.  1  J.  iii.  12.  See  on  Rom.  L  17. 

God  testifying  of  his  gifts  (^fjutprupowfro^  ^l  nk  iApmft 
avTov  Tov  0€ov).  Defining  more  specifically  the  general  wa$ 
witnessed  to.  God  bore  witness  by  his  acceptance  of  the  gifts. 
'Eirl  marks  the  fact  on  which  the  witness  was  baaed. 

Yet  speaketh  (In  \aXu).  Comp.  Gen.  iy.  10.  Sta, 
although  ages  have  passed  since  his  death.  Comp.  ch.  xiL  24. 
Not  that  his  voice  still  cries  to  God  (so  Bleek  and  others), 
but  that  by  his  faith  he  still  speaks  to  us  in  the  O.  T.  Scrip- 
tures, though  dead.  Const,  iri  yet  with  \aX&  speaketh;  not 
with  being  dead^  in  the  logical  sense,  ^^eve%  being  dead^"  as 
Rom.  iii.  7.* 

5.    Enoch.    Gen.  y.  21-24.   Comp.  Sir.  xliy.  16 ;  xlix.  14; 

Wisd.  iv.  10. 

Was  translated  (fierer^ff).  The  verb  used  of  Enoch's 
translation,  LXX,  Gen.  v.  24.  In  Acts  vii.  16  of  the  trans- 
porting of  the  remains  of  Jacob  and  his  sons  to  Sychem.  In 
Gal.  i.  6,  of  the  sudden  change  in  the  religious  attitude  of 
the  Galatians.  In  Heb.  vii.  12,  of  the  change  in  the  priest- 
hood. 

That   he  should   not  see  death  (^rov  yi^  ISelv  Odvarop). 

This  may  Hignify  t lie  purpose  of  his  translation,  but  probably 
refers  to  tJie  result.  He  was  translated  so  that  he  did  not  see 
death.     Comp.  Matt.  xxi.  32;  Acts  vii.  19;  Rom.  vii.  S.f 

Was  not  found  because  God  had  translated  him  (oix 

ffvpiaxero  Sidri  fi€T€Or)K€v  avrov  6  ^ecfc).  Cited  from  LXX, 
Gen.  V.  24.      For  had  translated  rend,  translated. 

He  had  this  testimony  (fiefiaprvpfjraL).      Rev.  properly 

preserves  the  force  of  the  perfect  tense,  "  he  hath  had  witness 
home  to  him."     The  testimony  still  stands  on  record. 

*  T.  R.  reads  XaXcirac  is  spoken  about. 

t  See  Burton^s  Hew  Testament  Moods  and  Tenses^  (  SSS. 


€h.  XL]  THE  EPISTLE  TO   THE  HEBKEWS.  515 

That  he  pleased  God.  Rend,  hathpletued.  Comp.  LXX, 
Gen.  V.  22,  24.  Faith  was  exhibited  by  Enoch  in  walking 
with  God  (comp.  A,  V.  Gen.  v.  22,  ''walked  with  God,"  and 
LXX,  €vapd(mfa€  plea$ed  Grod).  Faith  creates  close  personal 
relation. 

6.  To  please  (euapcor^oi).  The  aorist  gives  the  sense 
of  at  aU^  stating  the  verbal  idea  without  time,  as  a  universal 
proposition.     Comp.  Rom.  viii.  8. 

Cometh  (irpoa^fyxitn^ofov).  See  on  ch.  iv.  16.  Mu9t  (&i). 
An  essential  obligation.  In  the  nature  of  the  case.  That  he 
is  (irn  !<mv).  Faith  in  God  involves  belief  in  his  existence 
although  he  is  unseen. 

Is  a  rewarder  (^fuaOawoSdrri^  ytiftrai).  Note  the  di£Ferenoe 
of  the  verb  :  not  simply  exists^  but  comes  to  pass  as;  proves  to 
le^  habitually,  so  that  he  who  approaches  God  has,  through 
faith,  the  assurance  that  his  seeking  God  will  result  in  good 
to  himself.  Mio^unroWn;?  rewarder^  N.  T.^.  Comp^  /uo-^- 
ofirohoaCa  recompense  of  reward^  ch.  ii.  2  (note)  ;  x.  85 ;  xi.  26. 

Of  them  that  diligently  seek  him  (joU  hcSnTova-iv  asM^). 
Lit.  unto  them  that  seek  him  out.  Comp.  Acts  xv.  17  ;  Heb. 
xii.  17 ;  1  Pet.  i.  10.  The  verb  is  used  of  seeking  God,  Rom. 
iii.  11.  God's  beneficent  will  and  attitude  toward  the  seeker 
are  not  always  apparent  at  the  first  approach.  In  such  cases 
there  is  occasion  for  faith,  in  the  face  of  delay,  that  diligent 
seeking  will  find  its  reward.  One  is  reminded  of  Jesus' 
lessons    on    importunity    in    seeking    God,    L.   xi.   5-10; 

xviii.  1-8. 

**  Be  hides  himeelf  so  wondroiuly 
Ab  though  there  were  no  God ; 
He  is  least  seen  when  all  the  powen 

Of  ill  are  most  abroad. 
Or  he  deserts  ns  at  the  honr 

The  fl^t  is  almost  lost, 
And  seems  to  leave  as  to  ounelTes 
Jmt  when  we  need  him  most 


610  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TEBTAIOENT.       [Cb.  XK 

It  is  not  80,  bat  so  it  looks ; 

And  we  lose  ooniage  then ; 
And  doabts  wUl  come  if  Qod  hath  kspft 

His  promisee  to  man.*' 

7.    Noah.    Gen.  vi. 

Being  warned  of  Qod  (xpi^/Mm^ck).     Cf  Ghod  is  not  in 

the  text.  See  on  Matt.  ii.  12 ;  L.  ii.  26 ;  Aots  zL  26 ;  and 
comp.  Heb.  viii.  6. 

Of  things  not  seen  as  yet  (irepl  r&v  firfS^nw  /SkewofiAmif). 

Const,  with  cvXaffrfOeU,  and  rend.  '*by  faith  Noah,  being 
warned,  having  reverent  care  concerning  things  not  seen  as 
yet,  preiMired  an  ark,"  etc.  Thus  ;^/iaTto-d€l9  warned  is 
taken  absolutely.*  The  things  not  seen  were  the  well-known 
contents  of  the  revelation  to  Noah,  Gen.  vi.  18  ff .,  as  appre* 
hended  by  Noah's  faith. 

Moved  with  fear  (evXxi/arfOeU).  N.  T.^.  Often  in  Class. 
ami  LXX.  See  on  eifXd/Seia  godly  fear^  ch.  v.  7.  The  A.  V. 
gives  the  impression  that  Noah  acted  under  the  influence  of 
fright.  Rev.  improves  on  this  a  little  by  rendering  godlif 
fear.  The  true  idea  is  pious  care^  a  reverent  circumspection 
with  regard  to  things  enjoined  by  God,  and  as  yet  unseen, 
yet  confidently  expected  on  the  strength  of  God's  word. 

Prepared  (^KaTeaxevcurcp),  Built  and  equipped.  See  on 
ch.  iii.  8. 

An  ark  (^klPohtov).  Originally,  a  wooden  chest.  Also  of 
the  ark  of  tlie  covenant  in  the  temple  and  tabernacle,  as 
ch.  ix.  4;  Apoc.  xi.  19  Of  Noah's  ark,  Matt.  xxiv.  38; 
L.  xvii.  27  ;  1  Pet.  iii.  20.    Adpva^  a  chest  is  found  in  Clas8. 

*  The  more  usual  interpretation  is  that  of  the  A.  V.  Bat,  as  was  long  ago 
discerned  by  Grotius,  and  is  clearly  Rhown  by  Weiss  and  yon  Soden.  the  sub- 
jective negative  nrfdina  agrees  much  better  with  the  subjective  quality  (rever- 
fnt  care)  than  with  the  announcement  of  an  objective  fact  (being  warned  of 
thingi,  etc). 


Ch.  XL]  THB  EPISTLE  TO   THE  UEBKEWS.  517 

in  the  same  sense.  Every  classical  scholar  will  recall  the 
charming  fragment  of  Simonides  on  Danae  and  her  infant 
son  Perseus  exposed  in  an  ark: 

'Ore  XdppoKi  h  dcudoX^  Awtfim 
Bp4tiM  wwhi»w  K,  r«  X. 

Also  of  the  ark  of  Deucalion,  the  mythic  Noah. 

By  the  which  (&'  ^).    By  ^th :  although  some  refer  it 

to  the  ark. 

He  condemned  the  world  Qtcardfcpivaf  rh/y  xSafAov).  His 
faith  was  exhibited  in  building  the  ark  on  the  mere  strength 
of  God's  declaration,  while  as  yet  there  were  no  signs  of  the 
flood.  By  his  faith  thus  manifested  he  announced  the  con- 
demnation of  the  world  to  destruction.  World  is  to  be  taken 
as  in  2  Pet.  ii.  5.  It  is  not  used  in  Hebrews  in  the  ethical 
sense  so  common  in  John  and  Paul — the  world  as  alien  from 
God.  The  meaning  of  the  statement  is  not  that  Noah  con- 
demned the  conduct  of  his  contemporaries  by  the  contrast 
presented  by  his  own  faith,  after  the  analogy  of  Matt.  xii.  41 ; 
Rom.  ii.  27. 

And  became  heir  (ical — iyAfero  K\fipov6fio^).  This  is  not 
an  independent  clause,  but  is  dependent  on  &*  ffi  by  which. 
It  is  connected  by  KaX  with  the  preceding  clause,  and  the  two 
clauses  are  parallel,  describing  the  lot  of  Noah  and  his  family. 
Became  heir  is  practically  =  became  partaker  of.  The  literal 
sense  of  heir  must  not  be  pressed.  Certainly  not  ^^nherited 
the  righteousness  of  Abel  and  Enoch.**  But  righteousness 
came  to  Noah  in  virtue  of  his  intimate  fellowship  with  God. 
Of  him  as  of  Enoch,  it  is  said  that  ^^he  walked  with  God,** 
Gen.  vi.  9.  Because  of  this  fellowship  he  was  a  son  of  God 
and  an  heir  of  righteousness. 

Of  the  righteousness  which  is  by  faith  (rffi  tcarh  irUmt 
huccLioavvrfsi).  In  the  O.  T.  Noah  is  the  first  to  receive  the 
title  of  ZUcM^  righteo%i9^  Gen.  vi.  9 ;  comp.  Ezek.  xiv.  14, 20 ; 
Sir.  xliv.  17.      Kar^  irUrriv^  lit.  according  to  failh^  comp 


518  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ch.  XL 

Matt.  ix.  29;  Tit.  i.  1,  4.  Paul  has  Sucaioavtnj  and  iikam 
from  or  out  of  faith  (he  tt^tcw?),  6y  faith  (&^  ^r/orap?), 
foutided  on  faith  (Arl  rg  w/irrci),  and  of  faith  (wUmm)^  none 
of  wliich  are  found  either  in  Hebrews  or  in  the  Pastorals. 
Kar^  irUmv  signifies  according  to  faith  as  a  standard ;  bat 
the  conception  at  bottom  is  not  essentially  different  from 
Paul's,  unless  there  be  imported  into  his  conception  the 
scholastic  fiction  of  imputed  righteousness.  Paul,  in  Rom. 
iv,  is  at  pains  to  show  that  the  Christian  conception  of  right- 
eouHuess  by  faith  has  its  parallel  in  Abraham,  and  that  the 
doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  is  no  new  thing.  Faith  is 
the  ground  and  the  germ  of  righteousness.  Our  writer  here 
lays  down  the  absolute  and  universal  standard  of  righteous- 
ness for  the  men  of  both  dispensations — according  to  faith. 
Hence,  like  Paul,  he  cites  the  words  of  Hab.  ii.  4.  See 
ch.  X.  88. 

8.  Paul  exhibits  faith  as  the  element  of  personal  right- 
eousness in  Abraham.  In  these  verses  (8-22)  faith,  accord- 
ing to  the  opening  definition  in  this  chapter,  is  that  assurance 
and  conviction  of  unseen  things  which  caused  Abraham  and 
the  patriarchs  to  rely  confidently  upon  the  future  fulfilment 
of  the  divine  promises. 

When  he  was  called  to  go  out — obeyed  (/raXov/Aeyo? 
^fcX^cti/  \nrriKova€v).  A.  V.  is  wrong.  'E^eXdcii/  to  go  out 
should  be  construed  with  {nrrfKovatv  obeyed^  and  KaXoufkonni 
being  called  is  to  be  taken  absolutely.  KaXou/iei/o?,  the  pres- 
ent participle,  indicates  Abraham's  immediate  obedience  to 
the  call :  while  he  was  yet  being  called.  Rend,  "when  he  was 
called  obeyed  to  go  out."  The  infinitive  explains  the  more 
general  obeyed^  by  specifying  that  in  which  his  obedience  was 
shown.  For  the  construction,  see  Acts  xv.  10 ;  1  Th.  i.  9 ; 
Heb.  V.  5.  For  the  narrative,  see  Gen.  xii.  1-6,  and  comp. 
Acts  vii.  2-5. 

Whither  he  went  Qrrov  epx^rai).  Note  the  picturesque 
continued  present  tense,  "whither  he  is  going,*'  as  of  Abra- 
ham on  his  journey. 


Ch.  XI.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  519 

9.  He  sojourned  in  (irafHpKfiatv  e^).  The  verb  lit.  to 
dwell  hende  or  among.  Udpouco^^  a  foreigner  dwelling  in  a 
state  without  rights  of  citizenship.  In  Class,  only  in  the 
sense  of  neighbour.  See  on  L.  xxiv.  18.  The  verb  ©f  rest 
with  the  preposition  of  motion  (only  here)  signifies  that  he 
went  into  the  land  and  dwelt  there.  Usuidly  with  iv  tn,  but 
sometimes  with  the  simple  accusative,  as  L.  xxiv.  18 ;  Gen. 
xvii.  8 ;  Ex.  vi.  4. 

Land  of  promise  (y^i/  t^  hraffiklasi).  Note  the  article, 
omitted  in  A.  V.,  the  promise :  the  land  which  was  desig- 
nated in  the  promise  of  God.  See  Gen.  xii.  7 ;  xiii.  16.  The 
phrase  N.  T.^.     There  is  no  corresponding  phrase  in  O.  T. 

Strange  (aXKorrptav).  Another  (aXXi;)  land  than  his  own. 
So  LXX,  Gen.  xv.  IS.     Comp.  Acts  vii.  6. 

In  tabernacles  (h  a/crfvdk^.  Or  tent$y  as  a  migratory 
people,  without  a  permanent  home. 

The  heirs  with  him  (r&v  <nwK\fipov6yMv).  Joint-heirs  or 
fellow-heirs.  ^LXX,  ^Class.  See  Rom.  viii.  17 ;  Eph.  iii.  6 ; 
1  Pet.  iii.  7.  The  three,  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  are 
mentioned  because  they  cover  the  entire  period  of  the  sojourn 
in  Canaan.  Faith  inspired  these  to  endure  patiently  their 
unsettled  life,  since  it  assured  them  of  a  permanent  home  in 
the  future. 

10.  For  he  looked  for  a  city  which  hath  foundations 

(ii^h^ero  yiip  rifv  roifi  OefieXiov^  jfj^ot/o-av  irdkiv}.  The  sense 
is  impaired  in  A.  V.  by  the  omission  of  the  articles,  the  city, 
the  foundations.  Passing  over  the  immediate  subject  of 
God's  promise  to  Abraham  —  his  inheritance  of  the  land  in 
which  he  sojourns — the  writer  fastens  the  patriarch's  faith 
upon  the  heavenly  fulfilment  of  the  promise — the  perfected 
community  of  God,  which,  he  assumes,  was  contained  in  the 
original  promise.  By  the  city  he  means  the  heavenly  Jeru- 
salem, and  his  statement  is  that  Abraham's  faith  looked  for- 


520  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THK  KBW  TESTAMENT.       [Gh.  XL 

ward  to  that.  The  idea  of  the  new  or  heavenly  Jemsalem 
was  familiar  to  the  Jews.  See  ch.  xii.  22 ;  xiii.  14 ;  GaL 
iv.  26;  Apoc.  iii.  12;  xxi.  2.  The  Rabbins  regarded  it  as 
an  actual  city.  For  the  faundatioM  comp.  Apoc.  xxi.  14. 
In  ascribing  to  the  patriarchs  an  assured  faith  in  heaven  as 
the  end  and  reward  of  their  wanderings,  the  writer  oversteps 
the  limits  of  history ;  but  evidently  imports  into  the  patri- 
archal faith  the  contents  of  a  later  and  more  developed  faith 
—  that  of  himself  and  his  readers. 

Builder  and  maker  (rex^fOnfi  icaX  irjfuovpyo^y  Textffnfi 
artificer,  architect.  Comp.  Acts  xix.  24  (note),  88 ;  Apoc. 
xviii.  22,  and  LXX,  1  Chron.  xxix.  5 ;  Cant.  vii.  1 ;  Wisd. 
viii.  6 ;  xiv.  2 ;  Sir.  ix.  17.  Arffuovpyo^  N.  T.^,  originally 
a  workman  for  the  pxthlic  (ififiof;')  ;  generally , /ram^,  builder. 
It  is  used  by  Xenophon  and  IMato  of  the  maker  of  the  world 
(Xen.  Mem,  i.  4,  9;  Plato,  Tim,  40  C  ;  Repuh.  580  A).  It 
was  appropriated  by  the  Neo-Platonists  as  the  designation  of 
God.  To  the  Gnostics,  the  Demiurge  was  a  limited,  second- 
ary God,  who  created  the  world ;  since  there  was  no  possi- 
bility of  direct  contact  between  the  supreme,  inconununicable 
God  and  the  visible  world. 

11.  Sarah.  Faith  prevailing  against  natural  impossibili- 
ties. See  Rom.  iv.  19-22.  Both  Abraham  and  Sarah  doubted 
at  first  (Gen.  xvii.  17 ;  xviii.  12) ;  but  both  became  per- 
suaded of  the  truthfulness  of  the  promise. 

Herself  (ovr^).     She  who  at  first  doubted. 

To  conceive  seed  (ctV  KorafioXffv  (nr^pfAaro^^.  In  every 
other  instance  in  N.  T.  Kara/SoXi]  means  foundation^  and 
appears  in  the  phrase  Kara^oXrj  xocfiov  foundation  of  the 
world.  Originally  it  means  thromng  down ;  hence,  the  depos- 
iting of  the  male  seed  in  the  womb.  The  sentence  may  be 
explained  either,  "received  strength  as  regarded  the  deposi- 
tion of  seed,"  to  fructify  it ;  or,  "received  strength  for  the 
foundation  of  a  posterity,"  air^pfia  being  rendered  in  accord- 


Ch.  XI.]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE   HEBREWS.  521 

ance  with  ch.  ii.  16 ;  xi.  18,  and  tccerafioXii  in  the  sense  of 
foundation^  as  everywhere  else  in  N.  T. 

And  was  delivered  of  a  child  when  she  was  past  age 

(/col  irapiL  tcaipiv  ^XucUk^.  Was  delivered  of  a  child  not  in 
the  text.  Koi  and  that.  Rend.  ** received  strength,"  etc., 
*^and  that  when  she  was  past  age."  Hapd^  tccupiv  ^XucUk^  lit. 
past  the  season  of  age.     For  ^XueCa  see  on  stature^  L.  xii.  25. 

12.  As  good  as  dead  (y€if€icp»iUifw).  Comp.  Rom.  iv.  19. 
As  good  a«  is  an  addition  of  A.  V.  The  Greek  reads  and 
that  a  dead  man.  Comp.  vAcpwrip  deadness  applied  to  Sarah, 
Rom.  iv.  19. 

Stars — sand.     See  Gren.  xxii.  17;  xxxii.  12. 

By  the  seashore  (wapii  ii  x^tXo9  r^  OaKdaoffii).  Lit.  bg 
the  lip  of  the  sea.  The  phrase  N.  T.^.  Very  often  in  LXX, 
as  Gen.  xxii.  17  ;  Ex.  xiv.  80 :  lip  of  a  river^  Gen.  xli.  17  ; 
Ex.  vii.  15 :  of  a  brooks  Dent.  ii.  86 ;  iii.  12 :  of  Jordan^ 
2  K.  ii.  13.  So  in  Class.  The  vigour  thus  supernaturally 
imparted  to  Abraham  does  not  appear  to  have  exhausted 
itself  in  the  generation  of  Isaac ;  since,  according  to  Gen. 
XXV.  2,  Abraham  became  by  Keturah  the  father  of  six  sons 
after  the  death  of  Sarah. 

13.  In  faith  (jcarii  wttmv).     See  on  ver.  7. 

Not  having  received  (/i^  tcofuadfiofoi).  See  on  ch.  x.  86. 
They  died  according  to  faith,  inasmuch  as  they  did  not  receive. 
They  died  under  the  reg^en  of  faith,  and  not  of  sight.  For 
the  phrase  koiuC^uv  r^  hraffyeXCaf;  to  receive  the  promises^ 
comp.  ch.  X.  36;  xi.  89. 

Having  seen  them  afar  off  (irSppssOty  airri,^  ISAmay     By 

faith ;  from  afar. 

Were  persuaded  of  them  and  embraced  them  (aaTrcuT- 
dfuvoi).     The  A.  v.  completely  destroys  the  beauty  of  this 


622  WOBD  STUDIES  IS  THE  KEW  TBBTAIOCNT.      [Cn.  XL 

verse.  It  reads  were  penmaded^  following  T.  R.  wuoB^n^ 
and  translates  a^wairdfkafoi  embraced^  which  is  a  sort  of  infer- 
ential rendering  of  the  original  sense  to  9alute  or  greet.  Bend, 
''having  seen  them  from  afar  and  greeted  them*' :  as  seamen 
wave  their  greeting  to  a  country  seen  far  off  on  the  horizon, 
on  which  they  cannot  land.  Liinemann  appropriately  quotes 
Virgil,  Aen.  iii.  522 : 

*«  Cam  proeol  obtcoros  ooUk  bmnfleinqQe  videnoi 
luliam.    luliam  primus  ooodamat  A  chalet, 
luliam  laeto  tocii  damore  nliiuiit.** 

Confessed  that  they  were  strangers  and  pilgrims  (^lo- 

Xay^qacarrei  Sri  (Afoi  tccd  wapeTrCSfjfuu}.  They  admitted  and 
accepted  the  fact  with  the  resignation  of  faiUi,  and  with  the 
assurance  of  future  rest.  Comp.  Gren.  xxiii.  4;  xxiv.  87; 
xxviii.  4;  xlvii.  9;  Ps.  xxxix.  12;  cxix.  19,  54.  FonrapewC- 
irffuu  safaumere^  see  on  1  Pet.  i.  1.  In  the  anonymous 
Epistle  to  Diognetus,  an  apologetic  letter,  probably  of  the 
second  century,  and  one  of  the  gems  of  early  Christian  litera- 
ture, occur  the  following  words  concerning  Christians  :  ^  They 
inhabit  their  own  country,  but  as  sojourners :  they  take  part 
in  all  things  as  citizens,  and  endure  all  things  as  aliens :  every 
foreign  country  is  theirs,  and  every  country  is  foreign.** 

14.  Declare  plainly  (ifufxivt^ownp).  ^P.  See  on  J.  xiv.  21. 
OccBfiionally  in  LXX.     Rend,  ^^make  it  manifest." 

They  seek  a  country  (irarplha  hn^rrrovaiv).  The  verb 
in  fr)und  in  LXX,  chiefly  in  the  sense  of  seeking  after  Grod  or 
another  deity.  See  2  K.  i.  3,  6 ;  iii.  11 ;  viii.  8  ;  xxii.  18  ; 
2  Chron.  xviii.  6.  Comp.  hri^rp-ovfiAnj  7rJXi9  a  city  eaught 
after  (Zion),  Isa.  Ixii.  12.  Harpk  is  a  native  country ;  a 
fatherland.  Only  here  and  in  Gospels  and  Acts.  Quite 
often  in  LXX. 

15.  If  they  had  been  mindful  (el  ifiprjfulv€tH>v).  In  N.  T. 
habitually  remember.  So  invariably  in  LXX.  The  meaning 
here  is,  that  if,  in  their  declaration  (ver.  14)  that  they  were 


Ch.  XI.]  THE  EPISTLB  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  523 

seeking  a  country,  they  had  called  to  mind  the  country  from 
which  they  came  out,  they  could  have  returned  thither,  so 
that  it  is  evident  that  they  did  not  mean  that  country.* 

To  have  returned  (aveurafi^).  Rend,  ''to  return.**  Lit. 
bend  their  way  hack  again  (avd). 

16.  Now  they  desire  (vvv  op^ovrai).  Nw  now  is  logical : 
as  the  case  now  stands.  For  opdyovrai  derive^  see  on  1  Tim. 
iii.  1. 

Is  not  ashamed  (ovic  hraurxyvenu).  Because  they  have 
commended  themselves  to  God  by  their  faith,  so  that  he 
acknowledges  them  as  his  own.  Comp.  ch.  ii.  11;  Mk. 
viii.  28,  38 ;  Rom.  i.  16 ;  2  Tim.  i.  8, 16. 

To  be  called  their  Qod  (0«d9  hnKaKMoBm  oMni).  Lit. 
to  be  mmamed.  Comp.  Acts  iv.  36 ;  x.  5, 18,  82.  Grod  was 
called  the  God  of  Abraham,  of  Isaac,  and  of  Jacob.  See 
Ex.  iii.  6. 

For  he  hath  prepared  for  them  a  city  (fyroliJLaa^p  yhp 
ainoV;  iriXxv).  Comp.  Matt.  xxv.  34 ;  J.  xiv.  2 ;  Apoc.  xxi.  2. 
City  is  significant,  as  showing  that  the  fulfilment  of  God's 
promise  lies  in  introducing  them  into  the  perfection  of  social 
life.     Comp.  Apoc.  iii.  12 ;  xxi.  2, 10 ;  xxii.  19. 

*  Some  interpreten  render  i$uni/t6p€»ow  mentioned,  citing  1  Th.  t  3,  and 
Heb.  xi.  22,  where  the  verb  is  followed  by  wtpl  with  the  genitire.  In  both 
these  cases,  howerer,  the  meaning  remember  is  qoite  possible.  Grammatical 
testimony  is  confusing.  There  are  instances  in  Class,  where  the  Terb  signi- 
fies mention,  as  Plato,  Legg.  646  B,  with  accosatiTS :  also  with  r^pl  and  geni- 
tive. Winer  says  positiTely  that  verbs  of  making  mention  do  not  take  a 
genitive  in  the  N.  T.  (xxx,  10,  c).  On  the  other  hand,  the  verb  in  the  sense 
of  remember,  though  mostly  with  the  genitive,  is  sometimes  found  with  the 
acmsative,  as  Matt  xvl.  9 ;  1  Th.  ii.  9 ;  2  Tim.  iL  8.  So  in  Class.  Neither 
Clruw.  nor  N.  T.  furnishes  any  sufficient  reason  why  the  verb  in  Heb.  xi  2S 
should  not  be  rendered  remembered,  Utpl  is  constantly  used  in  connection 
with  mental  operations,  as  ^porr/^cr.  The  kindred  verb  fufuHjano^ai  is  used 
with  Ttpl  and  the  frsnitive  roeaninic  remember:  m^  Tob.  Iv.  1,  and  cnmo. 
Homer,  Od  vii,  192 ;  Hdt.  i,  Sfl :  Ix,  4''> ;  Plato,  PhUeb.  81  A. 
mrmnrial  is  found  with  W9pi  and  genitive,  Ex.  xxviiL  12. 


524  WOBD  STUDIES  IK  THE  KEW  TB8TA1CENT.      [Cte.  XL 

17.  When  he  was  tried  offered  up  (irpoaanipox^  wmpa(- 
ofievo^).  The  full  sense  of  the  statement  is  missed  in  A.V. 
The  meaning  is  that  while  the  trial  is  yet  in  progreu^  Abraham 
hath  already  offered  up  his  son,  before  the  trial  has  come  to 
an  issue,  by  the  act  of  his  obedient  will,  through  fiuth  in 
God.     Comp.  Jas.  ii.  21. 

He  that  had  received  (6  hvate^dijyGWi).  The  verb  only 
here  and  Acts  xxviii.  7.  It  means  to  accept;  to  welcome  and 
entertain.     So  Rev.  gladly  received. 

Accounting  (Xo7Mr(£Mciw)«  See  on  1  Pet.  v.  12 ;  Rom.iy.S; 

viii.  18. 

From  whence  (Mep).  Rend,  wherrfore:  because  of  \nB 
faith  in  God's  power  and  truthfulness.  ''OOevy  though  occas- 
ionally in  a  local  sense  in  N.  T.,  as  Matt.  xii.  44 ;  L.  xi.  24 ; 
Acts  xiv.  26,  is  much  more  conmion  in  the  logical  or  causal 
sense,  wherrfore^  on  which  account.  So  in  every  other 
instance  in  Hebrews.  In  the  local  sense  it  would  mean 
from  the  dead. 

Also  he  received  him  in  a  figure  (avroy  teal  iv  wapafioli^ 
i/cofiiaaTo).  Kal  marks  the  receiving  as  answering  to  the 
faith.  As  Abraham  believed  in  Grod's  power  to  restore 
Isaac,  so,  because  of  his  faith,  he  also  received  him.  For 
iKOfiiaaro  received  see  on  ch.  x.  36.  'Ei/  wapafioXy  in  a  parO' 
ble.  Since  the  sacrifice  did  not  take  place  as  a  literal  slaugh- 
ter, there  could  not  be  a  literal  restoration  from  death.  There 
was  a  real  offering  in  Abraham's  will,  but  not  a  real  death  of 
Isaac.  Isaac's  death  took  place  symbolically,  in  the  sacrifice 
of  the  ram :  correspondingly,  the  restoration  was  only  a 
symbolic  restoration  from  the  dead.  Some  expositors,  among 
whom  is  Westcott,  explain  thus:  Abraham  accounted  that  God 
was  able  to  raise  Isaac  from  the  dead,  from  which  he  received 
him  at  birth,  in  that  Isaac  sprung  from  one  dead  (y€v&cpc»itdvoVy 
ver.  12).     This  is  extremely  laboured  and  artificial.* 

•  The  yarieties  of  interpretAtlnn  pfp  enclless.  A  list  of  the  principal  OOM 
may  be  foimd  in  Weitcott    Ooe  Bbould  be  noticed,  aoooxding  to  which  |p 


Cb.  XI.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  526 

20.  Blessed  (evKiiyfftrep).     See  on  J.  xii.  18. 

Concerning  things  to  come  (/col  irtpl  tuXKivmv).  A.V. 
omits  icaX  which  gives  aii  emphasis  to  the  following  words. 
Isaac  pronounced  a  blessing,  and  that  concerning  things  to 
come ;  things  beyond  the  lifetime  of  Jacob  and  Esau.  See 
Gen.  xxvii.  29, 39.  The  blessing  was  an  act  of  faith.  Isaac's 
confidence  in  the  power  of  his  blessing  to  convey  the  good 
which  it  promised  was  *^  the  assurance  of  things  hoped  for, 
the  conviction  of  things  not  seen,"  founded  on  the  promise 
of  Gen.  xvii.  6. 

21.  When  he  died  (airoOvr^Ktov).  Rend,  '^when  dying.  ** 
(t  is  quite  superfluous  to  explain  this  as  emphasising  the 
strength  in  contrast  with  the  weakness  of  approaching  death ; 
or  that,  in  the  birth  of  Joseph's  two  sons  before  Jacob's  death, 
Jacob  discerned  a  monition  to  adopt  them  into  the  direct  line 
of  his  own  sons.  The  meaning  is  simply  that  these  events 
took  place  in  Jacob's  last  hours. 

Blessed  each  (Jbcaarov  evXdyriaev).  See  Gen.  xlviii.  17-20. 
Each  son  received  a  separate  and  distinct  blessing,  although 
Joseph  had  expected  only  one  common  blessing  for  both. 
Jacob's  discernment  of  faith  appeared  in  this,  as  in  the  pre- 
cedence assigned  to  the  younger  son. 

And  worshipped  leaning  on  the  top  of  his  staff  (/col 
^poa€icwqa€V  inrl  to  cucpov  rrfi  pdfiSov  airrov).  From  tlie  LXX 
of  Gen.  xlvii.  31.  It  seems  to  have  been  loosely  included  by 
our  writer  among  the  incidents  of  Jacob's  last  hours  (jairoO' 
vri(Tic€dv)^  although  it  belongs  to  a  different  part  of  the  nar- 

wa/MpoXi  is  explained  in  venture  or  ri»k^  from  wapafidXKtiw  to  throw  beeide^ 
to  expoee.  The  verb  sometimee  has  this  meaning  in  Class.,  and  once  in  LXX, 
2  Mace.  iy.  38 ;  but  there  is  no  instance  of  the  noun  rapafioX^  in  that  sense, 
either  in  N.  T.,  LXX,  or  Class.  Thayer  cites  one  or  two  doubtful  cases  in 
later  Greek.  According  to  this  interpretation  the  clause  would  read,  **  from 
whence  he  receired  him  in  risking  him.'*  Lttnemann  explains :  **  on  which 
account  he  receired  him  on  the  ground  of  the  giving  «p,*'  taking  wmpmfieMi  ia 
the  sense  of  ammender. 


526  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW   TESTAMJENT.       [CSk.  XL 

rative.  The  promise  given  by  Joseph  to  remove  his  father's 
remains  to  the  family  sepulchre  may  have  been  regarded 
as  preparatory  to  the  blessing,  or  introduced  in  order  to 
emphasise  the  devotional  character  of  the  entire  proceeding. 
The  words  upon  the  head  of  his  staff  are  from  the  LXX; 
the  Hebrew  being  ^^  Jacob  bowed  himself  upon  tke  head 
of  the  bed.''  Comp.  1  K.  i.  47.  According  to  its  vowel-points 
the  same  Hebrew  word  signifies  either  staff  or  bed.  The 
LXX  has  chosen  the  former,  and  renders  by  /M^3So9  staff. 
According  to  the  Hebrew,  the  meaning  is  that  Jacob,  having 
been  sitting  during  the  conversation,  lay  down  when  it  was 
finished,  probably  overcome  by  weakness,  and  breathing  a 
prayer  as  he  fell  back  on  his  pillow.* 

22.  When  he  died  (reTieurAv).  Comp.  Gen.  1.  26,  LXX. 
The  verb  means  to  finish  or  close^  with  life  understood. 
Always  in  this  sense  in  N.  T.  See  Matt.  ii.  19;  ix.  18; 
L.  vii.  2,  etc.  Never  used  by  Paul.  Rend.  ^  when  near  his 
end." 

Made  mention  of  (wepl — ifipfffuiveuaep).  See  on  ver.  15. 
A.V.  heLS  rememhered  in  marg.  Remembered  is  appropriate 
here.  Joseph  on  his  death-bed  remembered  the  promise  of 
God  to  give  the  land  of  Canaan  to  the  seed  of  Abraham 
(Gen.  xii.  7 ;  xiii.  15 ;  xv.  7),  and  also  the  prediction  to 
Abraham  that  his  descendants  should  pass  four  hundred 
years  in  bondage  in  a  strange  land,  and  should  afterward  be 
brought  out  thence,  Gen.  xv.  13,  14. 

The  departing  of  the  children  of  Israel  (rrj^  i^6hov  r&» 
vla)p  'laparjX).     "EfoSo?  only  here,   L.   ix.   31   (note)  and 

*  A  formidable  mass  of  hermeneutic  rubbish  has  accumulated  about  this 
passage :  for  instance,  that  the  act  of  Jacob  implied  the  worship  of  the  staff ; 
or  that  the  staff  was  Joseph's,  and  that  the  patriarch  paid  formal  reTerence 
to  the  staff  as  a  tribute  to  Joseph's  position,  a  view  common  among  the 
Fathers ;  or  that  worship  was  paid  to  some  image  or  symbol  of  power  on 
the  head  of  the  staff,  from  which  has  been  drawn  the  justification  of  image- 
worship. 


Cb.  XI.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  527 

2  Pet.  i.  15  (note).  'Ot  viol  ^lapaifX  is  one  of  several  phrases 
in  N.  T.  denoting  the  chosen  people.  There  are  also  Jum$€ 
(oLco9)  and  people  (Xao^^  of  Itraelf  and  Itrael  of  O-od^  and 
Israel  according  to  ike  flesh. 

And  gave  commandment  (^KaX  ivereCkaio).  Kal  and  so; 
in  consequence  of  his  remembering  the  prophecy  of  the 
exodus.  The  verb  indicates  a  specific  injunction  (^yroXi;). 
See  on  1  Tim.  vi.  14. 

23.  Of  his  parents  ({nr6  r&v  irardfHdv  avrov).  Lit.  by  his 
fathers.  Comp.  Ex.  ii.  2.  Tlar^pe^  fathers^  according  to  a 
late  Greek  usage,  is  employed  like  yovek  parents.  Similarly 
the  Lat.  patres  and  socerij  including  both  parents,  or  father 
and  mother  in  law. 

Proper  (curreiop).  Only  here  and  Acts  vii.  20,  on  which 
see  note.     Rend,  "comely." 

Commandment  (^Udrayfjui).    N.  T.^.    Rend«  "mandate." 

24.  When  he  was  come  to  years  (^fi^a^  yevSfieiw}.  Lit. 
having  become  great.  Comp.  LXX,  Ex.  ii.  11.  Often  in  the 
phrase  fuicpol  teal  fieydKoi  small  and  great;  young  and  old. 
See  Acts  xxvi.  22 ;  Heb.  viii.  11 ;  Apoc.  xi.  8 ;  xiii.  16,  etc. 

25.  To  suffer  affliction  with  QavPtcatcovxArOai).  N.  T.^ 
^LXX,  ^Class.  The  verb  tcaicovxeiv  to  treat  ill,  ver.  87; 
ch.  xui.  3;  LXX,  1  K.  ii.  26;  xi.  39.  Rend.  ^^  to  be  evil 
entreated." 

Than  to  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  sin  for  a  season  (^  irpSa-- 
tcaipov  ^€iv  ifiafrria^  airJkavaip).  Lit.  than  to  have  temporary 
enjoyment  of  sin.  The  emphasis  is  first  on  temporary  and 
then  on  sin.  For  airtlXavai^  ef^'oyment,  see  on  1  Tim.  vi.  17. 
Upda/caipo^  for  a  seasony  temporary,  rare  in  N.  T.  ^LXX. 
Once  in  Paul,  see  2  Cor.  iv.  18. 


628  WORD  STUDIES  IN  TWE  NEW  TE8TAMKNT.       [Cr.  XL 

20.  Esteeming  the  reproach  of  Christ  (JfpiaaiMGWi  tw 
ayaSuTfiov  Tot;  Xpumu).  The  participle  gives  the  reason  for 
his  choice  of  auction  instead  of  sin:  9inee  he  esteemed. 
^*  The  reproach  of  Christ'*  is  the  reproach  peculiar  to  Christ; 
such  as  he  endured.  The  writer  uses  it  as  a  current  form 
of  expression,  colouring  the  story  of  Moses  with  a  Christ- 
ian tinge.  Comp.  Rom.  xv.  3;  Heb.  xiii.  18;  2  Cor.  i.  5; 
Col.  i.  24;  Philip,  iii.  14;  1  Pet.  iv.  14.  The  phrase  is 
applied  to  Moses  as  enduring  at  the  hands  of  the  Egyptians 
and  of  the  rebellious  Israelites  the  reproach  which  any  faith- 
ful servant  of  God  will  endure,  and  which  was  endured  in  a 
notable  way  by  Christ. 

He  had  respect  unto  (JnripKetrof  cw).  N.  T.^.  Lit.  he 
looked  away  (from  the  treasures  of  Egypt,  etc)  WfUo  the 
recompense. 

27.  He  forsook  Egypt  (jcariluvey  "Atyvwrop).  After  he 
had  killed  the  Egyptian,  Ex.  ii.  15.  Not  in  the  general 
exodus.  The  historical  order  of  events  is  preserved:  the 
flight  to  Midian,  the  Passover,  the  Exodus,  the  passage  of 
the  Red  Sea. 

The  wrath  (top  OvfMv).     Only  here  in  Hebrews.     See  on 

J.  iii.  3t). 

He  endured  (iKapr^prjaev).   N.  T.^.  Occasionally  in  LXX. 

Often  in  Class.     He  was  stanch  and  steadfaet. 

As  seeing  him  who  is  invisible  (t6v  adparop  ck  Sp&p). 

Since  he  saw,  etc.  The  emphasis  is  on  invisible^  pointing 
back  to  the  introductory  definition  of  faith.  The  word  is 
used  of  God,  Col.  i.  15;  1  Tim.  i.  17. 

28.  Kept  the  passover  (Trerroirf/cep  to  irdaxa^.  Rend. 
"hath  instituted  the  passover."  The  perfect  tense  indicates 
the  continued  significance  of  the  service  down  to  the  time  of 
writing.  The  phrase  woielp  to  irdtrxa  in  N.  T.  only  here  and 
Matt.  xxvi.  18.     The  usual  N.  T.  phrase  is  ^^Iv  to  irdaya 


Ch.  XI.]  THE  EPI8TLB  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  529 

to  eat  the  Passover.  See  Matt.  xxvi.  17 ;  Mk.  xiv.  12 ; 
L.  xxii.  11.  Iloicty  to  irdaxa  unquestionably  means  to  keep 
or  celebrate  the  Passover,  as  Matt.  xxvi.  18 ;  Ex.  xii.  48 ; 
Num.  ix.  2, 4,  6, 10, 13 ;  Deut.  xvi.  1 :  but  the  verb  is  elastic. 
The  corresponding  Hebrew  verb  TfffJf^  among  other  mean- 
ings, signifies  to  create  (Gen.  i.  7 ;  ii.  2) ;  to  establish  (Eccl. 
ii.  5,  6,  8);  to  constitute  (1  K.  xii.  31,  32);  to  make  ready  or 
prepare  (Judg.  xiii.  16;  to  prepare  as  a  sacrifice  (Ps.  Ixvi.  15), 
In  all  these  instances  it  is  rendered  in  LXX  by  Troielv,  In 
N.  T.  we  find  iroieip  apurrov  or  Beiirvov  to  prepare  a  breakfast 
or  dinner.  Accordingly  iroidv  may  properly  be  used  here  of 
the  instituting  of  the  Passover.  Moreover  the  two  following 
clauses  clearly  indicate  that  the  writer  is  referring  to  the 
original  institution. 

The  sprinkling  of  blood  (rifv  irp6aywnv  rot)  oT/bMrro^). 
npdax^av;  affusion^  N.  T.^,  ^LXX,  ^Class.  From  wpoaxeip 
to  pour  on.  In  the  post-Exodus  legislation  the  blood  which, 
in  the  original  institution,  was  sprinkled  on  the  door-posts 
and  lintels  (Ex.  xii.  22),  was  thrown  upon  the  altar  (Deut. 
xvi.  6),  and  Trpoax^lv  in  LXX  is  used  of  this  act  almost 
without  exception.  See  Ex.  xxiv.  6 ;  xxix.  16 ;  Lev.  i.  5, 11 ; 
iii.  2,  8,  18,  etc. 

Lest  he  that  destroyed  the  first-born  should  touch  them 

(ii/a  fi^  6  oKo6p€wov  ri,  irpwroroica  OlrfQ  airr&v).  Rend.  ^^  that 
the  destroyer  of  the  first-bom  should  not  touch  them,"  a 
rendering  which  brings  out  more  sharply  the  preventive 
purpose  of  the  sprinkling  of  blood.  *0\o6p€U€iv  to  destroy^ 
N.  T.^,  ^Class.  'O  oKodpeiHav  is  used  in  the  narrative  of 
Ex.  xi.  23  for  the  destroying  angel.  The  kindred  noun  oXo- 
Opemtfi  destroyer  (^LXX,  ^Class.)  occurs  in  1  Cor.  x.  10  of 
the  plague  in  Num.  xvi.  46-50.  For  Blrfjf  should  touchy  see 
on  Col.  ii.  21. 

29.  Passed  through  (hUfiriaap).  Only  three  times  in 
N.  T.  See  L.  xvi.  26 ;  Acts  xvi.  9.  The  simple  ficUimv  does 
not  occur  in  N.  T. 

VOL.  IT.  —  84 


580  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Gs.  XL 

The  Red  Sea  (i^y  *Epv0pkv  BdXaaaop).  Called  bj  the 
Israelites  the  sea^  Ex.  xiv.  2,  9, 16,  21,  28,  etc.,  and,  specially, 
the  sea  of  Suph  (judge^  9eed$).  In  LXX  always  as  heie 
except  Judg.  xi.  16,  where  it  is  OaXouraa  21^  i.e.  S^h.  By 
the  Greeks  the  name  was  at  first  applied  to  the  whole  ocean 
from  the  coast  of  Ethiopia  to  the  island  of  Taprobana  or 
Ceylon.  Afterward,  when  they  learned  of  the  existence  of 
an  Indian  Ocean,  they  applied  the  name  merely  to  the  sea 
below  Arabia,  and  to  the  Arabian  and  Persian  g^ulfs. 

Which  the  Egyptians  assaying  to  do  (^  weipap  Xafidpref 
Of  *Aijvimoi).  The  A.V.  has  <is$aying^  according  to  the 
older  English  usage.  Assatf  is  now  chiefly  used  of  the  test- 
ing of  precious  metals ;  but  in  the  sense  of  try  it  is  found  in 
Piers  Ploughman,  Gower,  Chaucer,  Shakespeare.  Lit.  of 
which  (%ed)  the  Egyptians  having  taken  trial.  The  phrase 
welpop  Xofjifidveiv  to  take  trial  occurs  also  in  LXX,  Dent. 
xxviii.  56.     In  N.  T.  only  here  and  ver.  86. 

Were  drowned  (^tcareirJOrfaav).  Lit.  were  drunk  down. 
See  on  Matt,  xxiii.  24.  Comp.  LXX,  Ex.  xy.  4,  and  in  N.  T. 
1  Cor.  XV.  54 ;  2  Cor.  ii.  7 ;  v.  4. 

30.  Compassed  about  Q/cvK\M06rra^.  Comp.  L.  xxi.  20; 
J.  X.  24.     n\ 

31.  The  harlot  Rahab  C^aafi  17  irSpinj}.  See  Josh,  ii; 
vi.  17,  and  comp.  Jas.  ii.  25.  Kahab's  occupation  is  stated 
without  mincing,  and  the  lodging  of  the  spies  at  her  house 
was  probably  not  a  matter  of  accident.  Very  amusing  are 
the  efforts  of  some  earlier  expositors  to  evade  the  fact  of  a 
harlot's  faiths  by  rendering  iropvrj  landlady. 

Perished  not  with  (ou  avpaircbXero).  N.  T.^.  In  LXX 
see  Num.  xvi.  26 ;   Ps.  xxv.  9 ;  xxvii.  3. 

Them  that  believed  not  (joU  a7r€i0i]aaaip).  Rend. "them 
that  were  disobedient.''      Simple  disbelief  is  expressed  by 


Ch.  XI.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  531 

airurrelPy  airurrla :  disbelief  as  it  manifests  itself  in  disobedi- 
ence, by  aireiOeiP,  ^Aweiffeip  is  awurreip  on  its  active  side. 
See  on  J.  iii.  36,  and  comp.  Heb.  iii.  18;  iv.  6, 11 ;  Rom.  xi. 
30,  32,  contrasting  with  Rom.  xi.  20,  23.  ^AireiOeip  here 
describes  the  failure  to  be  persuaded  that  God  had  given  the 
land  to  the  Israelites,  and  the  consequent  refusal  to  sur- 
render Jericho.     Rahab*s  faith  is  shown  Josh.  ii.  9-11. 

When  she  had  received  the  spies  {Se^afiAnf  ro^  tcara- 
a/cSwov^).  Rend.  ** having  received."  For  this  sense  of 
friendly  reception  as  a  guest  see  L.  x.  8, 10.  Kardatcoiro^ 
a  %py,  N.  T.<>.     LXX,  Gen.  xlii.  9, 11, 14 ;  1  Sam.  xxvi.  4. 

With  peace  (^iier  eipripryi).  The  phrase  only  here  and 
Acts  XV.  33.  Quite  often  in  LXX,  as  Gen.  xv.  15 ;  xxvi.  29 ; 
Ex.  xviii.  23 ;  Deut.  xx.  20 ;  Judg.  viii.  9.  In  N.  T.  iv 
€lpriPfi  in  peace  (Acts  xvi.  86;  Jas.  ii.  16):  tk  tlpi^prfp  into 
peace  (Mk.  v.  34 ;  L.  vii.  60 ;  viii.  48);  both  these  very  often 
in  LXX.  Rahab  received  the  spies  without  enmity,  and  did 
not  allow  them  to  suffer  harm  from  others.  An  interesting 
parallel  is  furnished  by  Dante,  Purg.  ii.  99,  in  the  case  of 
the  pilot-angel  who  conveys  souls  to  the  shore  of  Purgatory. 

**  He,  sooth  to  say,  for  three  months  past  has  taken 
Whoever  wished  to  enter,  vtUh  all  peace  "  (without  interposing  any 
obstacle.)* 

32.  To  tell  QSitfyovfiepop^.  Lit.  the  time  will  fail  me  telling: 
if  I  tell.  See  on  Mk.  ix.  9,  and  comp.  Mk.  v.  16 ;  L.  viii.  39 ; 
ix.  10 ;  Acts  ix.  27,  and  hi^rg^aK  narrative  (A.  V.  declaration^ 
L.  i.  1. 

Qideon,  etc.  These  names  of  the  four  judges  are  not 
enumerated  in  chronological  order.  Samuel  is  closely  con- 
nected with  David  as  in  the  history,  but  with  re  icaX  as  intro- 
ducing the  new  order  of  the  prophets. 

*  **  Yeramente  da  tie  mesi  egli  ha  tolto 
Chi  ha  Toluto  entrar  con  tuUapace,*^ 


d32  WOBD  STCDIES  IS  THE  SHEW  TBffTAMK3rr.      (Gk.  JL 

33.  Through  faith  (&«  irioTew).  Thiii  fonnola  is  now 
Kubstitated  for  the  instrumental  dative  irirm  hyfaUk,  The 
reason  for  the  change  cannot  perhaps  be  aceuratelj  fonniiIated> 
but  will  be  appreciated  by  one  who/e^Zt  the  Greek  idicnm  as 
better  suiting  the  more  general  illustrations  which  follow. 

Subdued  kingdoms  {Kanrimvlaayro  fioffChjtiafi).  The  verb 
N.  T.^,  ^LXX,  signifies  fought  down  ;  overcame  by  struggle, 
as  Barak,  Judg.  iv ;  Gideon,  Judg.  vii ;  Jephthah,  Judg.  xi ; 
David,  2  Sam.  v. 

Wrought  righteousness  (fifrfcuramo  hucawawniv).  For  the 
phraHC  (;omp.  Acts  x.  35.  Referring  not  merely  to  their 
persfmal  virtues,  but  to  the  public  exercise  of  these  as  leaders, 
as  2  Sam.  viii.  15 ;  1  Chron.  xviii.  14 ;  1  Sam.  xii.  4.  Faith 
showed  itself  in  the  association  of  righteousness  with  power. 
Comp.  Isa.  ix.  7;  liv.  14;  IK.  x.  9. 

Obtained  promises  (jhrentxpv  iwayytki&ii).  See  on  ch. 
vi.  15. 

Stopped  (i^pal^av).  The  verb  means  to  fence  in;  block  up. 
Rare  in  N.  T.  See  Rom.  iii.  19 ;  2  Cor.  xi.  10,  and  comp. 
<f>payfuk  a  fence^  Matt.  xxi.  33 ;  Eph.  ii.  14.  Occasionally 
in  LXX,  an  Job  xxxviii.  8;  Prov.  xxi.  13;  Zech.  xiv.  5. 
The  reference  is  no  doubt  to  Daniel,  Dan.  vi.  22;  comp. 
1  Mace.  ii.  60. 

34.  Quenched  the  violence  of  fire  (eafieaav  Bwafup  irvpii). 

Rend.  *'the  power  of  fire."     Reference  to  the  three  Hebrews, 
Dan.  iii ;  comp.  1  Mace.  ii.  59. 

Edge  of  the  sword  (arofiara  fiaxdlpv^^.  Lit.  mouthB  of  the 
sword.  See  on  ch.  iv.  12.  The  plural  edges  indicates  fre- 
quent assaults. 

Out  of  weakness  Qairo  aadeveia^).  Rend,  ^^from  weak- 
ness."    i*'or  the  sense  of  ctTro  from^  see  L.  v.  15.    The  mean* 


Cu.  XI.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  533 

ing  is  not  confined  to  sickness,  as  in  the  case  of  Hezekiah 
(2  K.  XX ;  Isa.  xxxviii).  The  main  reference  is  probably  to 
Samson,  Judg.  xvi.  28  ff . 

The  armies  of  the  aliens  (wapefifioXii^  iXKorpiup).  Omit 
both  the' 8  in  translation.  For  wapefifioXii^  see  on  Acts  xxi.  34. 
Very  often  in  LXX.     Aliens^  foreign  foes  or  invaders. 

35.  Women.  The  recorded  raisings  from  the  dead  are 
mostly  for  women.  See  1  K.  xvii.  17  flF.;  2  K.  iv.  17  flF. 
Comp.  L.  yii.  11  ff.;  J.  xi;  Acts  ix.  The  reference  here  is 
to  the  first  two. 

Raised  to  life  again  (i(  avcuTraafwT).  Rend.  ^^  by  a  resur- 
rection'*; and  for  the  force  of  ^f  comp.  Rom.  i.  4.* 

Were  tortured  (^irvfMJwaviffOfjaav).  N.  T.^.  LXX  once, 
1  Sam.  xxi.  13.  Originally  to  heat  a  drum  (rvfAiravov). 
Hence  to  beat^  to  cudgel.  The  A.  V.  of  1  Sam.  xxi.  13, 
describing  the  feigned  madness  of  David,  renders  hv/Awdvi^ev 
^^he  scrabbled  on  the  doors  of  the  gate,*'  meaning  that  he  beat 
the  doors  like  a  madman.  Tvfjujravop  means  a  drum  or  a 
drumstick  ;  hence  a  cudgel ;  so  Aristoph.  PluJt.  476,  where  it 
is  associated  with  kv^v  a  piUory.  Comp.  2  Mace.  vi.  19, 28. 
The  meaning  here  is,  were  beaten  to  death  with  club$^  the  word 
being  used  to  represent  cruel  torture  in  general. 

Not  accepting  deliverance  (ov  wpoaSe^dfAOfoi  rifp  iiroXtrrp^- 
aip).  For  the  verb,  see  on  ch.  x.  34.  The  (t^p)  deliverance 
offered  at  the  price  of  denying  their  faith.  See  2  Mace.  vi. 
21-27. 

A  better  resurrection  (/cpe^rroiw  hvaard^r&a/fi).  Better 
than  a  resurrection  like  those  granted  to  the  women  above 
mentioned,  which  gave  merely  a  continuation  of  life  on  earth. 
Comp.  2.  Mace.  vii.  9, 14. 

*  Not  as  Westcott:  '*  Resurrection,  which  is  the  transition  from  death  to 
life,  is  that  out  of  which  the  departed  were  received.'* 


534  WORD  STCDISB  DT  THK  IfKW  TEBIAMEST.      [Gk.  XL 

3«.  Of  criMl  mockifigs  (i^oifffOmi).  N.  T.^  ^^Claas. 
Rare  in  LXX.  Cruel  is  an  insertion  of  A.  V.  BemL  ^of 
mockings."  ^Eftfwaiffpiopii  modkery  (^LXX,  ^HTIaas.)  is  fonnd 
2  Pet.  iii«  3  (note) :  and  iiiiraiscnf:  mocker  or  eeoffer^  2  Pet. 
iii.  3 ;  Jade  18.  *Efifwai^  to  mock  is  qoite  frequent  in  the 
Synoptic  Gospels,  and  occurs  also  in  LXX. 

37.  They  were  ttoffiad  (tkiBdoOiiaaw).  A  characteristic 
Jewish  punishment.  See  2  Chron.  zxiy.  20 ;  Matt,  xxiii.  37; 
J.  X.  31 ;  Acts  Y.  26 ;  vii.  59 ;  xiv.  19.  The  verb  Xi0o/3oXdM 
is  also  used  in  Matthew,  Luke,  and  Acts,  and  once  in  this 
epistle,  zii.  20. 

Were  sawn  asunder  (hrpiarOffoatf).  N.  T.^.  As  Isaiah, 
according  to  tradition. 

Were  tempted  (e^apdadrioav).  If  the  reading  is  correct^ 
which  seems  probable,  the  reference  is  probably  to  induce- 
ments offered  them  to  abandon  their  loyaJty  to  Grod.  It  has 
seemed  to  many  out  of  place,  because  occurring  in  the  midst 
of  a  list  of  different  forms  of  violent  death.* 

38.  Of  whom  the  world  was  not  worthy  (Jy  oim  ^v  afto^ 

6  xSofjus}.  This  clause  falls  into  the  series  of  participles 
which  precedes  it ;  the  form  of  the  relative  sentence  being 
adopted  because  of  the  lack  of  a  proper  participial  phrase  to 
express  the  statement.  At  the  same  time  it  prepares  the  way 
for  the  following  clause  in  which  the  participial  construction 
is  resumed.  Rend.  "  they  went  about  in  sheepskins  and  goat- 
skins, being  destitute,  afflicted,  evil-entreated,  men  of  whom 
the  world  was  not  worthy,  wandering  in  deserts,"  etc.  By  the 
world  (/c6<rfio^^  is  not  meant  the  corrupt  world,  as  in  John  and 
Paul  (see  on  ver.  7),  but  the  world  considered  as  an  economy 
which  was  unworthy  of  these,  because  ruled  by  sense  and  not 
by  faith.     Their  plane  of  life  was  higher. 

*  Accordingly  a  variety  of  readings  has  been  proposed :  hrvp^&Briaaw^  ^pV- 
^ar,  ixvpLffBrfffay  they  were  burned :  fxdp0rjffay  they  were  pierced :  iwtipd&ttaaw 
they  were  impaled :  iwfipu)€ifffaw  they  were  mutilated :  iffv€ipdff$7fffaw  they  were 
broken  on  the  wheel :  iwpdSriffav  they  were  sold. 


Ch.  XII.]  THE  EPISTLB  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  535 

They  wandered  (wXawfievoi),  Lit.  wandering  or  straying^ 
apart  from  the  homes  and  the  intercourse  of  men. 

Caves  of  the  earth  (^o^aU  rrfi  7^).  'OttiJ  only  here  and 
Jas.  iii.  11.  It  means  a  hole;  primarily  a  place  through 
which  one  can  see  (Jhrama).  In  LXX  the  cleft  of  the  rock  in 
which  God  placed  Moses,  Ex.  xxxiii.  22 :  a  window^  a  latticed 
opening^  Eccl.  xii.  3 :  the  eye-socket,  Zech.  xiv.  12 :  a  hole  in 
the  wall^  Ezek.  yiii.  7 :  a  hole  in  a  tree^  4  Mace.  xiv.  16. 

39.  Havingobtained  a  good  report  (fia/:m;/)i7^^c9).  Rend. 

*^  having  had  witness  borne  to  them."     See  on  ver.  2. 

40.  Having  provided  (irpopke^aiUvov).     N.  T.^. 

For  us  (ir^pl  ^fjL&v}.  The  better  thing  is  for  t«.  It  was 
not  for  them :  they  lived  in  the  assurance  of  a  future  time 
better  than  their  own,  and  in  this  assurance  of  faith,  did  their 
work  and  bore  their  burden  in  their  own  time.  It  is  one  of 
the  achievements  of  faith  to  be  cheerfully  willing  to  be  only 
a  stage  to  some  better  thing  which  we  cannot  share. 

That  they  without  us  should  not  be  made  perfect  (tva  fi^ 
X^P^^  i7/i6)i/  reXeKod&aLv).  Each  successive  stage  of  history 
gathers  up  into  itself,  the  fruit  of  preceding  stages.  This 
passage  teaches  the  solidarity  of  humanity  in  its  work  as  well 
as  in  itself.  The  man  of  the  present  requires  the  work  and 
suffering  and  achievement  of  the  men  of  the  past  to  complete 
him  and  his  work.  The  future  men  will,  in  like  manner, 
require  the  work  and  suffering  and  achievement  of  the  men 
of  to-day  to  complete  them.  The  whole  creation,  in  all  its 
successive  aeons,  moves  together  toward 

**The  one  far-off,  divine  event.*' 


CHAPTER  Xn. 

1.  Therefore  (roiyapow}.  An  emphatic  particle,  strongly 
affirming  the  facts  on  which  the  following  exhortation  is 
based. 


586  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ql  TIL 

We  also  are  compassed  (iical  i^^ck).  According  to  this  the 
sense  would  be,  those  described  in  ch.  xi  were  compassed  with 
a  cloud  of  witnesses,  and  we  al9o  are  so  compassed.  Wrong. 
The  we  also  should  be  construed  with  let  U9  mn.  **  Therefore 
let  us  also  (as  they  did)  run  our  appointed  race  with  patience.*" 

Seeing  we  are  compassed  about  with  so  great  a  cloud 
of  witnesses  (tocovtov  ^oin^  irepucetfievov  fiiuv  vi^c^  fS4ipTV' 
pwp^.  Lit.  having  so  great  a  cloud  of  witnesses  lying  around 
v^.  Nei^  cloudy  N.  T.^,  means  a  great  mass  of  cloud  covering 
the  entire  visible  space  of  the  heavens,  and  therefore  without 
definite  form,  or  a  single  large  mass  in  which  definite  outlines 
are  not  emphasised  or  distinguished.  It  thus  differs  from 
1^^X17,  which  is  a  detached  and  sharply  outlined  cloud. 
N^i^  is  therefore  more  appropriate  to  the  author's  image, 
which  is  that  of  a  vast  encompassing  and  overhanging  mass. 
The  use  of  cloud  for  a  mass  of  living  beings  is  familiar  in 
poetry.  Thus  Homer,  a  cloud  of  footmen  (IL  xxiii.  133) :  of 
Trojans  (^IL  xvi.  66).  Themistocles,  addressing  the  Atheni- 
ans, says  of  the  host  of  Xerxes,  ^^  we  have  had  the  fortune  to 
save  both  ourselves  and  Greece  by  repelling  so  great  a  daud 
of  men''  (Hdt.  viii.  109).     Spenser,  F.  Q.  i.  1,  28: 

^*  A  cloud  of  cumbrous  gnattes  doe  him  molest** 

Milton,  Par.  L.  i.  340 : 

*•  A  pitchy  cloud  of  locusts.'* 

Witnesses  (^fiaprvpcop^  does  not  mean  spectators^  but  those  who 
have  borne  witness  to  the  truth,  as  those  enumerated  in  ch.  xL 
Yet  the  idea  of  spectators  is  implied,  and  is  really  the  princi- 
pal idea.  The  writer's  picture  is  that  of  an  arena  in  which 
the  Christians  whom  he  addresses  are  contending  in  a  race, 
while  the  vast  host  of  the  heroes  of  faith  who,  after  having 
borne  witness  to  the  truth,  have  entered  into  their  heavenly 
rest,  watches  the  contest  from  the  encircling  tiers  of  the  arena, 
compassing  and  overhanging  it  like  a  cloud,  filled  with  lively 
interest  and  sympathy,  and  lending  heavenly  aid.  How 
striking  the  contrast  of  this  conception  with  that  of  Kaul« 


Ch.  Xn.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEW8.  537 

bach's  familiar  ^^  Battle  of  the  Huns/'  in  which  the  slain 
warriors  are  depicted  rising  from  the  field  and  renewing  the 
fight  in  the  upper  air  with  aggravated  fury. 

Weight  (Sycop).  N.  T.o,  ^LXX.  Lit.  bulk,  mas$.  Often 
in  Class.  Sometimes  metaphorically  of  a  person,  dignity^ 
importance,  pretension  :  of  a  writer's  style,  loftineis,  majesty y 
impressiveness.  Rend«  ^^encumbrance/'  according  to  the  figure 
of  the  racer  who  puts  away  everything  which  may  hinder  his 
running.  So  the  readers  are  exhorted  to  lay  aside  every 
worldly  hindrance  or  embarrassment  to  their  Christian  career. 

And  the  sin  which  doth  so  easily  beset  (^tcal  rifp  einrepla- 
rarop  afiafniap^,  Kal  adds  to  the  general  encumbrance  a 
specific  encumbrance  or  hindrance.  ^EvTrepCararo^  N.  T.^, 
®LXX,  ^Class.  From  ev  readily,  deftly,  cleverly,  and  wepita- 
raa-Oai  to  place  itself  round.  Hence,  of  a  sin  which  readily  or 
easily  encircles  and  entangles  the  Christian  runner,  like  a 
long,  loose  robe  clinging  to  his  limbs.  Beset  is  a  good  rend- 
ering, meaning  to  surround.  In  earlier  English  especially 
of  surrounding  crowns,  etc.,  with  jewels.     So  Gower,  Conf. 

Am.  i.  127: 

*'  With  golde  and  riche  stones  beset** 

Shakespeare,  Thpo  Gent.  Ver.  v.  3 : 

**  The  thicket  is  beset ;  he  cannot  *8cap6.** 

The  sin  may  be  any  evil  propensity.  The  sin  of  unbelief 
naturally  suggests  itself  here. 

With  patience  (hi  vwoiioprjfi).  ^Tirofiop^  includes  both 
passive  endurance  and  active  persistence.  See  on  2  Pet.  i.  6, 
and  Jas.  v.  7.     For  this  use  of  &*  unth,  see  on  ch.  ix.  11. 

The  race  (top  ay&pa).  Instead  of  a  specific  word  for  race 
(SpS/jLo^),  the  general  term  contest  is  used.  For  irpoicetfiepop 
set  before,  see  on  ch.  vi.  18. 

2.  Looking  (a<f>op&PTe;).  Only  here  and  Philip,  ii.  23. 
In  LXX  see  4  Mace.  xvii.  10.     Looking  away  from  every- 


538  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  ZIL 

thing  which  may  distract.  Comp.  Philip,  iii.  13,  14,  and 
airipKerrev  he  had  respect^  lit.  looked  away^  Heb.  xi.  26.  Wet- 
stein  cites  Arrian,  JEpictet.  ii.  19,  29  :  ek  ihv  0Av  h^fAvm 
iv  ircanl  fuicp^  icdX  fieyaXqi  looking  away  unto  Q-od  in  every- 
thing small  and  great. 

Jesus.  Having  presented  a  long  catalogue  of  witnesses 
under  the  old  covenant,  he  now  presents  Jesus,  the  mediator 
of  the  new  covenant,  and  the  supreme  witness.  See  Apoc. 
i.  5 ;  iii.  14 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  13. 

The  author  and  finisher  of  our  faith  (riv  r^  irlcTenf^ 
apxvyov  Kol  rcXeuorifp).  The  A.  V.  is  misleading,  and  nar- 
rows the  scope  of  the  passage.  For  author^  rend,  leader  or 
captain^  and  see  on  ch.  ii.  10.  For  finisher^  rend,  petfeeter. 
For  our  faiths  rend,  faith  or  the  faith.  Not  our  Christian 
faith,  but  faith  absolutely,  as  exhibited  in  the  whole  range 
of  believers  from  Abel  to  Christ.  Christ  cannot  be  called 
the  author  or  originator  of  faith,  since  the  faith  here  treated 
existed  and  worked  before  Christ.  Christ  is  the  leader  or 
captain  of  faith,  in  that  he  is  the  perfecter  of  faith.  In  him- 
self lie  furnished  the  perfect  development,  the  supreme  exam- 
ple of  faith,  and  in  virtue  of  this  he  is  the  leader  of  the  whole 
believing  host  in  all  time.  Notice  the  recurrence  of  the 
favorite  idea  of  perfecting.  Comp.  ch.  ii.  10 ;  v.  9 ;  vi.  1 ; 
vii.  11,  19,  28;  ix.  9;  x.  1,  14;  xi.  40.  TeXeuor^  perfecter, 
N.  T.^  ^LXX,  <>Cla8s. 

For  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him  (airrl  t^  wpo/eei- 
fjL€V7)^  airrtp  x^P^^)-  'Ain"l  in  its  usual  sense,  in  exchange  for. 
IlpoK€ifi€vr)f:  lying  before^  present.  The  joy  was  the  full, 
divine  beatitude  of  his  preincarnate  life  in  the  bosom  of  the 
Father  ;  the  glory  which  he  had  with  God  before  the  world 
was.  In  exchange  for  this  he  accepted  the  cross  and  the 
shame.  The  contrast  is  designed  between  the  struggle  which, 
for  the  present,  is  alone  set  before  the  readers  (ver.  1),  and 
the  joy  which  was  already  present  to  Christ.  The  heroic 
character  of  his  faith  appears  in  his  renouncing  a  joy  already 


Ch.  Xn.]  THE  SPISTLB  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  539 

in  possession  in  exchange  for  shame  and  death.    The  passage 
thus  falls  in  with  Philip,  ii.  6-8.* 

The  cross  (aravpip).  Comp.  Philip,  ii.  8.  ^LXX.  Orig- 
inally an  upright  stake  or  pale,  ^ravpovv  to  drive  down  a 
stake;  to  crucify.  Comp.  the  use  of  ft/Xoy  wood  or  tree  for 
the  cross,  Acts  v.  30 ;  x.  39 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  24.    See  on  L.  xxiii.  31. 

The  shame  (jaiaywfifi).  Attendant  upon  a  malefactor^s 
death. 

Is  set  down,  etc.  See  ch.  i.  3, 13 ;  viii.  1 ;  x.  12.  Notice 
the  tenses :  endured^  aorist,  completed :  hath  sat  dowrij  per- 
fect, he  remains  seated  and  reigning. 

3.  For  consider  {avcCkjo^Caaade  yap).  Tap  for  introduces 
the  reason  for  the  exhortation  to  look  unto  Jesus.  Look  unto 
him,  for  a  comparison  with  him  will  show  you  how  much 
more  he  had  to  endure  than  you  have.  ^AvdKoyC^eaOai  N.  T.^. 
Comp.  3  Mace.  vii.  7.  It  means  to  reckon  up;  to  consider  in 
the  way  of  comparison. 

Contradiction  of  sinners  {tnrd  r&v  afiapTosi\&p  avriKoyCop). 
Contradiction  or  gainsaying.  See  on  ch.  vi.  16,  and  comp. 
ch.  vii.  7.  See  on  gainsaying^  Jude  11.  Qf  sinners,  trrrd  by^ 
at  the  hands  of 

Against  himself  (ek  iavroi^).  According  to  this  text  we 
should  render  "against  themselves."     Comp.  Num.  xvi.  38. 

*  The  interpretation  of  the  passage  has  been  dominated  by  the  assumption 
that  the  joy  set  before  him  must  refer  to  a  future  prize  which  Christ  was  to 
receive  in  return  for  his  sufferings,  **  without  which,''  says  Weiss,  **  he  would 
not  have  been  able  to  endure  them."  Accordingly,  drrl  is  explained  for  the 
sake  of  or  to  obtain  the  joy,  and  the  joy  is  defined  as  the  heavenly  reward^  or 
the  joy  of  being  the  redeemer  of  his  brethren,  ffhis  sense  of  i^rrl  is  legitimate, 
although  it  enfolds  the  meaning  of  exchange  (see,  for  instance,  Matt.  zvii.  27 ; 
xz.  28,  and  the  formula  dv^'  Jv  because).  At  any  rate,  its  use  here  in  that 
sense  creates  a  feeling  of  awkwardness.  We  should  rather  expect  iKjra,  or 
inrkp  or  dtd  with  the  accusative.  Moreover,  Christ  did  not  endure  cross  and 
shame  for  the  sake  of  heavenly  reward,  and  the  redemption  of  his  brethren 
can  hardly  be  called  something  to  which  he  looked  forward  with/aft/L 


640  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAHENT.       [Cb.  HL 

The  explanation  will  then  be  that  Christ  endured  the  gain- 
saying of  sinners,  who,  in  opposing  him,  were  enemies  of  their 
own  souls.  The  reading  iavrois^  however,  is  doubtful,  and 
both  Tischendorf  and  Weiss  read  iavrov  him9e\f^  which  I 
prefer. 

Lest  ye  be  wearied  and  faint  in  your  minds  (Iva  fti^ 
icdfArfre  tm  '^^vxm  vfi&v  ixXvSfievoi).  Rend.  ^Hhat  ye  be  not 
weary,  fainting  in  your  minds.'*  *Eic\v€iv  is  to  loosen;  hence, 
to  relax^  exhaust.  So  often  in  LXX.  See  Deut.  xx.  8 ;  Jndg. 
viii.  15;  1  Sam.  xiv.  28.  Comp.  Matt.  xv.  82;  Mk.  yiii.  8; 
Gal.  vi.  9. 

4.  Unto  blood  (/i^]^i9  atfjMTo^^.  Tour  strife  against  sin 
has  not  entailed  the  shedding  of  your  blood,  as  did  that  of 
many  of  the  O.  T.  worthies,  and  of  Jesus  himself.  See  ch. 
xi.  35,  37.  Of  Jesus  it  is  said,  Philip,  ii.  8,  ^^he  became  obe- 
dient to  the  extent  of  death  Cm^XP^  Bavdrov).  Comp.  2  Mace. 
xiii.  14. 

Striving  against  sin  (irpo^  rffp  aiiaprrlav  iLvra^vt^dyyafoC). 
The  verb  N.  T.^.    LXX,  4  Mace.  xvii.  14.    Sin  is  personified. 

5.  Ye  have  forgotten  (^itcX^XtfaOe).  N.  T.^.  Common 
in  Class.,  ^LXX.  The  simple  verb  \av0dpeip  means  to  escape 
notice;  to  be  unseen  or  unknoum.  Middle  and  passive,  to  let  a 
thing  escape;  forget.  Some  render  interrogatively,  "have  ye 
forgotten?" 

Speaketh  unto  you  (vfiip  BiaXfyerai).  The  verb  always 
in  the  sense  of  mutual  converse  or  discussion.  See  Mk.  ix.  34; 
Acts  xvii.  2  ;  xviii.  19.     Rend,  "reasoneth  with  you." 

My  son,  etc.     From  Prov.  iii.  11, 12.     Comp.  Job  v.  17. 

Despise  not  (/i^  iXiytopei).  N.  T.^.  LXX  only  in  this 
passage.     Quite  often  in  Class.     It  means  to  make  little  of 


Ch.  XII.]  THE  SPI8TLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  541 

Chastening  (waiSeia^^,  Mostly  in  Hebrews.  See  on 
Eph.  vi.  4,  and  2  Tim.  iii.  16. 

6.  He  chaeteneth  (iraiMei).    See  on  L.  xxiii.  16. 

Scourgeth  (^fjLeurriyoi).  Not  very  common,  but  found  in 
all  the  four  Gospels.  Hebrews  only  here.  Quite  often  in 
LXX. 

Receiveth  (Trapafi^crcu).  Admits  to  filial  privileges: 
acknowledges  as  his  own.  Of  receiving  the  word  of  Grod, 
Mk.  iv.  20 :  of  receiving  delegates  from  a  body,  Acts  xv.  4 : 
of  adopting  or  approving  customs,  Acts  xvi.  21. 

7.  If  ye  endure  chastening  (cfc  waiSeiav  iwoiUvm). 
Rend,  "it  is  for  chastening  that  ye  endure."  A.  V.  follows 
the  reading  of  T.  R.  €i  if.  Do  not  faint  at  affiction.  Its 
purpose  is  disciplinary.  HaiBela  is  here  the  end  or  retuU  of 
discipline.     In  ver.  5  it  is  the  process. 

Qod  dealeth  with  you  as  with  sons  (ek  vloU  ifuv  wpoa^ 
i^perai  6  ^€09).  The  verb  means  to  bring  to:  often  to  bring 
an  offering  to  the  altar,  as  Matt.  v.  23,  24 ;  viii.  4.  In  the 
passive  voice  with  the  dative,  to  be  borne  toward  one;  hence, 
to  attack^  assail^  deal  witht  behave  toward.  See  Thucyd.  i.  140 ; 
Eurip.  Cycl.  176 ;  Hdt.  vii.  6.  The  affictive  dealing  of  Gk)d 
with  you  is  an  evidence  that  you  are  sons. 

What  son  is  he  whom  the  father,  etc.  (rk  1/409).  Some 
interpreters  render,  "who  is  a  son  whom  the  father?"  etc. 
That  is,  no  one  is  a  son  who  is  without  paternal  chastening. 
The  A.  V.  is  better.  The  idea  expressed  by  the  other  rend- 
ering appears  in  the  next  verse. 

8.  Of  which  all  are  partakers  (^  fji&roxoi  yeyJpoa-i  irdvrei). 
Rend.  " of  which  all  have  been  made  partakers."  For  ia4toxo^ 
partakers  see  on  ch«  iii.  14.     AU^  that  is,  all  sons  of  God. 


»12  WORD  flnTTDDBB  DT  THE  SKW  TBflrrA3CE3rr.       [Ql  XD. 


Bastards  rMftfoc;.  X.  T.^  See  WiaiL  It.  3.  They  mij^t 
think  thiit  they  would  not  suffer  if  thej  were  reallj  God's 
sons ;  whereas  the  reTezse  is  the  case.  If  thejr  did  not  snffer, 
they  woold  not  be  God*s  i 


9.  Furtharmora  (urd).  ETerjwhere  else  in  N.  T.  diis 
particle  marks  a  socoeasicMi  of  time  or  incident.  See  Mk. 
iT.  17 ;  Till.  25 ;  L.  viiL  12  ;  1  Cor.  xr.  5, 7.  Here  it  intro- 
duces a  new  phase  of  the  subject  under  discussion* 

Fathers  of  our  flesh  (rw  lum  r^v  vapgi^  nf^^  wot^mk). 
Up  to  thiii  point  the  suffering  of  Christians  has  been  explained 
by  God's  fatherly  relation  to  them.  Now  the  emphatic  point 
is  that  their  fathers,  with  whom  God  is  compared,  were  only 
earthly,  human  parents.  The  phrase  wan^pc?  r^  ^a/mo^  N.  T.^, 
but  kindred  expressions  are  found  Rom.  iv.  1 ;  ix.  3 ;  GraL 
iy.  29;  Heb.  ii.  14. 

Which  corrected  (iraiUuriK).  Lit.  ^we  have  had  others 
of  our  flesh  as  chasteners."^  Only  here  and  Rom.  ii.  20.  In 
LXX,  Sir.  XXX vii.  19 ;  Hos.  v.  2  ;  4  Mace.  y.  34 ;  ix.  6. 

Shall  we  not  much  rather  be  in   subjection  (oi  woXv 

fiaXXop  v7roTayrj<r6fi€0a),  The  comparison  is  between  the 
re.s[>ect  paid  to  a  fallible,  human  parent,  which  may  grow  out 
of  the  natural  relation,  or  may  be  due  to  fear,  and  the  com- 
plete subjection  to  the  divine  Father. 

To  the  Father  of  spirits  (t^  irarpi  t&p  irveufidrMv),  Con- 
trasted with  fathers  of  the  flesh.  Their  relation  to  us  is  lim- 
ited ;  liis  is  universal.  They  are  related  to  us  on  the  fleshly 
side  ;  he  is  the  creator  of  our  essential  life.  Our  relation  to 
him  is  on  the  side  of  our  eternal  being.  Comp.  J.  iv.  23, 24 ; 
Zech.  xii.  1 ;  Isa.  Ivii.  16.  The  phrase  N.  T.^.  Comp.  LXX, 
Num.  xvi.  22;  xxvii.  16;  Apoc.  xxii.  6.  Clement  of  Rome 
styles  God  the  benefactor  (evepyerrf^)  of  spirits^  the  creator  and 
overseer  (KTurrrf^,  iiria-Koiro^)  of  every  spirit,  and  the  lard 
(^Seawdrr)^)  of  spirits.     Ad  Corinth,  lix,  Ixiv. 


Ch.  XU.]  the  epistle  to  the  HEBREWS.  548 

And  live  (ical  ^i^ofiep^.  Have  true  life ;  not  limited  to 
the  future  life.  Comp.  J.  v.  26 ;  vi.  57 ;  1  J.  v.  11 ;  Apoc. 
xi.  11 ;  Acts  xvi.  28 ;  Rom.  vi.  11 ;  xiv.  8 ;  1  J.  iv.  9,  and 
see  on  living  O-od^  Heb.  iii.  12. 

10.  Much  difficulty  and  confusion  have  attached  to  the 
interpretation  of  this  verse,  growing  out  of :  (a)  the  relations 
of  the  several  clauses  ;  (4)  the  meaning  of  for  a  few  day$^ 
and  how  much  is  covered  by  it.  The  difficulties  have  been 
aggravated  by  the  determination  of  commentators  to  treat 
the  verse  by  itself,  confining  the  relation  of  its  clauses  within 
its  own  limits,  attempting  to  throw  them  into  pi^rs,  in  which 
attempt  none  of  them  have  succeeded,  and  entirely  overlook- 
ing relations  to  the  preceding  verse. 

For  a  few  days  (^-/wk  o\(^a^  ^/J^pa^)'  This  clause  is 
directly  related  to  be  in  syJbjection  to  the  Father  of  epirits  and 
livey  and  points  a  contrast.  On  the  one  hand,  subjection  to 
the  Father  of  spirits,  the  source  of  all  life,  has  an  eternal  sig- 
nificance. Subjection  to  his  fatherly  discipline  means,  not  only 
the  everlasting  life  of  the  future,  but  present  life,  eternal  in 
quality,  developed  even  while  the  discipline  is  in  progress. 
Subjection  to  the  Father  of  spirits  and  life  go  together.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  discipline  of  the  himian  father  is  brief  in 
duration,  and  its  significance  is  confined  to  the  present  life. 
In  other  words,  the  offset  to  for  a  few  days  is  in  ver.  9.  To 
read  for  a  few  days  into  the  two  latter  clauses  of  the  verse 
which  describes  the  heavenly  discipline,  and  to  say  that  both 
the  chastening  of  the  earthly  and  of  the  heavenly  father  are 
of  brief  duration,  is  to  introduce  abruptly  into  a  sharp  con- 
trast between  the  two  disciplines  a  point  of  resemblance. 
The  dominant  idea  in  wpi^  is  not  mere  duration^  but  duration 
as  related  to  significance :  that  is  to  say,  ^^for  a  few  days " 
means,  during  just  that  space  of  time  in  which  the  chastise- 
ment had  force  and  meaning.  See,  for  instances,  L.  viii.  18 ; 
J.  V.  35 ;  1  Th.  ii.  17 ;  2  Cor.  vii.  8.  The  few  days  can 
scarcely  refer  to  the  whole  lifetime,  since,  even  from  the 
ancient  point  of  view  of  the  continuance  of  parental  author- 


544  WOBD  8TUDIE8  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Gh.  XU 

ity,  parental  discipline  is  not  applied  throughout  the  lifetime. 
It  signifies  rather  the  brief  period  of  childhood  and  youth. 

After  their  own  pleasure  {tcarh  to  iotcouv  auro!?).    Better, 

as  seemed  good  to  thetn.  The  airrok  has  a  slightly  emphatic 
force,  as  contrasted  with  a  higher  intelligence.  The  thought 
links  itself  with  iraiBevri^^  in  ver.  9,  and  is  explained  by  as 
seemed  good  to  them^  and  is  placed  in  contrast  with  subjection 
to  the  Father  of  spirits.  The  human  parents  were  short- 
sighted, fallible,  sometimes  moved  by  passion  rather  than  by 
sound  judgment,  and,  therefore,  often  mistaken  in  their  dis- 
ciplinary methods.  What  seemed  good  to  them  was  not  always 
best  for  us.  No  such  possibility  of  error  attaches  to  the 
Father  of  spirits. 

But  he  for  our  profit  (6  Be  iirl  to  avfu^pov).  The  con- 
trast is  with  what  is  implied  in  as  seemed  good  to  them.  The 
human  parent  may  not  have  dealt  with  us  to  our  profit. 
'2vfuf>^p€ip  means  to  bring  together:  to  collect  or  contribute  in 
order  to  help :  hence,  to  help  or  be  profitable.  Often  imper- 
sonally, avfMf>^p€i  it  is  expedient^  as  Matt.  v.  29;  xviii.  6; 
J.  xi.  60.  The  neuter  participle,  as  here,  advantage^  profit^ 
1  Cor.  xii.  7  ;  2  Cor.  xii.  1.  There  is  a  backward  reference 
to  Zive,  ver.  9,  the  result  of  subjection  to  the  Father  of  spir- 
its; and  this  is  expanded  and  defined  in  the  final  clause, 
namely : 

That  we   might  be   partakers  of  his  holiness  (ek  to 

fieraka^elv  t^  ayuiTr)To^  avroii).  Lit.  unto  the  partaking  of 
his  holiness,  *Et9  marks  the  final  purpose  of  chastening. 
Holiness  is  life.  Shall  we  not  be  subject  to  the  Father  of 
spirits  and  live?  For,  in  contrast  with  the  temporary,  fault- 
ful  chastening  of  the  human  parent,  which,  at  best,  prepares 
for  work  and  success  in  time  <and  in  worldly  things,  his  chast- 
ening results  in  holiness  and  eternal  life. 

11.  No  chastening  for  the  present  seemeth  (ircura  /ikv 
iraihela  irpo^  /jl€p  to  irapov  ov  BokcI).      Lit.  all  christening — 


Ch.  Xn.]  THE  SPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  545 

doth  not  seem.  Tlaaa  of  all  sorts^  divine  and  human.  The 
A.  v.,  by  joining  ov  not  to  iraaa  cUU  and  rendering  no  chas- 
tisement^  weakens  the  emphasis  on  the  idea  every  kind  of  chas- 
tisement. npo9  fJ^v  TO  irapop  for  the  present.  For  the  force 
of  irpo^  see  on  ver.  10.  Not  merely  during  the  present,  but 
for  the  present  regarded  as  the  time  in  which  its  application 
is  necessary  and  salutary.  Miv  indicates  that  the  suffering 
present  is  to  be  offset  by  a  fruitful  future  — biU  (S^)  qfterward. 

To  be  joyous  but  grievous  (xapa9  ehcu  liKKh  Xvmrf:^. 
Lit.  to  he  of  joy  but  of  grief  . 

It  yieldeth  the  peaceable  fruit  of  righteousness  («a^ 
irov  elprjpiicdp  airoBiBoHnp  Bitcaioirvprj^) .  Perhaps  with  a  sug-* 
gestion  of  recompense  for  the  longsuffering  and  waiting,  since 
airoBiSopoi  often  signifies  ^^to  give  back.''  The  phrase  airO' 
SiSSpul  KapTTOP  only  here  and  Apoc.  xxii.  2.  KapTrop  fruit 
with  BiSdpai  to  yive^  Matt.  xiii.  8 ;  Mk.  iv.  8  :  with  iroieip  to 
make  or  produce^  often  in  Synoptic  Gospels,  as  Matt.  iii.  8, 10 ; 
vii.  17 ;  L.  iii.  8 ;  vi.  43,  etc. :  with  ^peip  to  bear^  always 
and  only  in  John,  J.  xii.  24  ;  xv.  2,  4,  5,  8,  16 :  with  ffkaa^ 
rdpeip  to  bring  forth^  Jas.  v.  18.  ^EifnfPitak  peaceable^  in  N.  T. 
only  here  and  Jas.  iii.  17,  as  an  epithet  of  wisdom.  Quite 
often  in  LXX  of  men,  the  hearty  especially  of  words  and  sac* 
rifices.  The  phrase  xapTrfk  elprfPiKfk  peaceable  fruit  (omit  tJie)^ 
N.  T.^,  ®LXX.  The  phrase  fruit  of  righteousness^  Philip, 
i.  11;  Jas.  iii.  18,  and  LXX,  Prov.  iii.  9;  xi.  30;  xiii.  2 ; 
Am.  vi.  13 :  comp.  Ps.  i.  3 ;  Ivii.  11.  The  genitive  of 
righteousness  is  explicative  or  appositional ;  fruit  which  con- 
sists in  righteousness  or  is  righteousness. 

Unto  them  which  are  exercised  thereby  (roii  &'  avrrff: 
yeyvfAPocfiAH}*^}.  Who  have  been  subjected  to  the  severe 
discipline  of  suffering,  and  have  patiently  undergone  it.  For 
the  verb  see  on  1  Tim.  iv.  7.  Rend.  **it  yieldeth  peaceable 
fruit  unto  them  that  have  been  exercised  thereby,  even  the 
fruit  of  righteousness."  This  preserves  the  Greek  order,  and 
puts  righteousness  in  its  proper,  emphatic  position. 

VOL.   IT. — 36 


546  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  VXW  TESTAMENT.      [G&  ZIL 

12.  Wherefore  (&^).  Because  chastening  is  thus  neoes- 
Bary,  and  serves  for  wholesome  discipline,  and  issues  in 
holiness. 

Lift  up  (hvopBAaart).  Found  in  L.  xiii.  18;  Acts  zv.  16 
(cit°).  Occasionally  in  LXX.  It  signifies  to  Met  up,  make, 
erect.  In  O.  T.  to  establieh,  as  a  throne  (2  Sam.  vii.  18, 16)  ; 
a  house  (2  Sam.  vii.  26 ;  1  Chron.  xvii.  24)  ;  to  roue  up  one 
who  is  down  (Ps.  cxlv.  9 ;  Sir.  xi.  12).  In  Acts  xv.  16,  to 
build  anew.  By  medical  writers,  to  straighten;  to  set  dislo- 
cated parts  of  the  body.  See  L.  xiii.  13.*  The  translation 
here  should  be  more  general :  not  l\ft  up,  which  is  inappro- 
priate to  paralyzed  knees,  but  set  right;  brace.  As  falling  in 
with  the  thought  of  this  passage,  comp.  the  LXX  of  Ps. 
xvii.  35,  which,  for  the  A.  V.  ^^thy  gentleness  hath  made  me 
great,"  gives  ^^thy  discipline  hath  established  me  or  set  me 
up.'*     See  also  Ps.  xix.  8. 

The  hands  which  hang  down  (rin  irapuiUya/i  x^V^^ 
Rend,  the  slackened  or  weakened  hands.  Comp.  Isa.  xxxv.  8  ; 
Sir.  XXV.  23 ;  2  Sam.  iv.  1.  The  verb  irapUwu  (only  here 
and  L.  xi.  42)  originally  means  to  let  pass,  disregard,  neglect; 
thence  to  relax,  loosen.  See  Clem.  Rom.  Ad  Corinth,  xxxiv, 
who  associates  it  with  vw0ph/f;  slothful  (comp.  Heb.  v.  11). 

And  the  feeble  knees  (jcal  rh  irapaXeKufUva  ydvard).     For 

feeble  rend,  palsied.     See  on  L.  v.  18. 

13.  Make  straight  paths  for  your  feet  (rpox^  opOin 
TTotelre  roh  iroalv  vfi&p).  After  the  LXX  of  Prov.  iv.  26. 
The  corresponding  Hebrew  means  to  tear,  to  cut  into  :  hence 
to  cut  through  as  a  path  ;  to  make  firm  or  plain.  *OpO<k  N.  T. 
only  here  and  Acts  xiv.  10 ;  commonly  straight  or  upright, 
but  also  right,  sqfe^  happy.     Comp.  Prov.  viii.  6;  xv.  14; 

*  A  copioos  list  of  references  to  Hippocrates  and  Galen  may  be  found  ia 
W.  K.  Hobart's  Medical  Language  of  St.  Luke,  p.  22. 


Ch.  xu.]  the  epistle  to  the  hebbews.  647 

xxi.  8.  Here,  not  in  the  sense  of  straight  as  distinguished 
from  crooked^  but  more  generally,  riffJU^  plain^  by  implication 
even  or  smooth.*  Tpox^d  N.  T.^  is  literally  a  wheel-track 
(rpox<k  a  wheel).  Very  rare  in  profane  Greek.  Tofe  iroalv 
vfi&p  *'*'for  your  feet,"  not  with.  That  is,  exert  yourselves 
to  make  the  course  clear  for  yourselves  and  your  fellow- 
Christians,  so  that  there  be  no  stumbling  and  laming. 

That  which  is  lame  (to  x^^v).  Xa>X(k  lame^  halting^  only 
in  Synoptic  Gospels  and  Acts.  Mostly  in  the  literal  sense. 
Proverbial  in  Isa.  xxxiii.  23.  Metaphorically  here,  and  partly 
Matt,  xviii.  8 ;  Mk.  ix.  45.  The  verb  x^Xa/vetv  to  be  lame  or 
to  make  lame  (not  in  N.  T.)  is  used  metaphorically  in  LXX, 
Ps.  xviii.  45;  IK.  xviii.  21,  where  the  A.V.  "how  long  halt 
ye  between  two  opinions"  is  iw  Trrfrc  vfuU  x^^^^'^'^  ^* 
afufxyrdpcu^  rai9  lyvvcu^  how  long  do  ye  go  lame  on  both  your 
hams  f    To  ;^o»Xov  here  signifies  the  lame  part  or  limb. 

Be  turned  out  of  the  way  (iicrpairy).  Rend.  "  be  put  out 
of  joint."  The  A.V.  is  according  to  the  more  usual  meaning 
of  the  verb,  which,  in  N.  T.,  is  confined,  with  this  exception, 
to  the  Pastoral  Epistles.  See  1  Tim.  i.  6 ;  v.  15 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  4. 
LXX  only  Am.  v.  8.  But  it  is  also  used  by  medical  writers 
in  the  passive,  with  the  meaning  to  be  wrenched  or  dislocated.^ 
There  is  nothing  strange  in  the  use  of  this  word  in  a  medical 
sense  by  our  writer,  whose  work  bears  the  stamp  of  Alex- 
andria. The  Greeks  received  their  knowledge  of  surgery 
from  the  Egyptians,  and  mural  paintings  and  documents, 
and  even  hieroglyphic  sjrmbols,  prove  that  that  people  had 
attained  remarkable  proficiency  in  the  science.     Herodotus 


*  So  Ton  SodeD,  **  not  the  dirtcUon  but  the  surface :  ipOal  =  smooth^  unth- 
<nU  atones  or  holes.^^ 

t  Stephens,  TKes.j  gives  detorquere^  and  cites  a  number  of  instances  from 
medical  writers  in  which  irrpowii  and  iicrpSviow  are  used  of  an  everted  eyelid, 
in  which  the  lid  is  turned  outward.  Celsus  says  that  when  the  eyelids  refuse 
to  come  together,  the  lower  lid  hanging  and  dragging,  and  unable  to  unite 
with  the  upper,  the  Greeks  call  it  iicrp&wiow. 


^-;i:i.  :u.  131^  m^rniiofu  &  mwiifaZ  schocd  as  Cyrene  in  Africii 
aa/1  aaji  tLu  tb^  papila  of  thu  school  were  r^aided  as  tlie 
jft^y>&d  bevt  phrsciaiks  in  all  Greece.  At  the  time  of  Gakn 
r'l^TS  A«D.>  ti^  medical  icfaool  of  Alezandria  was  the  mort 
famooii  in  the  wr^JA.  and  GaLen  himylf  studied  there.  Celsus 
fhm  \islL{  of  ihe  tint  otrntarr  a.d.).  in  the  Tth  book  of  his 
maxim  ht  Artif/u*,  treau  of  surgical  operations  aeemding 
to  ttie  ^iews  of  the  Alexandrian  schools.  The  oomnunly- 
acc^pted  rendering  of  the  A.  V.,  besides  giTing  a  oonception 
which  is  ver}'  tame,  presents  two  incongmities :  the  associa- 
tion of  !^nff  astray  with  lamemtju^  and  of  kealimg  with  ttrajfimg. 
The  other  rendering  give»  a  lively  and  consistent  image. 
Make  the  patlis  smooth  and  even,  so  that  the  lame  limb  be 
not  dislocated  bv  stones  or  pitfalls.  Do  ererrthing  to  aroid 
aggravating  the  weakness  of  a  fellow-Christian.  Rather  tcy 
t/>  heal  it.  To  x^Xiw  may  refer  either  to  an  individual  or  to 
a  section  of  the  church  which  is  weak  and  vacillating. 

14.  Follow  peace  (upiitnjv  &MceTc).  Comp.  LXX,  Ps. 
xxiii.  14,  and  Hom.  xiv.  19 ;  1  Pet.  ill.  11.  The  verb  h 
Uiied  of  the  pursuit  of  moral  and  spiritual  ends,  Rom.  ix.  80, 
31 ;  xii.  13;  1  Cor.  xiv.  1 ;  Philip,  iu.  12,  14 ;  1  Th.  v.  16; 

1  Tim.  ^-i.  11 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  22. 

Holiness  (ayiacfiop).     See  on  Rom.  vi.  19. 

15.  Looking  diligently  (hruTKOTrowre;).     A.V.  givies  dili- 

f/*^ntly  HH  the  force  of  erri ;  but  CTri  signifies  direction  rather 
than  inteuHity.  The  idea  is  exermain*/  oversight.  Only  here 
and  1  Pet.  v.  2. 

Fail  of  (varep&v  inro).  Rend.  *'fall  back  from,"  implying 
a  i>n;vioiis  attainment.  The  present  participle  marks  some- 
thing in  projfress  :  "lest  any  one  befalling  back." 

Root  of  bitterness  (pl^a  iriKpla^).  From  LXX,  Deut. 
xxix.  18.  A  bad  man  in  the  church.  'P/^a  of  a  person^ 
1  Mace.  i.  10. 


Ch.  Xn.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  649 

Springing  up  (avw  ^vovaa).  The  participle  pictures  the 
springing  up  in  progress;  the  root  gradually  revealing  its 
pernicious  character. 

Trouble  (ivox^v)*     Only  here  and  L.  vi.  18,  see  note. 

Many  be  defiled  QfuapOAa-iPolroXKoC).  Rend.  ^Uhe  many**: 
the  majority  of  the  church.     For  the  verb  see  on  J.  xviii.  28. 

16.  Fornicator  (in^piw).  In  the  literal  sense,  as  always 
in  N.  T. 

Profane  person  (/S^/Si^Xo?).     See  on  1  Tim.  L  9. 

As  Esau.  Only  the  epithet  profane  is  applied  to  Esau,  not 
fornicator. 

For  one  morsel  of  meat  (avrl  fipwrem  luofi).  BpAan^^  lit. 

the  act  of  eating,  as  1  Cor.  viii.  4 ;  Rom.  xiv.  17:  ^^one  eating 

of  meat.*'     Sometimes  corrosion^  as  Matt.  yi.  19.  Sometimes 
of  that  which  is  eaten^  J.  vi.  27,  55. 

Sold  (aTT^Sero).  The  word  occurs  in  the  narrative  of 
Gen.  xxv.  31,  33,  LXX.  In  N.  T.  often  of  discharging  an 
obligation;  paying  back.     To  sett^  Acts  v.  8  ;  vii.  9. 

His  birthright  (tA  irpoyroroicUL).  N.  T.^  ^Class.  In  this 
form  only  in  the  later  Greek  translations  of  the  O.T.  Ilparro- 
TOKeiov^  a  very  few  times,  almost  all  in  this  narrative. 

17.  He  found  no  place  of  repentance  {fierapoCa^  yi^p  irhrop 
ovx  ehpev^.  The  phrase  place  of  repentance  N.  T.^.  This  does 
not  mean  that  Esau  was  rendered  incapable  of  repentance, 
which  is  clearly  contradicted  by  what  follows ;  nor  that  he 
was  not  able  to  persuade  Isaac  to  change  his  mind  and  to 
recall  the  blessing  already  bestowed  on  Jacob  and  give  it  to 
him.  This  is  unnatural,  forced,  and  highly  improbable.  The 
words  place  of  repentance  mean  an  opportunity  to  repair  by 


1^50  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  KEW  TESTAMENT.       [Gh.  XH 

repenting.  He  found  no  way  to  reverse  by  repentance  what 
he  had  done.  The  penalty  could  not  be  reversed  in  the 
nature  of  the  case.  This  is  clear  from  Isaac^s  words,  Gen. 
xxvii.  38, 

Sought  It  carefully  (Aefirnjcriw).  See  on  1  Pet.  L  10. 
Comp.  Heb.  xL  6.     See  also  on  queHioninffi^  1  Tim.  i.  4. 

18.  Following  this  allusion  to  Esau,  and  perhaps  suggested 
by  it,  is  a  passage  setting  forth  the  privileges  of  Uie  Christian 
birthright  and  of  Christian  citizenship  in  contrast  with  those 
under  the  old  covenant. 

The  mount  that  might  be  touched  and  that  burned  with 
fire  {y^XcufxofieiHji^  icai  Kocav^Uinp  irvpX),  "Opa  mount  is  omitted 
by  the  best  texts,  but  should  be  understood.*  YiyXo^oy  is 
rare  in  N.  T.  and  LXX  ;  fairly  frequent  in  Class.  Radically, 
it  is  akin  to  '^ap  to  rvh^  wipe  ;  hence  feeling  on  the  surface,  as 
Gen.  xxvii.  12,  21,  22,  LXX :  a  touch  which  communicates 
only  a  superficial  effect.  It  need  not  imply  contact  with  an 
object  at  all,  but  simply  the  movement  of  the  hands  feeling 
after  something.  Hence  often  of  the  groping  of  the  blind,  as 
Deut.  xxviii.  29 ;  Isa.  lix.  10 ;  Job  v.  14.  Appropriate  here 
as  indicating  mere  superficial  contact.  The  present  participle 
that  18  being  touched^  means  simply  that  the  mountain  was 
something  material  and  tangible.  The  A.  V.  which  might  be 
touched^  although  not  literally  correct,  conveys  the  true  sense. 

That  burned  with  fire  (xeKavfi^  irvpl).  See  Ex.  xix.  18 ; 
Deut.  iv.  11 ;  v.  4  ;  ix.  15.  The  participle  is  passive,  $et  on 
fire  ;  kindled  with  fire  :  not  attributive  of  irvpl^  enkindled  fire. 


*  This  is  preferable  to  the  Vulg.  adoi)te<i  by  West^iott,  ad  tractabQem  et 
accensibilem  ignem  **  to  a  palpable  and  kindled  fire/*  thus  making  \/fri\a^/Uwif 
qualify  irvpL  It  destroys  the  antithesis  clearly  intended  between  the  material 
Mount  Sinai  and  the  spiritual,  heavenly  Mount  Zion,  and  leads  us  to  expect 
as  the  antithesis  of  materiiil  fire,  some  other  kind  of  fire.  The  other  render* 
lug  is  required  by  Xitbp  dpci,  ver.  22.  Moreover,  \f/fi\a^fUpifi  as  an  epithet  ol 
wvpl  is  unnaturaL 


Cr.  XU.]  the  epistle  to  the  HEBREWS.  551 

Blackness,  darkness,  tempest  iyv6<l><p,  ^6<fxp,  Ov^Wr^). 
Tv6<f>of;  (N.  T.®)  and  5rf0o9  (elsewhere  only  2  Peter  and  Jude) 
belong  to  the  same  family.  As  distinguished  from  ascdro^ 
darkness  that  conceals^  as  opposed  to  light,  these  words 
signify  half-darkness^  gloam^  nebtUousness  ;  as  the  darkness  of 
evening  or  the  gathering  gloom  of  death.  It  is  a  darkness 
which  does  not  entirely  conceal  colour.  Thus  Bv6<f>o^^  the 
earlier  and  poetic  form  of  yvSi^^  is  used  by  Homer  of  water 
which  appears  dark  against  the  underlying  rock,  or  is  tinged 
by  mire.  Tv6<f>o^  and  atedro^  appear  together,  Ex.  x.  22; 
xiv.  20 ;  Deut.  iv.  11 ;  v.  22.  Ti/rf^o?  alone,  Ex.  xx.  21. 
Z6<t>o^  only  in  the  later  version  of  Symmachus.  See  on  J.  i.  5. 
BveXXa  N.  T.^,  from  Oueiv  to  boil  or  foam.  It  is  a  briefs 
violent,  sudden,  destructive  blast,  sometimes  working  upward 
and  carrying  objects  into  the  upper  air ;  hence  found  with 
ieCpeiv  to  lift  and  itvapird^eiv  to  snatch  up  (see  Hom.  Od.  xx.  63). 
It  may  also  come  from  above  and  dash  down  to  the  ground 
(Hom.  n.  xii.  258).  Sometimes  it  indicates  the  mere  force  of 
the  wind,  as  ai^/ioto  OveXXa  (Hom.  Od.  xii.  409;  /Z.  vi.  846). 

19.  Sound  of  a  trumpet  (^adXinyyo^  fix<p) .  See  Ex.  xix.  16, 
19 ;  XX.  18.  *H;(09  a  noise^  almost  entirely  in  Luke  and  Acts. 
See  L.  iv.  87;  Acts  ii.  2 ;  comp.  LXX,  1  Sam.  xiv.  19.  Of 
the  roar  of  the  waves,  L.  xxi.  25 ;  comp.  LXX,  Ps.  Ixiv.  7; 
Ixxvi.  17.  A  rumour  or  report^  see  on  L.  iv.  87,  and  comp. 
LXX,  1  Sam.  iv.  16 ;  Ps.  ix.  6.  It  does  not  occur  in  the 
O.  T.  narrative  of  the  giving  of  the  law,  where  we  have  ^i^ 
voice  ;  see  LXX,  Ex.  xix.  18, 16, 19 ;  xx.  18.  For  ^pi^  <rd\- 
irifffo^  voice  of  a  trumpet  in  N.  T.,  see  Apoc.  i.  10 ;  iv.  1 ; 
viii.  18.     'S.dXTTiy^  is  a  war-trumpet. 

Voice  of  words  (^19  j^fAdrmX  See  Ex.  xix.  19;  Deut. 
iv.  12 ;  V.  22,  24,  26. 

Entreated  (irapffr^avTo).    See  on  1  Tim.  iy.  7. 

Be  spoken  to  them  any  more  (TrpoareOfjvai  airoW).  Lit. 
he  added.     See  on  L.  iii.  19 ;  xx.  11 ;   Acts  xii.  8.     To 


552  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THS  KBW  TB8TAMSNT.       [Cb.  Xa 

them  refei-s  to  the  hearers,  not  to  the  things  heard.  Rend. 
*^  that;  uo  word  more  should  be  spoken  onto  them.**  Comp. 
Ex.  XX.  19 ;  Deut.  v.  26 ;  xviii.  16. 

20.  That  which  was  commanded  (ih  UaanKKdit/mnf). 

See  on  Mk.  vii.  36  ;  Acts  xy.  24. 

Touch  (OCyrji).  Elsewhere  in  N.  T.  only  oh.  xi.  28  and 
Col.  ii.  21.  LXX  only  Ex.  xix.  12.  It  implies  a  touching 
or  grasping  which  affects  the  object  (comp.  yer.  18  on  '^Xo- 
^v).  In  Class,  often  of  touching  or  handling  some  sacred 
object  which  may  be  desecrated  by  the  one  who  lays  hands  on 
it.  See  Soph.  Philoct.  667;  Oed.  Tyr.  891,  899.  So  here, 
the  touch  of  the  mountain  was  profanatiim. 

Shall  be  stoned  (XiOofioXriaercu).  Found  in  Matthew, 
Luke,  and  Acts.  In  LXX  see  Ex.  xix.  18.  Comp.  ikiddtrfii^ 
aaPj  ch.  xi.  87.  The  correct  text  omits  or  tkruit  through  with 
a  dart. 

21.  The  sight  (tA  4>avTa^6fi€Pov).  N.  T.^.  LXX,  Wisd. 
vi.  16;  Sir.  xxxi.  5.     Rend,  "the  appearance**:  that  which 

was  made  to  appear. 

I  exceedingly  fear  and  quake  (i/c<f}ol3(k  elfu  teal  ivrpoim). 
Lit.  /  am  frvjhtened  away  (or  out)  and  trembling.  *KK<f>o0<k 
only  here  and  Mk.  ix.  6.  Comp.  LXX,  Deut.  ix.  19.  "Ep- 
Tpofio^,  only  Acts  vii.  32  ;  xvi.  29.     Rare  in  LXX. 

22.  The  heavenly  Jerusalem.     See  on  Gal.  iv.  26.     The 

spiritual  mountain  and  city  wliore  God  dwells  and  reigns. 
Comp.  Dante  Inf.  i.  128  : 

*'  Quivi  6  la  sua  cittade,  e  Talto  seggio."  • 

Comp.  Ps.  ii.  6;  xlviii.  2,  3 ;  1.  2 ;  Ixxviii.  68;  ex.  2; 
Isa.  xviii.  7;  Joel  ii.  32;  Mic.  iv.  1,  2;  Am.  i.  2. 

•  "  Here  is  his  city  and  his  lofty  seat.** 


Ch.  XII.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE   HEBREWS.  558 

To  an  innumerable  company  of  angels  (fivpidaiv  ayy^- 
\mv^.  On  this  whole  passage  (22-24)  it  is  to  be  observed 
that  it  is  arranged  in  a  series  of  clauses  connected  by  fcal. 
Accordingly  fwpuiaiv  to  mtfriads  or  ten$  of  thouMands  stands 
by  itself,  and  iravryyvpet  festal  assembly  goes  with  hy^iXoup 
angels,  Mvpi<K  (see  L.  xii.  1 ;  Acts  xix.  19 ;  Apoc.  v.  11 ; 
quite  often  in  LXX)  is  strictly  the  number  ten  thousand.  In 
the  plural,  an  innumerable  mtdtitude.  So  A.  V.  here.  Rend, 
^^to  an  innumerable  multitude,"  placing  a  comma  after  fAvptd- 
aiVy  and  connecting  of  angels  with  the  next  clause.  This 
use  of  fAvpLcurtp  without  a  qualifying  genitive  is  justified  by 
numerous  examples.  See  Gren.  xxiv.  60 ;  Deut.  xxxii.  80 ; 
xxxiii.  2;  1  Sam.  xviii.  7,  8;  Ps.  xc.  7;  Cant.  v.  10;  Dan. 
vii.  10 ;  xi.  12 ;  Sir.  xlvii.  6 ;  2  Mace.  viii.  20 ;  Jude  14. 
XiXidSei  thousands  is  used  in  the  same  way.  See  Isa.  Ixx.  22 ; 
Dan.  vii.  10. 

23.  To  the  general  assembly  (Tran/T^i).  Const,  with 
ayy^XMv  of  angelsy  with  comma  after  angels.  Rend,  ^^to  a 
festal  assembly  of  angels."  This  and  the  next  clause  show 
what  the  myriads  consist  of, — a  host  of  angels  and  redeemed 
men.  Tlavijyvpi^^  N.  T.^,  is  a  gathering  to  celebrate  a  solemnity^ 
as  public  games,  etc. :  a  public,  festal  assembly.  Frequently 
joined  with  iopn^  feast.  See  Ezek.  xlvii.  11 ;  Hos.  ii.  11 ; 
ix.  5.  The  verb  iravrfyvpi^nv  to  celebrate  or  attend  a  pMie 
festival^  to  keep  holiday^  occurs  occasionally  in  Class.  :  not  in 
N.  T. :  LXX  once,  Isa.  Ixvi.  10.  The  festal  assembly  of 
angels  maintains  the  contrast  between  the  old  and  the  new 
dispensation.  The  host  of  angels  through  whose  ministra- 
tion the  law  was  given  (see  on  ch.  ii.  2,  and  Gal.  iii.  19) 
officiated  at  a  scene  of  terror.  Christian  believers  are  now 
introduced  to  a  festal  host,  surrounding  the  exalted  Son  of 
man,  who  has  purged  away  sins,  and  is  enthroned  at  God's 
right  hand  (ch.  i.  8). 

And  church  of  the  first-born  which  are  written  in 
heaven  (^koI  i/c/cXtfcia  irpanorSKwv  airoyeypafifUiwp  iv  ovpaPoU^, 


654  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  XIL 

This  forms  a  distinct  clause ;  ^^and  to  the  church,'"  etc.  For 
iKKkricla  a%9emhly  or  church,  see  on  Matt.  xvi.  18 ;  1  Th.  i.  1. 
The  ^^ myriads"  embrace  not  only  angels,  but  redeemed  men, 
enrolled  as  citizens  of  the  heavenly  commonwealth,  and  enti- 
tled to  the  rights  and  privileges  of  first-bom  sons.  TLpwri- 
To#co9  first'iom  is  applied  mostly  to  Christ  in  N.  T.  See  Rom. 
viii.  29;  Col.  i.  15,  18;  Heb.  i.  6;  Apoc.  i.  5.  Comp. 
Heb.  xi.  28,  and  L.  ii.  7.  Properly  applied  to  Christians  by 
virtue  of  their  union  with  Christ,  ^Hhe  first-bom  of  all  cre- 
ation," ^^the  first-bom  from  the  dead,"  as  sharing  his  sonship 
and  heirship.  See  Rom.  viii.  14-17,  29.  The  word  also 
points  to  Christians  as  the  true  Israel  of  God.  The  analogy 
is  suggested  with  the  first-bom  of  Israel,  to  whom  peculiio* 
sanctity  attached,  and  whose  consecration  to  himself  Gk>d 
enjoined  (Ex.  xiii.  1,  11-16) ;  and  with  the  further  appli- 
cation of  the  term  first-bom  to  Israel  as  a  people,  Ex.  iv.  22. 
The  way  was  thus  prepared  for  its  application  to  the  Mes- 
siah. There  seems,  moreover,  to  be  a  clear  reference  to  the 
case  of  Esau  (ver.  16).  Esau  was  the  first-bom  of  the  twin 
sons  of  Isaac  (Gen.  xxv.  25).  He  sold  his  birthright  (irpwro- 
tokIo)^  and  thus  forfeited  the  privilege  of  the  first-bom.  The 
assembly  to  which  Christian  believers  are  introduced  is  com- 
posed of  those  who  have  not  thus  parted  with  their  birthright, 
but  have  retained  the  privileges  of  the  first-born.  The  phrase 
"church  of  the  first-born"  includes  all  who  have  possessed 
and  retained  their  heavenly  birthright,  living  or  dead,  of  both 
dispensations :  the  whole  Israel  of  God,  although  it  is  quite 
likely  that  the  Christian  church  may  have  been  most  promin- 
ent in  the  writer's  thought. 

Which  are  written  in  heaven  (aTroyeypafifidvxp  ip  ovpav- 
oh),  * A7roypd<l>€Lv,  only  here  and  L.  ii.  1,  3,  5,  means  to  write 
off  or  copy;  to  enter  in  a  register  the  names,  property,  and 
income  of  men.  Hence,  a7roypa<f>'q  an  enrolment.  See  on 
L.  ii.  1, 2.  Here,  inscribed  as  members  of  the  heavenly  com- 
monwealth ;  citizens  of  heaven ;  Philip,  iv.  3 ;  Apoc.  iii.  5 ; 
xiii.  8,  etc.  See  for  the  image,  Ex.  xxxii.  32;  Ps.  Ixix.  28; 
Isa.  iv.  3 ;  Dan.  xii.  1 ;  L.  x.  20. 


Ch.  XII.]  THE   EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  555 

To  Qod  the  judge  of  all  C^ptr^  Oe^  irdm-wv).  Rend,  ''a 
judge  who  is  God  of  all."  Comp.  Dan.  vii.  9ff.  God  of  all 
his  first-born,  of  those  whom  he  chastens,  of  all  who  are  in 
filial  relations  with  him  under  both  covenants,  and  who, 
therefore,  need  not  fear  to  draw  near  to  him  as  judge. 

Spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect  (wvev/juun  hucalwv  rereX- 
€uofi^vwp).  The  departed  spirits  of  the  righteous  of  both 
dispensations,  who  have  completed  their  course  after  having 
undergone  their  earthly  discipline.  Notice  again  the  idea  of 
reXeCaxTK,  not  attained  under  the  old  covenant,  but  only 
through  the  work  of  Christ,  the  benefits  of  which  the  disem- 
bodied saints  of  the  O.  T.  share  with  departed  Christian 
believers.     Comp.  ch.  xi.  40. 

24.  The  mediator  of  the  new  covenant  (hiadriicrf:  via<i 
^cCrji).  See  ch.  vii.  22 ;  viii.  6,  8,  9, 10 ;  ix.  15.  For  coven- 
ant^  see  on  ch.  ix.  6  ff.  For  the  new  covenant,  rend,  a  new 
covenant.  N^  new^  only  here  applied  to  the  covenant  in 
N.  T.  The  word  elsewhere  is  xaivi^.  For  the  distinction, 
see  on  Matt.  xxvi.  29.  It  is  better  not  to  press  the  dis- 
tinction, since  v^,  in  certain  cases,  clearly  has  the  sense  of 
quality  rather  than  of  time^  as  1  Cor.  v.  7 ;  Col.  iii.  10,  and 
probably  here,  where  to  confine  the  sense  to  recent  would 
seem  to  limit  it  unduly.  In  the  light  of  all  that  the  writer 
has  said  respecting  the  better  quality  of  the  Christian  coven- 
ant, superseding  the  old,  outworn,  insufficient  covenant,  he 
may  naturally  be  supposed  to  have  had  in  mind  something 
besides  its  mere  recentness.  Moreover,  all  through  the  con- 
trast from  ver.  18,  the  thought  of  earlier  and  later  is  not  once 
touched,  but  only  that  of  inferior  and  better ;  repellency  and 
invitation ;  terrors  and  delights ;  fear  and  confidence.  Note 
that  the  privilege  of  approaching  the  Mediator  in  person  is 
emphasised. 

Blood  of  sprinkling  (alfian  (MvruTfiov),  ^Favrurfuk  sprink- 
ling  only  here  and  1  Pet.  i.  2,  see  note.  The  phrase  blood  of 
sprinkling  N.  T.^.      ^LXX,  where  we  find  vStsp  jkivruryLov 


556  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TBSTAKENT.       [Ch.  XIL 

water  of  sprinkling^  Num.  xix,  9, 18,  20,  21.  For  the  verb 
pavTl^€iv  to  sprinkle^  see  on  ch.  ix.  18.  The  mention  of  blood 
naturally  follows  that  of  a  covenant,  since  no  covenant  is 
ratified  without  blood  (ch.  ix.  16).  The  phrase  is  suffic- 
iently explained  by  ch.  ix.  16-22. 

Speaketh  better  things  (^Kp€lTTov\a\ovvTi).    For  ** better 

things"  rend.  *' better."  The  blood  is  personified,  and  its 
voice  is  contrasted  with  that  of  Abel,  whose  blood  cried  from 
the  ground  for  vengeance  upon  his  murderer  (Gren.  iv.  10). 
The  voice  of  Christ's  blood  calls  for  mercy  and  forgiveness. 

Than  that  of  Abel  (waph  rhv  "A/SeX).  Rend,  "than  AbeL** 
Comp.  ch.  xi.  4,  where  Abel  himself  speaks. 

25.  See — refuse  (ySXArrre — irapain^aOe).  For  fikiwere 
9ee^  see  on  ch.  iii.  12.  For  TrapcuniatfaOe  r^fuse^  see  on 
1  Tim.  iv.  7 

Him  that  speaketh  (t6v  XaXotWa).  Through  his  blood. 
Rend.  ^'  that  is  speaking,"  the  participle  denoting  something 
that  is  going  on. 

They  (ixeivoi).  The  people  of  the  Exodus.  See  ch.  iv.  2. 
The  words  from /or  if  they  to  the  end  of  the  verse  are  paren- 
thetical. 

That  spake  on  earth  {ewl  7179  t6v  xpvm^'''^o^o,').  For 
spake  rend,  warned,  and  see  on  ch.  viii.  6.  *E7ri  y^  upon^ 
earth  should  not  be  construed  with  refused  nor  warned^  but 
with  the  whole  clause.  "If  on  earth  they  escaped  not» 
refusing  him  that  warned." 

If  we  turn  away  (a7rooT/>€^/i€i^t).  Lit.  turning  away. 
The  present  participle,  possibly  with  reference  to  the  relapse 
into  Judaism  as  already  in  progress. 

From  him  that  speaketh  from  heaven  (rov  iar*  ovpav&v). 
Lit.  from  him  from  the  heavens.    Supply  as  A.  V.  that  speaketh. 


Ch.  Xn.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  557 

'O  air  oipapov  or  oipav&v  does  not  occur  in  N.  T.  elsewhere. 
Wherever  air'  ovp.  appears,  some  act  or  thing  is  always 
named  which  proceeds  from  heaven.  See  Matt.  xxiv.  29; 
Mk.  viii.  11 ;  L.  ix.  54  ;  xvii.  29 ;  xxi.  11 ;  xxii.  48  ;  J.  vi.  38 ; 
1  Th.  i.  7.  The  speaker  from  heaven  is  still  God,  but  speak- 
ing through  his  Son.  The  thought  connects  itself  with  that 
of  Christ  carrying  his  blood  into  the  heavenly  sanctuary,  from 
which  he  exerts  his  power  on  behalf  of  men.  See  ch.  ix.  12, 24. 
This  will  be  the  clearer  if  we  throw  out  the  idea  of  Christ 
presenting  his  blood  to  an  angry  God  as  a  propitiation,  and 
interceding  with  him  to  pardon  sin.    See  note  on  ch.  vii.  25. 

26.  Whose  voice  (oC  ^  ^i^).  Connect,  after  the  paren- 
thesis, with  speaketh  better^  etc.,  ver.  24. 

Shook  (^iadXeuerev).  See  on  L.  xxi.  26,  and  comp.  adko^ 
tossinff  or  swell  of  the  sea,  L.  xxi.  25.  See  Judg.  v.  4; 
Ps.  cxiii.  7. 

He  hath  promised  (^hniyyeXrai).  See  Hag.  ii.  6.  The 
quotation  is  adapted  from  LXX,  which  reads :  *^  Yet  once 
will  I  shake  the  heaven  and  the  earth  and  the  sea  and  the 
dry  land."  The  Hebrew  for  "yet  once"  reads  "yet  a  little 
while."  In  Haggai^s  prophecy,  he  comforts  the  people  for 
their  sorrow  that  the  second  temple  is  so  inferior  to  the  first, 
predicting  that  Jehovah  will  move  heaven  and  earth  and  sea 
and  land,  and  will  fill  the  house  with  his  glory;  and  the  glory 
of  the  latter  house  shall  exceed  that  of  the  former.  The  dis- 
cipline begun  on  Sinai  will  then  have  its  consummation. 
This  shaking  of  heaven  and  earth  was  typified  by  the  mater- 
ial shaking  at  Sinai.  The  shaking  predicted  by  the  prophet 
is  applied  by  our  writer  to  the  downfall  of  worldly  powers 
before  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  ver.  28 ;  comp.  ch.  i.  8,  and 
see  Zech.  xiv. 

27.  This  word  "  yet  once  more  "  (ri  WEt*  27ra().  At- 
tention is  called  to  tliis  phrase  as  specially  significant,  because 
it  indicates  that  the  shaking  prophesied  by  Haggai  is  to  be 


558  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ch.  XU 

final.  It  is  to  precede  the  new  heaven  and  the  new  earth. 
Isa.  Ixv.  17 ;  Ixvi.  22 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  13 ;  Apoc.  xxi.  1. 

Signifieth  {SrfXot).  From  S^Xo?  manifest,  evident.  To 
make  manifest  to  the  mind.  Used  of  indications  which  lead 
the  mind  to  conclusions  about  the  origin  or  character  of 
things.  See  Thucyd.  i.  8 ;  Aesch.  Pers.  618.  Comp.  1  Cor. 
iii.  13 ;  Heb.  ix.  8 ;  1  Pet.  i.  11.  Appropriate  to  prophetic 
revelations. 

The  removing  (rffv  fierdOeaiv).  See  on  ch.  vii.  12.  For 
the  thought  comp.  1  J.  ii.  17 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  81. 

As  of  things  that  are  made  (eb?  weTroirffUiwv).  Made 
indeed  by  God,  who  also  makes  the  new  heaven  and  the  new 
earth  (Isa.  Ixv.  17 ;  Ixvi.  22),  but  made  to  pass  away. 

That  the  things  which  cannot  be  shaken  may  remain 

(tva  fieipfi  r&  firj  aa\€v6fi€va).  Whether  we  consider  the 
things  which  are  shaken,  the  old  heavens  and  earth  which 
pass  away,  or  the  new  heaven  and  earth  which  cannot  be 
shaken,  both  are  irewoir^fidva  made  by  God.  The  writer 
perceives  this,  and  therefore  adds  to  as  of  things  that  are 
made  a  clause  stating  that  they  were  made  (by  God  himself) 
to  pass  away.  Accordingly,  ha  in  order  that  is  to  be  con- 
nected with  TrerroirjfjJvioVy  after  which  the  comma  should  be 
removed'.  Rend.  "  the  removal  of  things  made  in  order  that 
they  might  await  the  things  which  are  not  shaken."  Miu&p 
is  used  in  this  sense,  await.  Acts  xx.  5, 23,  and  often  in  Class.* 

28.  Receiving  a  kingdom  (^/SaaiXeiap  TrapaXafifidpopre:). 
The  participle  gives  no  note  of  time,  but  simply  indicates  the 
fact  that  Christians  as  such  receive.     The  compounded  prep- 

*  Another  mode  of  rendering  is  *'  things  which  are  made  to  the  end  that 
the  tilings  which  cannot  be  shaken  may  abide.**  To  this  it  is  justly  objected 
that  fultno  is  thus  compelled  to  assume  an  elliptical  sense :  '*  Come  Into  the 
place  of  the  things  removed  and  so  abide  **;  for  as  Alford  remarks,  '*  thin^i 
which  cannot  be  shaken  refnaining  merely,  would  be  a  matter  of  course.** 


Ch.  Xn.]  THE  BPI8TLB  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  569 

osition  waph  adds  to  the  idea  of  receiving  that  of  trammissian 
or  communication.  They  receive  ^rofii  God.  See  Dan.  yii.  18. 
BaaiXela  in  the  sense  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  in  this  epis- 
tle only  here  and  ch.  i.  8  (cit*!).  See  on  Matt.  iii.  2; 
L.  vi.  20. 

Let  us  have  grace  (ix<»fi€P  X^O-  Vov grace  rend,  thank- 
fulness. See  L.  xvii.  9 ;  1  Tim.  i.  12  •  2  Tim.  i.  8.  Comp. 
Ps.  1.  28. 

Acceptably  (jsuapiarm).  N.  T.^  ^LXX.  *^vap€irr€iv 
to  be  well  pleaeingj  ch.  xi.  5,  6 ;  xiii.  16.  For  the  adjective 
€va/9€OT09  well  pleasing^  see  on  Tit.  ii.  9. 

With  reverence  (^fierit  evXafieia^).  Rend,  ^^with  pious 
care."  Reverence  is  translated  from  T.  R.  aXbw  (see  on 
1  Tim.  ii.  9).     See  on  ch.  v.  7  ;  xi.  7. 

Fear  (SAw).  N.  T.^.  See  2  Mace.  iii.  17,  80 ;  xu.  22 ; 
xiii.  16 ;  xv.  28.  Its  fundamental  idea  is  timid  apprehension 
of  danger;  while  ^/3o9  is  the  terror  which  seizes  one  when 
the  danger  appears.  Schmidt  (^Synon.  189,  10)  illustrates 
happily.  In  a  primitive  forest  an  undefined  sense  of  possible 
danger  possesses  one,  and  makes  his  heart  beat  quickly  at 
every  rustle  of  a  leaf.  This  is  8^.  When  the  voice  and 
tread  of  a  wild  beast  are  distinctly  heard  close  at  hand,  the 
Ho^  becomes  ^)9o9.  The  phrase  ^^with  pious  care  and  fear" 
is  not  explanatory  of  acceptably.  These  are  to  accompany 
(/^ler^)  acceptable  service.  They  do  not  imply  a  cringing  or 
slavish  feeling,  but  grow  out  of  the  warning  in  ver.  25,  which 
runs  through  the  two  following  verses,  and  implies  that  the 
catastrophe  of  ver.  27  will  be  final,  leaving  no  more  opportun- 
ity to  retrieve  the  refusal  of  God's  invitation  to  the  privi- 
leges of  the  new  covenant,  or  the  relapse  into  the  superseded 
economy  of  Judaism. 

29.  For  our  God  is  a  consuming  fire  (/cal  7^  o  Oebu 
fiiiAv  wvp  KaravaXUrKov).    See  Ex.  xxiv.  17;  Deut.  iv.24; 


560  WOBD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Gte.  Xm. 

ix.  8 ;  Mai.  iii.  2 ;  iv.  1.  The  verb  N.  T.®,  a  few  times  in 
LXX.  Often  in  Class. ,  especially  Xenophon.  Originally 
to  use  up^  spends  lavish^  as  property :  thence  to  consume  as 
with  fire.  The  simple  verb  avaXlaicuv  to  expend  occurs 
L.  ix.  54 ;  Gal.  v.  15;  2  Th.  ii.  8.  'O  0ei^  ^fi&v  is  not  our 
God  as  compared  with  the  God  of  the  Jews.  He  is  the  God 
of  both  covenants  (see  ch.  i.  1,  2,  and  notes);  but  though 
now  revealed  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  offering  all  the  privil^^es 
of  the  new  covenant  (w.  22-24),  his  anger  bums  against 
those  who  reject  these  privileges. 


CHAPTER  xm. 

1.  Let  brotherly  love  continue  (^XaSeX^  ^icp^ra).   <^iX- 

ai€K4>ia  in  Paul,  Rom.  xii.  10;  1  Th.  iv.  9.  As  a  proper 
name,  Apoc.  i.  11;  iii.  7.  It  is  not  necessary  to  suppose 
that  the  admonition  implies  signs  of  estrangement  among 
those  addressed.   Comp.  ch.  iii.  13 ;  vi.  10 ;  x.  24 ;  xii.  12-15. 

2.  Be  not  forgetful  to  entertain  strangers  (t^  ^Xo- 
^evla^  fifj  iwiXavOdveaOe).  Lit.  be  not  forgetful  of  hospitality, 
^CKo^evla  only  here  and  Rom.  xii.  18.  ^LXX.  ^bCKi^Em^ 
hospitable,  1  Tim.  iii.  2 ;  Tit.  i.  8 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  9.  The  rend- 
ering of  Rev.  to  show  love  unto  strangers,  is  affected.  On  the 
injunction  comp.  Rom.  xii.  13;  1  Tim.  iii.  2;  Tit.  i.  8; 
1  Pet.  iv.  9,  and  see  Clem.  Rom.  Ad  Corinth,  x,  xi,  xii.  The 
virtue  of  hospitality  is  not  distinctively  Christian.  It  appears 
with  the  very  beginnings  of  history,  largely  as  the  resiilt  of 
nomadic  conditions.  It  was  peculiarly  an  Oriental  virtue. 
In  the  Egyptian  Book  of  the  Dead,  commendatory  judgment 
is  awarded  to  him  who  has  fed  the  hungry  and  clothed  the 
naked.  The  O.  T.  abounds  in  illustrations,  and  the  practice 
of  hospitality  among  the  Arabs  and  Bedoueen  is  familiar 
through  the  writings  of  travellers  in  the  East.*   Great  stress 

«  See  Dr.  W.  M.  Thomson,  The  Land  and  the  Book;  Buickhardt,  NoUs 
on  the  Bedouins  and  Wahtihys ;  Lane,  Modern  Egyptians  ;  Palgraye,  Central 
and  Eastern  Arabia;  Trombull,  Oriental  Social  Life;  etc 


Cb.  Xm.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  561 

was  laid  on  the  duty  by  the  Greeks,  as  appears  constantly  in 
Homer  and  elsewhere.  Hospitality  was  regarded  as  a  relig- 
ious duty.  The  stranger  was  held  to  be  under  the  special 
protection  of  Zeus,  who  was  called  f^io9,  the  god  of  the 
ttranger.  The  Romans  regarded  any  violation  of  the  rites 
of  hospitality  as  impiety.  Cicero  says:  ^^It  seems  to  me 
eminently  becoming  that  the  homes  of  distinguished  men 
should  be  open  to  distinguished  guests,  and  that  it  is  an 
honour  to  the  Republic  that  foreigners  should  not  lack  this 
kind  of  liberality  in  our  city"  {De  Off.  ii.  18). 

Have  entertained  angels  unawares  (i\4i66v  nve;  ^laavrei 
ayy^Xov^^.  The  Greek  idiom  is,  "  were  not  apparent  as  enter- 
taining angels."  The  verb  iXaSov  were  concealed  represents 
the  adverb  unawares.  For  similar  instances  see  Mk.  xiv.  8 ; 
Acts  xii.  16 ;  Aristoph.  Waaps^  617 ;  Hdt.  i.  44 ;  Hom.  J7. 
xiii.  278.  Bevi^eiv  to  receive  as  a  gtiest^  mostly  in  Acts.  In 
LXX  only  in  the  apocryphal  books.  In  later  Greek,  to  sur- 
prise with  a  novelty ;  passive,  to  be  surprised  or  shocked.  So 
1  Pet.  iv.  4, 12 ;  comp.  2  Ep.  of  Clem,  of  Rome  (so  called), 
xvii.  To  be  a  stranger  or  to  be  strange^  once  in  N.  T.,  Acts  xvii. 
20.  "BevuriiiAi  amazement^  perplexity^  not  in  N.  T.  LXX, 
Prov.  XV.  17.  Comp.  Ignatius,  Eph.  xix.  The  allusion 
to  the  unconscious  entertainment  of  angels  is  probably  to 
Gen.  xviii,  xix,  but  the  idea  was  familiar  in  Greek  literature. 
The  Greeks  thought  that  any  stranger  might  be  a  god  in 
disguise.  See  Hom.  Od.  i.  96  ff.;  iii.  829-870;  xvii.  485. 
Comp.  also  the  beautiful  story  of  Baucis  and  Philemon  as 
related  by  Ovid  ^Metam.  viii.  626-724).  The  thought  ap- 
pears in  our  Lord's  words,  Matt.  xxv.  84-46. 

8.  Them  that  are  in  bonds  (jS>v  Seafiitop).  See  on  ch.  x.  84. 

As  bound  with  them  (eb?  (nwBeBefidiHii).  N.  T.^.  As  if  you 
were  fellow-prisoners.  Comp.  1  Cor.  xii.  14-26 ;  2  Cor.  xi.  29. 
Public  intercession  for  prisoners  has  formed  a  part  of  the 
service  of  the  church  from  the  earliest  times.  See  the  prayer 
at  the  close  of  Clem.  Rom  Ad  Corinth,  lix.  It  also  occurs 
in  the  daily  morning  service  of  the  synagogue, 
vol-  IV.— 86 


662  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  KEW  TESTAMENT.      [Cm.  XBL 

Which  suffer  adversity  (/caKovxovfidvd^p).     Rend,  are  evU 

entreated.     See  on  ch.  xi.  87. 

As  being  yourselves  also  in  the  body  (^  xal  aimX  Svns 

iv  o-c&fusrt).  As  subject  like  them  to  bodily  suffenngs.  Not 
in  the  body  —  the  churchy  which  would  require  the  article. 
The  expression  iv  aAfiari  in  the  sense  of  being  still  alive, 
only  in  2  Cor.  xii.  2. 

4.  Marriage  is  honourable  in  all  (rifuo^  6  ydfAo^  iv  ira/trw). 
TdfAo^  everywhere  else  in  N.  T.  a  wedding  or  wedding  feast^ 
often  in  the  plural,  as  Matt.  xxii.  2,  8,  4 ;  L.  xii.  86.  Tifuoq 
honourable  or  held  in  honour.  Often  in  N.  T.  preciom^  of 
gold,  stones,  etc.,  as  1  Cor.  iii.  12;  Apoc.  xvii.  4;  xviii.  12: 
of  life.  Acts  XX.  24 :  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  Jas.  v.  7 ;  the 
blood  of  Christ,  1  Pet.  i.  19  ;  the  divine  promises,  2  Pet.  i.  4. 
Rend,  ^^let  marriage  be  had  in  honour."  The  statement  is 
hortatory,  as  suiting  the  character  of  the  entire  context,  and 
especially  the  yii^pfor;  "  for  whoremongers,"  etc.  *Ev  waatp 
*'  in  all  respects,"  as  1  Tim.  iii.  11 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  6 ;  Tit.  ii.  9 ; 
Col.  i.  18;  Philip,  iv.  12.  If  as  A.V.,  the  more  natural 
expression  would  be  iraph  iraaiv^  as  Matt.  xix.  26;  Acts 
xxvi.  8  ;  Rom.  ii.  13 ;  2  Th.  i.  6 ;  Jas.  i.  27.  *Ev  irouriv  in 
all  things  appears  in  this  chapter,  ver.  18.*  There  are  many 
points  in  which  marriage  is  to  be  honoured  besides  the  avoid- 
ance of  illicit  connections.     See  on  1  Thess.  i\ .  6. 

Qod  will  judge  (jcpivel  6  Oed^^.  Note  the  emphatic  position 
of  0  ^ecfe.  He  will  judge  and  condemn  infractions  of  the 
marriage-bond,  however  social  sentiment  may  condone  them. 

5.  Let    your    conversation    be    without    covetousness 

(^a<f)iXdpyvpo^  6  rpoiro^'),  Tp67ro<:  originally  turn  or  direction. 
Hence  way,  manner,  fashion  ;  way  or  manner  of  life.  In  this 
sense  N.  T.^.     Elsewhere  often  in  the  phrase  6v  rpAnov  or 

*  Calvin,  taking  ireurcy  as  masculine,  explains  that  marriage  is  not  to  be 
denied  to  any  class  of  men,  as  to  priests.  Others  explain  that  marriage  is 
not  to  be  avoided  on  ascetic  grounds  by  any  one. 


Cb.  XIII.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  568 

Kaff  hv  Tpinrov  in  or  according  to  the  way  in  which.  See 
Matt,  xxiii.  87;  L.  xiii.  34;  Acts  i.  11;  xv.  11;  xxvii.  25. 
The  meaning  here  is  character  or  moral  disposition.  'A^Xa/> 
yvpo^  without  covetousnesSy  only  here  and  1  Tim.  iii.  3,  see  note. 

Be  content  with  such  things  as  ye  have  (^apfcovfievot  roU 
wapowTLv).  Lit.  being  contented  with  the  things  which  are  at 
hand.  For  ap/cetv  to  suffice^  see  L.  iii.  14 ;  J.  yi.  7  ;  1  Tim.  vi.  8. 
On  the  compounds  avrdp/erfi  self-sufficient  and  avrdp/eeia  self- 
sufficiency^  see  on  2  Cor.  ix.  8 ;  Philip,  iv.  11. 

For  he  hath  said  (airm  yi^p  etpri/eev).  Rend,  for  ^*he 
himself."  God  himself.  For  etprf/cep  hath  said^  see  ch.  i.  13 ; 
iv.  3,  4 ;  x.  9. 

I  will  never  leave  nor  forsake  thee  (ov  fj^  ae  &v&  ouS*  ov 
fM7  ae  iyKaraXhrto).  Comp.  Gen.  xxviii.  15;  Josh.  i.  5; 
Deut.  xxxi.  6.  None  of  these,  however,  give  the  saying  in 
the  form  in  which  it  appears  here.  This  appears  to  be  a 
combination  or  general  adaptation  of  those  passages.  For 
"  never,"  rend,  "by  no  means  "  or  "  in  no  wise."  Av&  from 
avifffu.  In  Acts  xvi.  26;  xxvii.  40,  to  loosen:  Eph.  vi.  9^ 
to  give  up  ov  forbear.  Somewhat  in  this  last  sense  here :  "  I 
will  in  no  wise  give  thee  up^  or  let  thee  go.'^  I  will  not  relax 
my  hold  on  thee.   For  iy/caraXiiroDforsake^  see  on  2  Tim.  iv.  10. 

So  that  we  may  boldly  say  (&aT€  Bappovvrw;  ^fia^  Xiyeip). 
Lit.  so  thaty  being  of  good  courage^  we  say.  Sappetv  to  be  con- 
fident or  boldy  only  here  in  Hebrews.  Elsewhere  only  in  Paul. 
The  kindred  form  dapaelv  is  used  in  N.  T.  only  in  the  im- 
perative ddpcei  or  Oapaetre  take  courage.  See  Matt.  ix.  2; 
Mk.  vi.  50 ;  J.  xvi.  88 ;  Acts  xxiii.  11. 

The  Lord  is  my  helper,  etc.  From  LXX,  Ps.  cxvii.  6, 
with  slight  alteration.  Here,  what  shaU  man  do  unto  me  is 
an  independent  clause.  LXX  inserts  and:  *^my  helper  and 
I  will  not  fear,"  and  connects  the  last  clause  with  ^^  fear ": 
^^  I  will  not  fear  what  man  will  do." 


664  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Cte.  Zm 

7-15.  The  following  passage  presents  many  difficulties 
of  detail,  but  its  general  sense  is  clear.  It  sums  up  in  a 
striking  way  the  main  topics  of  the  epistle,  bringing  them 
all  to  bear  upon  the  conclusion  that  Judaism  and  Christian- 
ity are  mutually  exclusive,  and  thus  enforcing  the  warning 
against  a  relapse  into  Judaism.  It  goes  to  show,  in  oonnec- 
tion  with  other  features  of  the  epistle,  the  absurdity  of  the 
hypothesis  that  the  epistle  was  intended  as  a  warning  to 
Gentile  Christians  against  a  relapse  into  Paganism.* 

7.  Remember  them  which  have  the  rule  over  you  (/i*i^ 
fiovetkre  r&v  ^ovfUvwv  vfi&v).  Remember,  with  a  view  to 
observing  their  admonitions.  For  r&v  f/yoviiAvrnv  those  who 
lead  or  ruley  see  on  1  Th.  v.  18.  Used  of  both  civil  and 
ecclesiastical  rulers.  Clement  of  Rome,  among  a  great  vari- 
ety of  names  for  church  functionaries,  has  both  f^yoA/AOfoi 
and  irpoffyov/jL€Poi  (see  Ad  Corinth,  i,  xxi).  Comp.  Acts  xv.  22. 
In  LXX  frequently,  of  various  forms  of  authority,  and  in 
later  Greek  of  bishops  and  abbots.  For  **  which  have  the 
rule,"  rend.  "  which  had^''  etc. 

Who  have  spoken  (orrti^  iXdXrfaav).  Rend.  ^  spake,** 
and  comp.  ch.  ii.  3,  4. 

Follow  (fiifieiaOe).     Rend,  "imitate."     See  on  ch.  vi.  12. 

Considering  (avaOewpovvT^^.  Only  here  and  Acts  xvii.  28, 
see  note.  The  compound  verb  means  to  observe  attentively. 
The  simple  verb  Oetopelv  implies  a  spiritual  or  mental  interest 
in  the  object.     See  on  J.  i.  18. 

*  The  hypothesis  that  the  letter  was  called  out  by  '*  an  amateur  attach- 
ment to  Levitical  institutions  **  on  the  part  of  Gentile  Christiana,  leading  to 
the  adoption  of  an  eclectic  system  in  which  Jewish  elements  figured,  is  too 
shadowy  to  call  for  serious  refutation.  That  Judaism  became  a  *'  fad  **  for  a 
time  in  certain  circles,  is  a  well-known  fact,  which  has  its  analogy  in  the 
affectation  of  Buddhism  by  certain  individuals  in  modem  times.  But  there 
ifl  no  historical  evidence  that  in  the  Gentile  church  this  affectation  of  Judaism 
ever  assumed  the  proportions  of  a  movement,  or  afforded  a  menace  to  Gentile 
Christianity  sufficiently  serious  to  call  oat  such  a  pioduotton  as  the  Epistlt 
to  the  Hebrews. 


Ch.  Xm.]  THE  EPISTLB  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  565 

The  end  of  their  conversation  (rifv  bcfiaaip  r^  avaarpo- 
^).  "Exfiaai^  only  here  and  1  Cor.  x.  18  (note).  It  means 
outcome  or  iisue.  See  Wisd.  viii.  8.  In  1  Cor.  x.  18,  way 
out.  Comp.  Wisd.  ii.  17.  ^Avuarpo^  is  l\fe  in  intereaurse 
with  men.  See  on  1  Pet.  i.  15.  Conversatum,  in  the  older 
sense  of  that  word,  is  a  good  rendering,  as  it  is  also  a  nearly 
literal  rendering  of  the  Greek  word.  The  reference  is  to  the 
end  of  their  life  ;  what  kind  of  an  end  they  made ;  possibly, 
but  not  necessarily,  with  an  allusion  to  cases  of  martyrdom. 
What,  now,  was  the  subject  of  these  teachers'  faith  which  is 
commended  to  imitation  ?    It  is  stated  in  the  next  verse. 

8.  Jesus  Christ  the  same  (Ti;<roS9  Xpurri^  6  aimk}.  The 
A.y.  is  slipshod,  leaving  the  sentence  without  connection, 
or  in  apparent  apposition  with  the  end  of  their  conversation. 
In  translation  this  is  commonly  corrected  by  inserting  ii: 
*^  Jesus  Christ  is  the  same,"  etc.  But  even  thus  the  real 
point  of  the  statement  is  missed.  No  doubt  the  old  teachers 
believed  in  the  unchangeableness  of  Jesus  Christ ;  but  that 
fact  is  not  represented  as  the  subject  of  their  faith,  which 
would  be  irrelevant  and  somewhat  flat.  The  emphatic  point 
of  the  statement  is  Christ.  They  lived  and  died  in  the  faith 
that  Jesus  is  The  Christ  —  the  Messiah.  The  readers  were 
tempted  to  surrender  this  faith  and  to  return  to  Judaism 
which  denied  Jesus's  messiahship  (comp.  ch.  x.  29).  Hence 
the  writer  says,  ^^  hold  fast  and  imitate  their  faith  in  Jesus 
as  the  Christ.  He  is  ever  the  same.  He  must  be  to  you, 
to-day,  what  he  was  to  them,  yesterday,  and  will  be  forever 
to  the  heavenly  hosts  —  Chbist.  Rend,  therefore  ^^  Jesus  is 
Christ."  Observe  that  our  writer  rarely  uses  the  formula 
Jesus  Christ.  In  ch.  x.  10  it  occurs  in  a  passage  in  which 
the  messianic  mission  of  Jesus  is  emphasised  (see  w.  5,  9), 
and  in  xiii.  21,  in  a  liturgical  formula.  The  temptation  to 
forsake  Jesus  as  Messiah  is  treated  in  the  next  verse. 

9.  Be  not  carried  about  (jatf  irapa^peaBt).  A.y.  follows 
T.  R.  ir€pi4>^p€a0€.  Rend,  ''carried  away.''  The  present  tenae 
indicates  a  present  and  active  danger. 


566  WORD  STUDIES  IS  THE  KEW  TESTAMENT.     [G&  XDL 

With  divers  and  strange  doctrines  ^BiSaxM  woucCXan  icai 
^diHUi^ .  For  ^^  doctrines  "  rend.  ^^  teachings. "  These  teachings 
represent  various  phases  of  one  radical  error — the  denial  of 
Jesns's  messiahship  and  of  his  messianic  economy  as  super- 
seding Judaism  and  all  other  means  of  salvation.  Among 
them  the  writer's  mind  would  naturally  turn  to  the  prescrip- 
tions concerning  clean  and  unclean  meats  and  sacrificial 
festivals.  See  next  clause.  These  teachings  were  varuna 
as  contrasted  with  the  one  teaching  of  the  gospel;  they 
were  $trange  as  they  differed  from  that  teaching.  Comp. 
Gal.  i.  6-9.     For  woiKiXcu^  see  on  2  Tim.  iii.  16. 

That  the  heart  be  established  (^^ficuowrOfu  r^y  fcapBCav). 
There  is  an  emphasis  on  heart  as  well  as  on  ffrace.  These 
strange  teachings  all  emphasised  extemalismy  in  contrast  willi 
Christianity,  which  insisted  upon  the  purification  of  the  heart 
and  conscience.  The  contrast  is  strongly  stated  in  ch.  ix.  9, 
14,  and  the  Epistle  constantly  directs  the  readers  to  the  heart 
as  the  true  point  of  contact  with  God,  and  the  source  of  all 
departures  from  him.  See  ch.  iii.  8,  10,  12, 15;  iv.  7, 12; 
viii.  10 ;  especially  x.  22.  Hence,  the  writer  says,  ^4t  is  good 
that  the  solid  basis  of  your  assurance  before  Grod  be  in  the 
hearty  purged  from  an  evil  conscience,  so  that  you  can  draw 
near  to  God  with  a  firmly-established  confidence,  with  a  true 
heart,  in  full  assurance  of  faith":  ch.  x.  22;  comp.  1  Th. 
iii.  13 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  22. 

With  grace,  not  with  meats  (x^P^'r^  oi  fipmfuunv).  The 
heart  is  the  proper  seat  of  the  work  of  grace.  Free  grace 
is  the  motive-power  of  Christ's  sacrifice  (2  Cor.  viii.  9; 
Gal.  i.  15) ;  it  is  behind  the  blood  of  the  new  covenant, 
and  is  the  energetic  principle  of  its  saving  operation.  See 
Rom.  V.  2, 15  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  10  ;  Eph.  ii.  5,  7,  8 ;  2  Th.  ii.  16 ; 
Heb.  ii.  9 ;  iv.  16 ;  x.  29.  With  meats  stands  for  the  whole 
system  of  ceremonial  observances,  in  contrast  with  grace, 
working  on  the  heart.  See  ch.  ix.  10.  This  ceremonial  system 
yielded  no  permanent  benefit  to  those  who  lived  under  it. 
See  ch.  vii.  25;  ix.  9, 13,  14;  x.  1,  2,  4. 


Ch.  Xra.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  567 

Which  have  not  profited  them  that  have  been  occupied 
therein  (ei^  ok  oitc  i><t>€\ii0i)aav  oi  ireptirarothne^^.  Lit.  in 
the  which  they  who  walked  were  not  profited.  Uepiirarelv  to 
walk  about  is  often  used  to  express  habitual  practice  or  gen- 
eral conduct  of  life.  See  Rom.  vi.  4 ;  2  Cor.  x.  8 ;  Eph. 
ii.  10  ;  Col.  iii.  7 ;  iv.  5. 

10.  Those  who  persist  in  adhering  to  the  Jewish  economy 
can  have  no  part  in  the  blessing  of  the  new  covenant.  The 
two  are  mutually  exclusive.  The  statement  is  cast  in  the 
mould  of  the  Jewish  sacrificial  ritual,  and  in  the  figure  of 
eating  a  sacrificial  meal. 

We  have  an  altar  (ixop^v  Bvamarripiov).  It  is  a  mistake 
to  try  to  find  in  the  Christian  economy  some  specific  object 
answering  to  altar  —  either  the  cross,  or  the  eucharistic  table, 
or  Christ  himself.  Rather  the  ideas  of  approach  to  God,  — ^ 
sacrifice,  atonement,  pardon  and  acceptance,  salvation,  —  are 
gathered  up  and  generally  represented  in  the  figure  of  an 
altar,  even  as  the  Jewish  altar  was  the  point  at  which  all 
these  ideas  converged.  The  application  in  this  broader  and 
more  general  sense  is  illustrated  by  Ignatius :  ^^  If  one  be 
not  within  the  altar  (ivrd^;  rod  Ovtruurrripiov^  the  sacred  pre- 
cinct), he  lacketh  the  bread  of  God.  .  .  •  Whosoever,  there- 
fore, cometh  not  to  the  congregation  (jhrl  to  airrd^  he  doth 
thereby  show  his  pride,  and  hath  separated  himself,"  J^A.  v. 
Ignatius  here  uses  the  word,  not  of  a  literal  altar,  but  of  the 
church.  Comp.  2VaH.  vii.  Again  :  **  Hasten  to  come  to- 
gether as  to  one  temple,  even  God ;  to  one  altar,  even  to  one 
Jesus  Christ,"  Magn,  vii. 

Of  which  —  to  eat  (ef  oC — ^076^1^).  The  foundation  of 
the  figure  is  the  sacrifice  of  the  peace-  or  thank-offering,  in 
which  the  worshippers  partook  of  the  sacrifice.  See  Lev. 
vii.  29-36  ;  Deut.  xii.  6  ;  xxvii.  7.  The  peace-offerings  were 
either  public  or  private.  The  two  lambs  offered  every  year 
at  Pentecost  (Lev.  xxiii.  19)  were  a  public  offering,  and  tiieir 
flesh  was  eaten  only  by  the  officiating  priests,  and  within  the 


568  WOBD  STUDIES  IK  THS  KEW  TBBTAMElTr.     [Cb.  Xm. 

holy  place.  The  other  public  peace-offerings,  after  the  priests 
had  received  their  share,  were  eaten  by  the  offerers  them* 
selves.  Jehovah  thus  condescended  to  be  the  guest  of  his 
worshippers.  The  large  scale  on  which  such  festivals  were 
sometimes  celebrated  is  illustrated  in  1  K.  viii.  68.  In  pri- 
vate peace-offerings,  the  breast  of  the  victim  belonged  to  the 
Lord,  who  gave  it  to  the  priests  (Lev.  vii.  80),  and  the  right 
shoulder  was  given  directly  to  the  priests  by  Israel  (Lev. 
vii.  32).  After  the  ritual  of  waving,  the  entrails  were  con- 
sumed, and  the  rest  was  eaten  by  the  priest  or  the  worship- 
pers and  their  invited  guests,  among  whom  were  specially 
included  the  poor  and  the  Levites. 

Right  (iiovalav).     See  on  J.  i.  12. 

Which  serve  the  tabernacle  (pi  79  ^icfiv^  Xarp&nvrei). 

This  does  not  mean  the  priests  only,  but  the  worshippers 
also,  ^icrivri  tabernacle  is  used  figuratively  for  the  whole  cere- 
monial economy.  A  reference  to  the  priests  alone  is  entirely 
foreign  to  the  context,  and  to  the  whole  drift  of  the  discus- 
sion which  contrasts  the  privileges  of  Christians  at  large  (we) 
with  those  of  Israel  at  large.  The  writer  is  speaking  in  the 
present  tense,  of  institutions  in  operation  in  his  own  time,  to 
which  tabernacle^  in  any  other  than  a  figurative  sense,  would 
be  inappropriate.  Moreover,  Xarpeikiv  to  serve  is  used 
throughout  the  N.  T.,  with  the  single  exception  of  Heb. 
viii.  5,  of  the  service  of  the  worshipper  and  not  of  the  priest. 

11.  The  statement  that  the  adherents  of  the  old  economy 
are  excluded  from  the  privileges  of  the  new  is  justified  by 
an  illustrative  argument  drawn  from  the  ceremonies  of  the 
Great  Day  of  Atonement.  See  Lev.  xvi,  and  comp.  Heb. 
ix.  7.  Of  the  victims  offered  on  that  occasion  neither  people 
nor  priest  were  allowed  to  eat.  The  blood  of  the  bullock 
and  of  one  of  the  goats  was  carried  into  the  sanctuary  and 
sprinkled  upon  the  mercy-seat,  and  afterward  on  the  horns 
of  the  great  altar  outside  ;  and  the  bodies  of  the  slain  animals 
were  burned  in  a  clean  place  outside  of  the  camp  or  city. 


Ch.  Xra.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  569 

Beasts  ($gm»i^).  Lit.  livinff  creature9.  The  victims  for 
the  Day  of  Atonement  were  a  bullock  and  two  young  goats 
for  sin-offeringSf  and  two  rams  for  burnt-offerings.  Only 
one  goat,  chosen  by  lot,  was  slain  ;  the  other  served  as  the 
scape-goat.  Z&ov  animal  is  not  used  elsewhere  of  a  sacri- 
ficial victim,  either  in  N.  T.  or  LXX.  The  word  in  N.  T. 
mostly  in  Apocalypse.     See  on  Apoc.  i.  16  ;  iv.  6. 

Without  the  camp  (lf»  r^  wapefifioXrj^^.  Burning  with- 
out the  camp  was  also  required  in  the  case  of  victims  offered 
at  the  consecration  of  the  priests,  Ex.  xxix.  14 ;  at  the  sin- 
offering  for  the  priest,  Lev.  iv.  11, 12  ;  and  at  the  sin-offering 
for  the  congregation,  Lev.  iv.  21.  For  irapefifioXrj  camp,  see 
on  Acts  xxi.  34. 

12.  That  he  might  sanctify  the  people  (Jva  a/yicurtf  rdv 
\a6v).  'Ayid^eiv  to  sanctify  had  a  peculiar  significance  to 
Jews.  It  meant  to  set  them  apart  as  holy.  Hence,  the  Isra- 
elites were  called  ayioi^  as  separated  from  other  nations  and 
consecrated  to  God.  Our  writer  extends  the  application  of 
the  word  to  Christians.  For  Christ's  work  he  claims  the 
same  efficacy  which  the  Jew  claimed  for  the  special  call  of 
God  to  Israel,  and  for  the  operation  of  the  Jewish  sacrificial 
system.  The  office  of  his  atoning  work  is  to  sanctify;  to 
make  for  himself  a  holy  nation  (idvof;  S^iov)^  a  people  ^  pre- 
pared for  the  Lord  "  (L.  i.  17)  ;  a  true  Israel  of  God.  'O  Xiwfe 
the  people^  or  XoAi  imv  my  people^  occurs  constantly  in  O.  T. 
as  a  designation  of  Israel,  and  also  in  N.  T.  See,  in  this 
epistle,  ch.  v.  3  ;  vii.  5, 11,  27  ;  ix.  7, 19.  The  N.  T.  extends 
the  title  to  all  who,  under  the  new  dispensation,  occupy  the 
position  of  Israel.  See  1  Pet.  ii.  10  ;  Matt.  i.  21 ;  L.  ii.  10  ; 
Heb.  iv.  9 ;  viii.  10  ;  x.  30 ;  xi.  25. 

With  his  own  blood  (iik  rod  IhCov  olfAuro^^.  In  contrast 
with  the  blood  of  animal-sacrifices.     Comp.  ch.  ix.  12,  28. 

Suffered  (hraOev).  Used  of  Christ  in  Hebrews,  Ist  Peter, 
and  Acts,  but  not  in  Paul,  who,  however,  has  iradrnAora  rotf 
X/MOTot)  sufferings  of  Christy  2  Cor.  i.  5  ;  Philip,  iii.  10  (avroS). 


670  WORD  STUDIES  IS  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.     [Cb.  ZOL 

.  Without  the  gate  (1^  r^  ttuXi;?).     Gate  is  substitated 
for  camp  (ver.  11),  as  more  appropriate  to  a  city. 

13.  Bearing  his  reproach  (rov  oviiSurfthv  airrov  ^4povT€i). 
The  reproach  of  exclusion  from  the  Jewish  commonwealth* 

14.  For  here  have  we  no  continuing  city  (ov  ^hp  fx9^ 
fA€v  &S€  fiAfovcrav  irdiXxv).  Here,  on  earth.  Continuing  ci^. 
Let  us  go  forth  without  the  gate  to  Jesus ;  for  the  system 
which  has  its  centre  in  Jerusalem,  the  Holy  City,  is  no  more 
ours.  We  are  excluded  from  its  religious  fellowship  by 
embracing  the  faith  of  him  who  suffered  without  the  gate* 
The  city  itself  is  not  abiding.  As  a  Jtoly  city,  it  is  the  centre 
and  representative  of  a  system  of  shadows  and  figures  (ch. 
viii.  5 ;  ix.  9,  23,  24;  x.  1),  which  is  to  be  shaken  and 
removed,  even  as  is  the  city  itself  (xii.  27) ;  viii.  18 ; 
ix.  10  ;  X.  9,  18.  If  the  epistle  had  been  written  after  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem  a  reference  to  that  event  could 
hardly  have  been  avoided  here. 

One  to  come  (Tf)v  tUKKovaav).  Rend,  ^'that  which  is  to 
come."     The  heavenly  Jerusalem.     Comp.  ch.  xi.  10, 18-16. 

The  course  of  thought  in  vv.  9-14  is  as  follows  :  Be  not 
carried  away  with  divers  and  strange  teachings,  for  example, 
those  concerning  meats  and  drinks  and  sacrificial  feasts.  It 
is  good  that  the  heart  be  established,  rather  than  that  the  body 
should  be  ceremonially  pure ;  and  that  the  heart  be  estab- 
lished by  the  grace  of  God  in  Christ,  which  alone  can  give 
inward  peace,  a  pure  conscience,  an  established  rest  and  secur- 
ity —  rather  than  by  the  consciousness  of  having  partaken  of 
meats  ceremonially  clean  :  for  those  whose  religious  life  was 
under  the  regimen  of  this  ceremonial  system  derived  no  per- 
manent profit  from  it.  Not  only  so,  the  two  systems  exclude 
each  other.  You  cannot  hold  by  the  Levitical  system  and 
enjoy  the  blessings  of  Christian  salvation.  It  is  the  sacrifice 
of  Christ  through  which  you  become  partakers  of  grace.  It 
is  impossible  to  obtain  grace  through  meats ;  for  meats  rep- 


Ch.  Xm.J  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  571 

resent  the  economy  which  denies  Christ ;  and,  by  seeking 
establishment  through  meats,  you  exclude  yourselves  from 
the  economy  which  is  the  only  vehicle  of  grace. 

Accordingly,  we  have  an  altar  and  a  sacrifice  from  which 
the  votary  of  Leviticalism  is  excluded.  By  the  Levitical 
law  it  was  forbidden  to  eat  the  flesh  of  the  victim  offered  on 
the  Great  Day  of  Atonement ;  so  that,  if  the  Levitical  law 
still  holds  for  you,  you  cannot  partake  of  the  Christian's 
atoning  victim.  The  law  under  which  you  are  prohibits  you. 
According  to  that  law,  there  is  nothing  to  eat  of  in  an  atoning 
sacrifice,  since  the  body  of  the  victim  is  burned.  Neither 
priest  nor  people  have  anything  more  to  do  with  it,  and, 
therefore,  it  is  carried  outside  of  the  camp  or  city,  outside  of 
the  region  of  O.  T.  covenant-fellowship.  Similarly,  so  long 
as  you  hold  by  Judaism,  participation  in  Christ's  atoning 
sacrifice  is  impossible  for  you.  It  is  outside  your  religious 
sphere,  like  the  body  of  the  victim  outside  the  gate.  You 
cannot  eat  of  our  altar. 

The  blood  of  the  Levitical  victim  was  carried  into  the 
holy  of  holies  and  remained  there.  If  you  seek  the  benefit 
of  that  blood,  it  must  be  within  the  camp,  at  the  Levitical 
tabernacle  or  temple.  And  you  cannot  have  the  benefit  of 
Christ's  blood,  for  that  compels  you  to  go  outside  the  gate, 
where  he  suffered.  According  to  the  O.  T.  law,  you  could 
partake  of  the  benefit  of  the  blood,  but  you  could  not  eat  of 
the  body.  Christ's  sacrifice  gives  you  both  body  and  blood 
as  spiritual  food ;  but  these  you  must  seek  outside  of  Juda- 
ism. Thus,  by  means  of  the  O.  T.  ritual  itself,  it  is  shown 
that  the  Jewish  and  the  Christian  systems  exclude  each 
other.     Christ  must  be  sought  outside  of  the  Jewish  pale. 

15.  By  him  therefore  (hC  ainov).  Rend,  "through  him." 
Omit  therefore.  A.  V.  follows  T.  R.  oiv.  Through  Jesus, 
and  not  through  the  Jewish  ritual. 

Let  us  offer  (ava^pfafi&f).  Lit.  hring  up  the  offering  to 
the  altar.  See  Jas.  ii.  21,  where  the  full  phi^  occurs.  For 
the  phrase  offer  up  through  Jesus  Christy  comp.  1  Pet.  ii.  5. 


572  WOBD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.     [G^  Zm. 

The  sacrifice  of  praise  (Owrlav  alvia^m).  The  Leyitical 
term  for  a  thank-offering.  See  LXX,  Lev.  vii.  2,  8»  5 ; 
2  Chron.  xxix.  31 ;  xxxiii.  16 ;  Ps.  xlix.  14,  28 ;  cvi.  22 ; 
cxv.  8.  "Ati^aw  prai9e,  N.  T.^.  Often  in  LXX,  ^Class.  For 
^Hhe  sacrifice"  rend,  ^^a  sacrifice."  The  sacrifice  of  thanks- 
giving is  to  take  the  place  of  the  animal  sacrifice.  For  the 
emphasis  on  thanksgiving  in  N.  T.  see  Eph.  v.  20 ;  CoL  i.  12 ; 

1  Th.  V.  18.  The  Rabbins  had  a  saying,  ^^  in  the  future  time 
all  sacrifices  shall  cease ;  but  praises  shall  not  cease."  Philo 
says  :  ^^They  offer  the  best  sacrifice  who  glorify  with  hymns 
the  saviour  and  benefactor,  God." 

That  is  the  fruit  of  our  lips  (rovT4(mv  tcafnrhv  x^XAni). 
Omit  our.  From  LXX  of  Hos.  xiv.  3,  where  the  Hebrew 
reads,  ^^  we  will  account  our  lips  as  calves ''  (offered  in  sac- 
rifice).    Comp.  Isa.  Ivii.  19. 

Giving  thanks  to  his  name  (^ofAoXoyoihnwp  r^  Mfum 
avTov).  The  phrase  N.  T.^  <>LXX.  Rend,  "of  lips  which 
make  confession  to  his  name." 

16.  But  to  do  good  and  to  communicate  forget  not 
(r^  Bk  einroitw;  ical  KOivtDvia^  fiif  hrCKavOdv^aOi).  Lit.  but  he 
not  forgetful  of  doing  good  and  communicating,  'EuTroifa  benefi- 
cence^ N.  T.^,  ^LXX,  ^Class.  For  tcotvfovUi  communication^ 
of  alms,  etc.,  see  on  L.  v.  10  ;  Acts  ii.  42.  See  also  Rom. 
XV.  26  ;  2  Cor.  viii.  4  ;  ix.  13.  Comp.  the  verb  tcoiiwvelv  to 
impart^  Rom.  xii.  13 ;  xv.  27  ;  Philip,  iv.  15. 

17.  They  watch  (aypvirvowrtv).  See  on  Mk.  xiii.  83,  and 
comp.  L.  xxi.  36  ;  Eph.  vi.  18. 

With  grief  (crrei^afovTc?).   Lit.  groaning.   See  Rom.  viii.  28; 

2  Cor.  V.  2,  i  ;  Jas.  v.  9. 

Unprofitable  (iXwmX^).  N.  T.^  ®LXX.  From  &  not, 
and  XvaireXiji  pc^yingfor  expenses.  Hence,  what  does  not  pay; 
unprofitable. 


Ch.  Xm.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO   THE  HEBREWS.  573 

I  may  be  restored  to  you  (jLwoicar<iara0&  v/mv).  Not  im- 
plying impriaonment,  but  enforced  absence  through  sickness 
or  other  cause. 

20.  The  Qod  of  peace.  Not  an  O.  T.  phrase,  and  found 
only  in  Paul  and  Hebrews.  See  Rom.  xv.  33;  xvi.  20; 
1  Cor.  xiv.  33;  Philip,  iv.  9;  1  Th.  v.  23;  2  Th.  iii.  16. 
The  phrase  signifies  Qod  who  is  the  author  and  giver  of  peace. 

Who  brought  again  from  the  dead  (o  avayarfa>v  U  vacp&v). 
The  only  direct  reference  in  the  epistle  to  the  resurrection 
of  Christ.  Ch.  vi.  2  refers  to  the  resiirrection  of  the  dead 
generally.  ^Avdyeiv  of  raising  the  dead,  only  Rom.  x.  7. 
Rend,  "brought  up,"  and  comp.  Wisd.  xvi.  13.  *Avd  in 
this  compound,  never  in  N.  T.  in  the  sense  of  again.  See  on 
L.  viii.  22 ;  Acts  xii.  4 ;  xvi.  34  ;  xxvii.  3.  The  verb  often 
as  a  nautical  term,  to  bring  a  vessel  up  from  the  land  to  the 
deep  water ;  to  put  to  sea. 

That  great  shepherd  of  the  sheep  (rov  iroifUva  r&v  wpo* 
fidrtov  TOP  li^av).  The  Greek  order  is,  "the  shepherd  of 
the  sheep  the  great  (shepherd)."  Comp.  J.  x.  2,  11, 14 ; 
1  Pet.  ii.  25,  and  see  Isa.  Ixiii.  11.    Of  God,  Ezek.  xxxiv. 

Through   the   blood  of  the   everlasting   covenant  (Jv 

aXfjLari  SiaffrJKtfi  aUovlov^.  Rend.  "  in  the  blood  of  an  eternal 
covenant."  See  Zech.  ix.  11.  The  phrase  eternal  covenant 
N.  T.^.  Common  in  LXX;  see  Gen.  ix.  16;  xvii.  19; 
Lev.  xxiv.  8 ;  2  Sam.  xxiii.  5 ;  Jer.  xxxix.  40 ;  Ezek.  xvi.  60. 
Const,  with  the  great  shepherd  of  the  sheep.  It  may  be  granted 
that  the  raising  of  Christ  from  the  dead,  viewed  as  the  con- 
summation of  the  plan  of  salvation,  was  in  the  sphere  of  the 
blood  of  the  covenant ;  nevertheless,  the  covenant  is  nowhere 
in  the  N.  T.  associated  with  the  resurrection,  but  frequently 
with  death,  especially  in  this  epistle.  See  Matt.  xxvi.  28 ; 
L.  xxii.  20 ;  Heb.  ix.  15, 16, 17,  20.  The  connection  of  the 
blood  of  the  covenant  with  Christ's  pastoral  office  gives  a 
thoroughly  scriptural  sense,  and  one  which  exactly  fits  into 


574  WOBD  STITDIBS  IS  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [G&  XHL 

the  context.  Christ  becomes  the  great  shepherd  solely 
through  the  blood  of  the  covenant.  Comp.  Acts  xx.  28. 
Through  this  is  brought  about  the  new  relation  of  the 
church  with  Grod  described  in  ch.  viii.  10  ff.  This  tallies 
perfectly  with  the  conception  of  "the  God  of  peace'';  and 
the  great  Shepherd  will  assert  the  power  of  the  eternal 
covenant  of  reconciliation  and  peace  by  perfecting  his  flock 
in  every  good  work  to  do  his  will,  working  in  them  that 
which  is  well  pleasing  in  his  sight.  With  this  agree  Jer.  L 
5,  19 ;  Ezek.  xxxiv.  25,  and  the  entire  chapter,  see  especially 
vv.  12-15,  23,  31.  In  these  verses  the  Shepherd  of  the 
Covenant  appears  as  guiding,  tending  his  flock,  and  leading 
them  into  fair  and  safe  pastures.  Comp.  Isa.  Ixiii.  11-14, 
and  Apoc.  vii.  17,  see  note  on  iroi/Aavet  shall  shepherd.  'Ev 
aXfjLari  "  in  the  blood,"  is  in  virtue  of^  or  in  the  power  of  the 
blood. 

21.  Make  you  perfect  (^Karafnia-ai  vfia^^.  The  verb  is 
aptly  chosen,  since  the  readers  are  addressed  as  a  body — the 
flock  of  Christ.  The  prayer  is  for  the  complete  mutual 
adjustment  of  all  the  members  of  the  flock  into  a  perfected 
whole,  fitted  to  do  the  perfect  will  of  God.  See  on  1  Pet.  v.  10, 
and  comp.  notes  on  2  Tim.  iii.  17  ;  1  Cor.  i.  10 ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  11. 
Ignatius  uses  the  word  of  the  church's  being  joined  (jcaTqp' 
Ti^afiivoC)  in  common  subjection  to  the  Bishops  and  the  Pres- 
bytery (^Eph,  ii),  and  of  himself  as  one  composed  or  settled 
into  union  (ek  hwai^v)^  that  is,  avoiding  division  in  the 
church  QPhilad.  viii) ;  and  again  to  the  Smymaeans  (i)  "  I 
have  perceived  that  ye  are  settled  or  compacted  in  faith  im- 
movable, being,  as  it  were,  nailed  on  the  cross  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  in  flesh  and  in  spirit.'' 

In  every  good  work  (Jv  iravrl  ayaO^^.   A.  V.  follows  T.  R. 

?py<p  work.     Rend.  "  in  every  good  thing." 

To  do  his  will  (ek  to  Trotrfo-ai  to  OeXrffia  airrov^.  To  the 
end  that  you  do,  etc. 


Gh.  Xm.]  THE  EPISTLB  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  575 

Working  in  you  (woi&v  iv  ^filv).  Rend,  "in  u«."  A.V. 
follows  T.  R.  vfilv  you.  For  "working"  rend,  "doing." 
The  word  plays  on  woirjaai  to  do.  "  Make  you  perfect  to  do 
his  will,  he  doing  in  us  what  is  well-pleasing  in  his  sight." 

That  which  is  well-pleasing  in  his  sight  (t6  evdpearov 
ivmriov  ovroC).  Comp.  Eph.  v.  10.  The  phrase  N.  T.^. 
^EvdpeoTov  usually  with  the  simple  dative,  as  Rom.  xii.  1 ; 
xiv.  8 ;  Eph.  v.  10 ;  Philip,  iv.  18.     Comp.  1  J.  iii.  22. 

22.  Suffer  the  word  of  exhortation  (^kvdxeaffe  rov  XcPyov 
T^  wapascXi^eof^^.  For  "suffer,"  rend,  "bear  with."  See 
Acts  xviii.  14 ;  2  Cor.  xi.  1 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  3.  Do  not  become 
impatient  at  my  counsels  in  this  letter.  The  word  of  exhorta- 
turn  refers  to  the  entire  epistle  which  he  regards  as  horta- 
tory rather  than  didactic  or  consolatory.  The  phrase  only 
in  Acts  xiii.  15. 

I  have  written  a  letter  unto  you  (hriar^CKa  v/uv).  A.V. 
supplies  a  ^tt^r.  Rend.  "I  have  written  unto  you."  The 
verb  only  here,  Acts  xv.  20 ;  xxi.  25.  Lit.  to  send,  not  let- 
ters only.  Sometimes  with  hrurroXal  or  hrurroXii^  letters 
added,  as  Neh.  vi.  19 ;  1  Mace.  xii.  7.  In  N.  T.  always  of 
sending  a  letter. 

In  a  few  words  (Si^  fipax^v)-  There  is  a  suggestion  of 
apology.  Do  not  grow  impatient.  The  letter  is  short.  The 
phrase  N.  T.^,  but  comp.  Bi  6X^a»v,  1  Pet.  v.  12,  and  iv 
oKl^itp  briefly,  Eph.  iii.  3. 

23.  Our  brother  Timothy  (rov  aSeX^i^  ^fi&v  TiiMeov). 
Paul's  habit,  when  using  o  aSeX^  brother  with  a  proper 
name,  is  to  put  the  proper  name  first.  See  Rom.  xvi.  28 ; 
1  Cor.  i.  1;  xvi.  12;  2  Cor.  i.  1;  ii.  13;  Philip,  ii.  26. 

Set  at  liberty  (aw6\€\viUpov).  Nothing  is  known  of  the 
fact  referred  to.  ^AiroXveiv  of  releasing  from  confinement. 
Matt,  xxvii.  15 ;  J.  xix.  10  ;  Acts  iii.  13  ;  iv.  21,  28 ;  v.  40. 


576  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAICENT.     [Cb.  Xm. 

24.  They  of  Italy  (oi  hm  r^  'IraX^).  This  may  mean, 
^  those  who  are  in  Italy  send  greeting  from  Italy '*;  or, 
^Hhose  of  Italy  (Italian  ChristianB  with  the  writer  at  the 
time)  send  greeting '  from  the  place  at  which  the  letter  is 
being  written.  See  Introduction.  The  phrase  affords  no 
reliable  indication  as  to  the  residence  of  the  persons  ad- 
dressed. 


WORDS  WHICH  OCCUR  ONLY  IN  HEBREWa 


aycvcoAoyiTros 

ycvcoAoycofuu 

€wrun^ 

furtwura 

iiyvofiiia 

y€wpyu>fua 

cvAo^cia 

§UTpunnMm 

60€Trfais 

yy64^ 

cvXa^cofuu 

fuffieria 

dSkiiaii 

cinrcptcrraTOC 

fMfXwni 

CUYCiOS 

SofuiAis 

cvirocta 

^^ 

olftartKXixriaL 

BcKdrif 

fjLurOawoioaui 

alv€<n^ 

Uxarota 

fimrpiiofiai 

purBam&OTJii 

Qi<T$rfTripui¥ 

iioi 

SiXTftrii 

/ivcAik 

oTrcos 

Sippa 

$€pdwwv 

dUcaroAvros 

Svffiwvpyii 

$v€XXai 

vc^ 

ikhvrri 

SlfWCV 

OviuarrifM¥ 

KOCWC 

OKpoBiVWV 

Sidray/m 

vo^ioAercM 

liAvo-ircAiTS 

&a^op<arcpo¥ 

UfHuavvri 

l^/Kk 

ofurdBvroi 

&17VC1C17C 

UCtTffpiOi 

&tiiJTu»p^ 

&acvcofuu 

3y#co5 

AlfOKOLVLCdi 

&0p^ftfOl$ 

Kafiaporqi 

dXiytopcM 

dvoAoytiCofUU 

Soiccfuio-ia 

KOKCVX^OfiOl 

dXotfpciSt* 

6vapi0fir/TOi 

&Krcp/A7ycvros 

KOfiTtpita 

ofUMon^ 

dyturravpoia 

KarayfavHopai 

OpKHifiOaCoL 

6vraya>viCofiai 

^ayircp 

Kara&qKoi 

avrucaOianffU 

lyyuos 

KaravaXiaKti 

wavnyvpt^ 

iarapafiaroi 

Ufialvw 

KaTOO-JCCO^tt 

wapajUiypariim 

Avdratp 

iK^xn 

Karcuricovoc 

HP^/f^TT^-KOIUVW 

dvavyao'/Aa 

iKXav&dvofuu 

Kovais 

itapawucpafffjuof 

airccpo9 

IxTpofioi 

KC^oAiV 

mpoLiri'WTiii 

Atrofikeiria 

IXcyxos 

KOfwrj 

wapawkriaiwi 

dird(7ToXo9  (of 

ifimuyfAOi 

KplTUCOi 

wapap€ia 

Chriflt) 

ivKOLytl^ia 

Kii»k0¥ 

wtipa 

apfioi 

hnjppiCiD 

<l<^n^ 

^ 

woXvfA€pS»9 

AfftaVUTfAOi 

Acvcirticoc 

voAvrpointfs 

imXuwia 

»ptj«  ^ 

iim 

fupurpji 

wpoPXiwopai 

p^ 

cuipccrrctt 

/Acotrcuu 

wpc&pofUK 

ficrdwi 

cuipc(rr«0S 

ficratfcois 

wpoaayopcm 

TOL,    IT, 

.—37 

577 

678 


WOBDS  WHICH  OCCUB  ONLY  HI  HEBKEW8. 


irpoo-^ros 

aw€wtfuiflTvp4m 

rpaxtikiioiiai 

fhP^^ 

wfwrxwm 

eaPParur/ik 
irwawoXXvfuu 

fnntKoKovxtoftai, 

TcXcMtfTI^ 

rifuupca 

rpcxta 
&rooToX^ 

WORDS  FOUND  IN  HEBREWS  AND  ELSEWHERE,  BUT 
NOT  IN  PAUL. 


[Wwrdi  which  occur  in  the  Pastorals  are  marked 

•0 

iyyaXXuun^ 

dcroXcvros 

Ik4>oPo9 

7X« 

ayicvpa 

<S<rrcibs 

iXoiw 

air  (a* 

iarpoy 

iXarrom 

0e«ipc« 

aKovOai 

Ai^iXdfyvpoi* 

iXeii^jw 

Ajp^r* 

aKpoy 

ifiwCwrti* 

IdofiOA 

dftcXcu* 

PawTur/iii 

ili4ar(tm 

ofuavros 

Pifir^* 

hOvfi^tns 

icparcca 

AvaS^xoftai 

PXa4mi¥^ 

iyyouL 

AvaOttipem 

Poifiua 

^Xe«> 

ivoKa^irrm 

Ppaxts 

^vrcAAofuu 

dvarcXAitf 

ivrpofWi 

cfiarcov 

yd/wi 
mpdaKfi^ 

i(dyu^ 
l$oSa, 

KoSapUTfJUOf 
KOiTOi 

dvrcAoyux 

yv/tt«i»* 

hnypd^ 

drrirvwoi 

ijn&iucyvfu 

oWirOTttlCTOS  * 

SutPaivta 

MOtaii* 

NUT  U  NUT  VVP 

ttaTitwwLtstnc 

avun-ipoit 

SiaAcyofUU 

KBLTdVaVU 

dwtf^eXiTS* 

SuurrcAAofuu 

iwurK€WTOfuu 

KaTawfToa/Aa 
#earaaiceva{a> 
#eara^€vyo> 
K€f^dXau¥ 

diraAAootrtt 

8(arii0efuu 

iwUTKCTtta 

<iiro/9<£AA» 

IxUTFOfUU* 

iiroypdf^ofuu 

fiurro/ios 

iwurriXX^ 

diro&icarott) 

l«os 

iptw 
ipfiffwota 

iciJ8arro« 

dvofca^tVn^fU 

dfnpfucoi 

ipvOpoi 

icocyoci) 

diroAaiMTtf* 

cicrayo) 

iawT€fiOf 

ICOKICiVOC 

diroAuu 

Cib-cifu 

vjtcaipot 

KVKXote 

tSpWofuu* 

^icXc/ir<i» 

ixO^, 

d/9iroyi7 

iKowrtiaq 

dpxny^ 

itCTfUwOfUU* 

{o^ 

XaMm 

dp)(up€vs 

Ui^* 

{wor 

Ximr* 

579 


580       WORDS  FOUND   IN  HBBBEWS  AND  ELSEWHERE. 


h»oPM^ 

Op#C09 

ir<^p<ii0eF 

TcXcMNrK 

Xoi^ 

5cno«* 

wfHurPvnpoi* 

TcXcvrai* 

Xvrpwn^ 

doT^ 

irpo(£ytt»* 

T€xwn|« 

XvxvuE 

»pd8i^» 

r/>^)3oXos 

vaXoAOo) 

»p<XF^X<V^* 

rpo^ 

fAoyya 

vovrcAiTs 

»po<rcx«» 

fmtrriyon 

irarro^ 

wfMFi^ipm 

VCTwV 

lujmi 

irofia^SoXi; 

mSKxi 

V/ATCM 

/ixyaXwavytj 

irofioMxpiuu^ 

V«Qf»£lS 

fieraXofiP^yta* 

wapaiTMOfMoi^ 

fiayriCto 

vroSoyfui 

fl€TO)(Oi 

frapaXvofuu 

^aivncrfWi 

vstMcaroi 

fnjmrt* 

lAJuauivm* 

wa{P€fiPokii 

iTtCui 

aicrpnf 

VaT€fiO¥ 

/XOCTXOS 

mpCfiiii 

am^Xau^ 

vf/furroi 

fivpcas 

frapoc#cc(ii 

<nrod09 

fcv«« 

mipo^fUK 

ardati 

*Au 

(yip^ 

iTOTpuipxi;? 

crrcpcos* 

»  ir 

irar^$ 

(rrc^KMi* 

X««ip«'* 

SOty 

(TUKOU^nUll 

XP«^« 

oXoKavTfOfui 

ircpcicaAvnTa) 

(TvvrcXcia 

Xpu(7€og* 

6/uruta 

ircpucccfuu 

orxcSor 

X«aXd5 

dm; 

«-A^A)5 

optyo/mi* 

irouciAos* 

Tavpo9 

^hXai^ 

6pe^ 

iraAtn;s 

rdxaw*  (jmsxit) 

INDICBS. 


INDEX   OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


Abba,  138 

Abel,  556 

Abide,  202,  456 

Able,  292,  295,  313,  835 

Abolish,  292 

Abominable,  839 

About  the  law,  351 

Above,  497 

Abraham,  181,  406 

Abstain,  245 

Abundant,  211 

Accept,  98,  588 

Acceptoble,  217,  259 

Acceptably,  559 

Acceptation,  212 

Accompany,  448 

Accomplish,  477 

According  to,  831 

Account  (verb),  115,  524 

Accursed,  86 

Accusation,  268 

Accused,  888 

Achaia,  17 

Acknowledging  (subst),  308,  381 

Add,  98, 120, 123 

Admonish,  48,  71,  469 

Admonition,  851 

Adoption,  186 

Adorn,  221,  848 

Adversary,  265,  508 

Aeon,  58,  59,  60 

Afar  off,  521 

Affairs,  296 


Affect,  146 

Affection,  169 

Affectionately  desirouSy  26 

Affirm,  206,  350 

Afflicted,  262 

Affliction,  88,  314 

Afraid,  141 

After,  93 

Again,  140,  488 

Aged  men,  840 

Aged  women,  840 

Air,  48 

Alexander,  827 

Alexandria,  871 

Aliens,  588 

All,  562 

Allegory,  149 

AUowed,  28 

Almost,  489 

Altar,  460,  567 

Always,  59,  887,  477 

Among,  295 

Anchor,  452 

Ancyra,  74 

Angel,  55, 86, 128, 144, 269, 889, 898, 

898,  406,  558,  561 
Anoint,  391 
Another,  85, 178 
Answer  (siAtt.),  828 
Answer  to,  151 
Antioch,  74,  814 
Antioch  (Pisidian)^  74 
Apollos,  867 


583 


584 


INDEX  OF  EKGLISH  WORDS. 


Apostle,  82,  201,  410 

Apparel,  221 

Appear,  344,  491,  493,  512 

Appearance,  51 

Appearing  (subst.),  280,  292,  818, 

323,  345 
Appoint,  33,  333,  380,  410 
Appointed,  493 
Approach,  281,  503 
Approved,  301 
Apt  to  teach,  229,  308 
Aquila,  329 
Arabia,  90 
Archangel,  42 
Ark,  516 
Armies,  533 
Array  (subst.),  224 
As  becometh  holiness,  340 
Ashamed,  71,  290,  292,  343 
Ashes,  483 
Asia,  294 
Asleep,  39 
Assaying,  530 
Assembling  together,  602 
Assurance,  17 
Assure,  315 
At  home,  259 
At  sundry  times,  377 
At  the  first,  143 
Augustus,  74 
Author,  436,  538 
Authority,  216 
Avail,  158 
Avenger,  37 
Avoid,  307 

Babblings,  283,  302 
Babe,  440 
Baptisms,  442 
Baptize,  129 
Barnabas,  367 
Bastards,  542 


Be  ashamed,  523 

Be  content,  276,  568 

Be  forgetful,  560 

Be  highminded,  281 

Be  in  subjection,  542 

Be  made,  433 

Be  mindful,  522 

Be  of  force,  487 

Be  over,  47 

Be  partaker  of,  269 

Be  quiet,  38 

Be  rich,  275 

Be  sober,  46 

Bear  (verb),  447,  493 

Bear  children,  265 

Bear  record,  145 

Bear  witness,  396 

Beast,  337,  569 

Become  (beJU),  340,  401,  465 

Before,  259,  268 

Before  the  world  began,  291,  883 

Beggarly,  140 

Begin,  112,  395 

Beginning,  68,  391,  418, 441 

Begotten,  387 

Behave,  238 

Behaviour,  340 

Behoved,  407 

Being  (partic.)f  102 

Believe,  115,  127,  212,  241,  245,  265, 

292,  422 
Believe  not,  300,  420,  530 
Beloved,  285,  448 
Benefit,  273 
Better,  385,  448,  463,  470,  490,  538» 

556 
Bewitch,  111 
Beyond  measure,  88 
Birthright,  549 
Bishop,  255,  256,  334 
Bite,  163 
Bitterness,  548 


IKDEX  OF  EKGLISH  WORDS. 


585 


Blackness,  551 

Blamed,  101 

Blameless,  228,  236 

Blaspheme,  273 

Blasphemers,  211,  310 

Bless,  116,  450,  458,  525 

Blessed,  210,  344 

Blessedness,  144 

Blessing  (subst.),  447 

Blood,  482,  487,  499,  540,  569,  578 

Boasters,  310 

BodUy,  248 

Body,  52,  501,  962 

Bold,  21 

Boldly,  563 

Boldness,  237 

Bondage,  97, 151,  406 

Bondmaid,  148 

Bonds,  298 

Book,  488,  497 

Books,  326 

Bound,  299 

Bound  with,  561 

Brawler,  230 

Break  forth,  152 

Breastplate,  46 

Brethren,  83,  181,  247,  408, 407, 409 

Briers,  447 

Brightness,  66,  381 

Bring,  401 

Bring  again,  573 

Bring  in,  388 

Bringing  in  (subst.),  468 

Bring  into  bondage,  97 

Bring  to  light,  292 

Bring  up  children,  261 

Broidered,  224 

Brother,  91,  575 

Brotherly  love,  560 

Brought  in  unawares,  96 

Bmld,  106,  411 

Builder,  520 


Building,  482 

Burden  (subst.),  172, 178, 174 

Burdensome,  24 

Bum,  550 

Burned,  448 

Burnt-offerings,  497 

Busybodies,  70,  264 

But  (except),  268 

Calf,  482,  488 

Call,  85,  89, 159,  291 

Call  on,  307 

CaUed,  433,  437,  486,  518,  628 

CaUeth,  53 

CaUing,  57,  291,  409 

Camp,  569 

Can  \verb),  496 

Candlestick,  475 

Canker,  303 

Captain,  402 

Carcase,  420 

Careful,  350 

Carnal,  461,  480 

Carpus,  326 

Carry  about,  565 

Cast  off,  264 

Caught  up,  43 

Caves,  535 

Cease,  161,  425 

Censer,  475 

Cephas,  91 

Certify,  87 

Chain,  295 

Change  {subst.),  460 

Change  {verb),  146,  460 

Charge  {subsL),  214 

Charge  (verb),  26,  53, 202, 265^ ! 

300 
Chargeable,  25,  70 
Charity,  314 
Chasten,  541 
Chastening  {sub$L)j  541,  544 


586 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


Cheriflheth,  25 

Cherubim,  476 

Chief,  212 

Child,  182,  315 

ChOdbeanng,  226 

ChUdren,  45,  128, 146, 163,  388, 404 

Children  of  Isratl,  526 

Choofte  to  be  a  soldier,  296 

Chosen,  68 

Christ,  418,  441,  528,  565 

Chnrch,  11,  554 

Cilicia,92 

Circumcise,  155, 178 

Circumcifiion,  79, 160,  835 

City,  510,  523,570 

Claudia,  330 

Clement  {of  Rome),  368,  369 

Cloke  or  cloak,  23,  326 

Cloud,  536 

Come,  810,  508 

Come  short,  420 

Come  to  years,  527 

Come  unto,  431,  465,  515 

Come  upon,  45 

Comfort  (ufT*),  26,  47 

Coming  {of  Chrht),  81,  66 

Commanded,  552 

Commandment^  201,  204,  279,  457, 

461,  527 
Commandments,  34,  338 
Commit,  214,  295 
Commit  to  one's  trust,  210, 283, 293, 

294,332 
Common,  332 

Communicate,  94, 174,  282,  572 
Companions,  500 
Company,  71,  553 
Compassed,  433,  530,  536 
Compel,  96, 103 
Conceive,  520 
Conclude,  126 
Concupiscence,  36 


Condemnation,  232 

Condemned,  343^  517 

Condeomed  of  himself  352 

Confer,  90 

Confess,  522 

Confession,  279 

Confidence,  414,  418,  508 

Confinij,  119,395,451 

Confirmation,  451 

Conacience,  205,  215,  235,  286,  839, 

479,  484.  501 
Consent  {i^trh),  273 
Consider,  171, 297, 410, 456, 502, 539, 

564 
Consolation,  451 
Constrain,  178 
Consume,  65 
Consumed,  163 
Consuming,  55$ 
Consummation  of  the  age,  379 
Content,  276 
Contention,  22 
Contentment,  275 
Continually,  456,  496 
Continue,  117  227  254,  464,  560 
Contimiing,  570 
Contradiction,  539 
Contrary,  29, 1G4,  208 
Contrary  part^  343 
Conversation,  87,  250  562,  565 
Convince,  335 
Corinth,  4,  7 
Correct  (tfwnfr)»  542 
Correction,  318 
Corrupt,  275,  313 
Corruption,  175 
Costly,  224 
Count,  273,  505 
Count  worthy,  54,  57,  411 
Country,  522 
Countrymen,  28 
Course,  323 


INDEX  OF  EKGLISH  WORDS. 


587 


CoTenant,  119,  d63,  470,  472,  494, 

555,573 
Covet,  277 
CoyetouB,  230,  310 
CovetoDBiiess,  23 
Create,  245 

Creature,  179,  246, 429 
Creep,  312 
Crescens,  324 
Cretans,  337 
Crete,  332 
Cross,  161, 178,  539 
Crown  (subst,)j  31,  323 
Crowned,  297,  400 
Crucified,  107, 112 
Crucify,  169 
Crucify  afresh,  446 
Crying,  137 
Curse  (subst),  117 
Cursed,  117 
Cursing  (subst),  447 
Cut  off,  162 

Dailt,  466 

Dalmatia,  325 

Damnation,  263 

Damned,  67 

Darkness,  45,  551 

David,  298,  423 

Day,  293,  503 

Day  of  the  Lord,  43 

Days,  140, 310,  378,  379,  543 

Deacon,  233,  236 

Dead,  260, 300,442, 484,487, 521, 573 

Deal,  541 

Death,  400,  404,  435,  485,  487,  514 

Debtor,  156 

Decay  (verb),  473 

Deceit,  22,  66 

Deceitfulness,  418 

Deceivableness,  66 

Deceive,  63, 172,  315 


Deceived,  175,  226 

Deceivers,  335 

Declare  plainly,  522 

Dedicate,  487 

Defile,  339,  549 

Defilers  with  mankind^  208 

Defraud,  37 

Degree,  237 

Deliver,  20,  314,  406 

Deliverance,  533 

Delivered  of  a  child,  521 

Delusion,  66 

Demas,  324 

Deny,  260,  300 

Depart,  244,  305,  418 

Departing  (subst,),  526 

Departure,  322 

Derbe,74 

Derive  descent,  457 

Descend,  41 

Desire  (verb),  140, 147, 148, 206»  227, 

228,  449,  523 
Desiring,  287 
Desirous  of  vainglory,  170 
Desolate,  260 

Despise,  37,  143,  347,  504,  540 
Despisers  of  the  good,  311 
Destitute,  275 
Destroy,  65, 106,  404,  529 
Destruction,  61,  277 
Devil,  232,  244,  309,  404 
Devour,  163 
Die,  107,  504,  525,  526 
Diligently  follow,  262 
Diligently  seek,  515 
Direct  (verb),  34 
Disannul,  120 
Disannulling  (tvbst.),  462 
Discemer,  428 
Dishonour,  306 
Disobedience,  394 
Disobedient,  207 


588 


INDEX  OF  BNOLISH  WOBD8. 


Disorderly,  70 

Dissemble,  102 

Disaimulaticnit  102 

JDisttibute,  282 

Divers,  3ia,  348,  396,  566 

Dividing  (^ukf.),  427 

Do,  429,  674 

Do  despite,  505 

Do  diligence,  324 

Do  good,  176,  282,  572 

Do  service,  139,  479 

Do  the  law,  156 

Doctrine,  208, 244, 254, 266, 274, 817, 

320,  566 
Doting,  274 
Double,  266 
Double-tougued,  234 
Itoiibtiug  (iu6^/,)»  221 
Draw  back,  508,  509 
Draw  nigh,  463 
Dress  (rer6),  447 
Drink  (suist.),  480 
Drink  (verb),  446 
Drink  water,  270 
Drown,  277,  530 
Drunken,  46 
Due,  176,  332 
Dull,  437 
Dwell,  288 

Each,  449,  525 

Earnest,  393 

Earth,  446 

Easily-besetting,  537 

Eat,  101,  303,  567 

Edge,  532 

Edify,  47 

Edifying,  204 

Effectually  worketh,  28 

Egypt,  528 

Elder  (in  the  church),  254,  256,  333 

Elder  women,  257 


Elders,  511 

Elect,  269 

Election,  16 

Elements,  134,  399 

Embrace,  521 

Enable,  210 

End  isuht.),  419,  448,  451,  492,  565 

Endless,  203,  461 

Endure,  320,  450,  528,  541 

Endure  afllictions,  321 

Endure  hardness,  296 

Enemy,  145 

Enjoy  282,  527 

Enlightened,  444 

Bnsample,  17 

EDUngle,155,296 

Enter,  417,  452, 499 

Entering  in  (subsL),  19 

Entertain  strange re^  560 

Entertained,  561 

Entire,  52 

Epistle,  71 

Equals,  88 

Erastus,  10,  380 

Err,  278,  284 

Errors,  477 

Esau,  549 

Escape,  394 

Establish,  32,  497 

Established,  470,  566 

Esteem  (verb),  48,  528 

Eternal,  56,  60,  176,  213,  283,  294 

436,  443,  482,  483,  486 
Eubulusi,  mo 
Evangelist,  321 

Everlasting,  56,  59,  60,  218,  578 
Everywhere,  221 
Evidence,  610 
Evident,  461 

Evil,  51,  69,  329,  343,  418, 440 
Evil-doer,  298 
Example,  426,  469 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH   WORDS. 


589 


Exceedingly,  83 
Excellent,  886,  518 
Exclude,  146 
Exercise  (svbst,),  248 
Exercise  (verb),  248 
Exercised,  440,  545 
Exhort,  319 

Exhortation,  22,  251,  575 
Expressly,  248 
Eyes,  145 

Fables,  203,  888 

Face,  101 

Fail,  392,  548 

Faint  {adj.),  540 

Faint  (verb),  176 

Faith,  93,  105,  107,  115,  127,  168, 

202,  205,  215,  220, 234, 237, 244, 

260,  288,  294,  363, 422, 449, 501, 

508,  509,  517,  532,  538 
Faithful,  53, 117,  211,  295,  299,  300, 

333,  334,  407,  410 
FaU,  232,  276,  426 
Fall  away,  445 
Fall  from,  157 
Falling  away  (subst),  68 
False  accusers,  341 
False  brethren,  96 
Falsely-called,  288 
Fathers,  378,  542 
Father  of  Spirits,  542 
Fault,  170 

Fear  (subsL),  290,  559 
Fear  (t;^),  269,  435,  552 
Fearful,  503 
Feeble,  546 
Feeble-minded,  49 
Fellow,  391 
Fellowship,  100 
Female,  130 
Fidelity,  348 
Fierce,  311 


Fiery,  503 

Fight  (subst.),  278,  322,  506 

Fight  (verb),  278,  322 

Figure,  478,  491,  524 

Fill,  29 

FinaUy,  68 

Find,  105 

Find  fault,  471 

Finished,  422 

Finisher,  538 

Fire,  55,  532,  550,  559 

Firm,  414 

First,  212,  258,  289, 297,  475 

First-begotten,  888 

First-bom,  529,  554 

Flaming,  55 

Flattering,  23 

Flee  for  refuge,  452 

Flesh,  90,  105,  118,  149,  163,  175, 

178, 179,  240,  242,  434,  500,  542 
Flesh  and  blood,  90,  404 
Fold  (verb),  392 
FoUow,  70,  209,  262,  272,  307,  548^ 

564 
Follower,  17,  449 
FoDy,  314 
Food,  276 

Foolish,  110, 112,  276,  807 
For  a  season,  527 
Forbear,  82 
Forbid,  245 
Forefathers,  286 
Forerunner,  453 
Foresee,  116 
Forever,  59,  84,  214^  408 
Forget,  572 
Forgotten,  540 
Form,  294,  312,  882 
Formed,  147,  225 
Fornication,  34 
Fornicator,  549 
For  nought,  70 


590 


INDEX  OF  EKOLISH  WORDS. 


Forsake,  824,  528,  563 

FoundatiozL,  803,  442,  492,  519 

Frame  (verb)^  512 

Free,  152 

Free  course,  68 

Fruit,  166,  545,  572 

Frustrate,  109 

Fulfil,  164, 172 

FulfiUed,  168,  329 

Full  assurance,  449,  501 

Full-grown,  440 

Fully  known,  829 

Fulness,  135 

Further,  459 

Furthermore,  34,  542 

Gain  (sttbst)^  275 

Gainsayers,  385 

Galatia,  74,  824 

Gate,  570 

Gathering  together,  62 

Gaul,  825 

Gender  (verb),  158,  808 

Genealogies,  203 

General  assembly,  553 

Gentiles  (after  the  manner  of),  103 

GentUes,  104,  220,  241,  365 

Gentle,  24,  308 

Gentleness,  168 

Gideon,  531 

Gift,  251,  289,  396,  445 

Gifts,  432,  514 

Give,  108, 122,  219,  253,  323 

Give  attendance,  460 

Give  commandment,  527 

Give  heed,  203,  338,  393 

Give  place,  97 

Give  thanks,  12,  572 

Given  to  hospitality,  229 

Given  to  wine,  230,  234,  341 

Gladness,  391 

Glorified,  57,  68 


Glorify,  433 

Glorious,  210,  345 

Glory  (subst.),  27,  57,  218,  299,  882, 

401 
Glory  (verb),  54, 179 
Goat,  482,  488 
Go  about,  264 
Go  before,  214,  271,  462 
Go  beyond,  36 
Goon,  442 
Go  out,  518 
Go  up,  90 

God  forbid,  106, 126 
Godliness,  209,  217,  225,  289,  274, 

275,  381 
Godly,  815 
Gold,  476 
Golden,  476 

Good,  49,  207,  259,261,282,842,440 
Goodness,  58, 168 
Good  pleasure,  58 
Goods,  507 
Gospel,  98 

Gospel  (our  or  my),  16,  298 
Gospel  of  God,  22,  210 
Governor,  182 
Grace,  12,  14,  68,  88,  99,  109,  291, 

295,  344,  400,  431,  505,  559,  566 
Grandmother,  289 
Grave  (adj\),  234 
Great,  345,  430 
Greatest,  473 
Greatly,  327 

Greedy  of  filthy  lucre,  234 
Grieved,  416 
Grievous,  545 
Ground,  238 
Guide  the  house,  265 
Guile,  22 

Hand,  124, 177,  221,  252,  546 
Hang  down,  546 


IKDBX  OF  EK6LISH  W0BD8. 


591 


Harden,  415 

Hard  of  interpretatioiiy  487 

HarJot,  530 

Harmlesa*  466 

Have  compassion^  4d2,  507 

Haye  in  subjection,  2^1 

Have  pleasure  in,  509 

Have  respect  to,  52S 

Have  the  rule,  504 

Heady,  811 

Heap  (verb),  820 

Hear,  148,  395 

Heard,  303,  4S5 

[fearing  {^uhiL),  112,  487 

Heart,  69,  205,  307  417,  566 

Heaven,  19,  553 

HeaTeuly,  329, 409,  445,  552 

Heifer,  488 

Heir,  182, 188, 154,  850,  880,  517 

Heirs  with ;  joint-heirs,  519 

Helmet,  46 

Help  ($ub$t.)y  481 

Henceforth,  180,  828 

Herbs,  446 

Heresy,  166 

Heretical,  851 

Hid,  272 

High,  885 

High-minded,  281,  811 

High  Priest,  864,  866,  869, 407,  482, 

453,500 
Hinder,  81,  159 
Hold,  215 

Hold  fast,  51,  884,  414 
Holily,  26 
Holiest,  478,  499 
HoliEiess,  544,  548 
Holy,  4O0,  486 
Holy  place  or  places,  491 
Holy  Spirit,  88,  415,  445,  478 
Home,  259 
Honestly,  88 


Honesty,  217 

Honour  (subit.),  218,  266,  806 

Honour  (verb),  257 

Honourable,  562 

Hope  {mhxt,).  31,  40,  158,201,844. 

350,  414,  449,  468,  501 
Hospitality,  229 
House,  260,  305,  836 
Household,  176 
House  of  God,  288,  418»  500 
How  great,  456 
How  much,  504 
Hurtful,  277 
Huabarid,  228 
Huabaudman,  297 
Hypocrisy,  244 
Hyssop,  488 

IcoNiuM,  74,  814 
Idols,  19 

Ignorant,  38,  488 
Illummated,  506 
Image,  382,  495 
Immediately,  90 
Immortal,  213 
Immortality,  261,  292 
Immutability,  451 
Impose,  480 
Impossible,  444 
In  a  certain  place,  897 
In  a  few  words,  575 
In  bonds,  561 
In  divers  manners,  877 
In  Like  manner,  284 
In  season,  319 
In  time  past,  376 
Incontinent,  311 
In  corruptness,  842 
Iq crease,  302 
Indeed,  258 
Indignation,  508 
Infidel,  260 


592 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  W0BD8. 


Infirmities,  480 
Infirmity,  143,  271,  438 
Inherit,  386,  450 
Inheritance,  386,  486 
Iniquity,  64,  346,  391 
Injure,  142 
Injurious,  211 
Innumerable,  553 
Inspiration,  317 
Instant,  319 
Instruct,  308 
Instruction,  318 
Intent,  428 
Intercession,  216 
Interpretation,  454 
Intreat,  551 
Intrusted,  210 
Invisible,  213,  528 
Isauria,  74 
Israel,  180 
Italy,  372,  576 
Itching,  321 

Jambres,  313 

Jannes,  313 

Jason,  4 

Jerusalem,  151, 152,  552 

Jesus,  424,  430 

Jews,  335 

Joints,  428 

Joy,  31,  168,  538 

Joyf uUy,  507 

Joyous,  545 

Judaea,  93 

Judaism,  88 

Judge  (8ubst.)y  323,  555 

Judge  (verb),  562 

Judgment,  271,  443 

Just,  117,  394,  508,  555 

Justified,  350 

Justify,  104,  116,  240 

Justly,  26 


Keep,  127, 178,  270,  323,  528 

Keepers  at  home,  342 

Kindness,  348 

King,  213,  280 

Kingdom,  27,  329,  559 

Kingdom  of  God,  55 

Kiss  (subst.),  53 

Knees,  546 

Know,  35,  47,  55,  142,  245,  274,  30^ 

309,  314,  472 
Knowledge,  218,  503 
Known,  139 

Labour  (subst,)^  15,  25 

Labour  (verb),  249,  266,  297,  425 

Labourer,  267 

Laden,  312 

Lame,  547 

Land  of  Promise,  519 

Large,  177 

Lasciviousness,  165 

Last,  310,  378 

Latter,  243 

Law,  104, 126, 127, 136, 148, 163, 165t 

169,  366,  461 
Lawfully,  207,  297 
Lawless,  207 
Lay  foundation,  391,  442 
Lay  hold,  278,  452 
Lay  on  hands,  269,  443 
Lay  to  the  charge,  328 
Lay  up,  323 
Lay  up  in  store,  282 
Laying  on  (subst.),  252,  448 
Lead  (one's  life),  217 
Lead  captive,  312 
Learn,  215,  264,  313,  436 
Least,  473 
Leave,  441,  563 
Leaven,  159 
Led  away,  313 
Left  (panic.),  32,  420 


INDEX  OF   ENGLISH  WORDS. 


598 


Leontopolis,  370 

Lest,  94 

Let  (hinder)^  65 

Let  slip,  393 

Letter,  63, 177 

Liars,  377 

Liberty,  97, 154, 162 

Lie,  67,  244 

Life,  213,  283 

Life  that  now  is,  249 

Lift,  221,  546 

Lifted  up  with  pride,  232 

Light,  45 

Like,  430 

Likewise,  404 

Limit  (verb),  428 

Linus,  330 

Lion,  329 

Lip,  572 

Little,  248,  398 

Little  while,  508 

Live,  108,  260,  458,  508,  543 

Live  in  pleasure,  260 

Live  like  a  Jew,  103 

Living,  19,  499 

Living  God,  370,  506 

Lodge  strangers,  261 

Longsuffering,  168,  212,  820 

Look  diligently,  548 

Look  for,  344,  493,  519 

Looking,  537 

Looking  for  (iubst,),  503 

Lord,  132,  281,  365 

Lord  of  peace,  71 

Lost,  61 

Love  (subsL),  158, 163, 166, 205, 294, 

348 
Love  (verb),  323,  324,  852 
Love  children,  841 
Love  husbands,  341 
Love  of  money,  277 
Lover  of  good  men,  334 


Lover  of  hospitality,  334 

Lovers  of  €rod,  311 

Lovers  of  pleasure,  311 

Lovers  of  self,  310 

Luke,  325 

Lump,  160 

Lust  (subst),  86, 164,  806 

Lycaonia,  74 

Lying,  66 

Lystra,  74,  314 

Macedonia,  3,  8, 17 

Made,  136,  207,  558 

Made  a  gazing-stock,  506 

Maintain,  350 

Majesty,  385 

Make,  106,  381,  469,  471,  546 

Make  a  fair  show,  177 

Make  free,  154 

Make  full  proof,  322 

Make  intercession,  465 

Make  like,  407,  455 

Make  lower,  398 

Make  mention,  13, 15,  526 

Make  old,  473 

Make  perfect,  113, 402, 486, 462, 479, 

535,  555,  574 
Make  reconciliation,  408 
Make  wise,  316 
Maker,  520 
Male,  130 
Malice,  348 
Man,  119 
Man  of  God,  278 
Man  of  sin,  63 
Manifest,  165,  240,  291,  314 
Manifest  token,  54 
Manner,  502 
Manner  of  life,  814 
Manslayers,  208 
Many,  121,  153,  549 
Many  more,  153 


VOL.  IV.  —  J 


594 


INDBX  OF  ENGLISH   WOBDS. 


Mark  (proper  name),  825 

Mark  (subst.),  180 

Marriage,  562 

Marrow,  428 

Marry,  245,  263,  266 

Marvel  (verb),  84 

Master,  273,  306 

Matter,  37,  97 

Meat,  439,  440,  549 

Meats,  245,  480,  566 

Mediator,  124, 125, 218, 470, 485, 555 

Meditate,  253 

Meekness,  168, 171,  278,  808 

Meet  (adj.),  806,  447 

Menstealers,  208 

Merciful,  407,  473 

Mercy,  179,  202,  349, 481 

Mercy-seat,  477 

Milk,  439 

Mind,  62, 839,  472 

Minded,  160 

Mindful,  287 

Minister  (subst.),  82, 106,  247, 467 

Minister  (verb),  114,  204 

Ministering,  392 

Ministry,  210,  325 

Miracle,  115,  396 

Mixed,  421 

Mocked,  175 

Mockings,  534 

Modest,  222 

Months,  141 

More  abundantly,  30 

More  excellent,  513 

Morsel,  549 

Mount  (mountain),  550 

Mouth,  329 

Move,  32 

Moved  with  fear,  516 

Murderers  of  fathers  and  mothers, 

208 
Must,  308 


Muzzle,  267 
Mystery,  64,  234,  289 

Name  (subst.),  58,  305 

Name  (verb),  305 

Nation,  88, 116 

Nature,  139 

Need  not  to  be  ashamed,  801 

Neglect  (verb),  251,  395 

Neighbour,  472 

Nephew,  258 

Nevertheless,  308 

New,  472,  499,  555 

Nicopolis,  352 

Nigh,  447 

Night,  44,  45 

Night  and  day,  287 

No  brawlers,  347 

No  effect,  156 

Not  a  brawler,  280 

Not  covetous,  280 

Note  (verb),  71 

Nourished,  247 

Novice,  231 

Now,  33,  470,  491 

Nurse,  25 

Oath,  451,  463,  464 

Obedience,  436 

Obedient,  342 

Obey,  159,  437,  518 

Obey  magistrates,  347 

Observe,  140,  269 

Obtain,  46,  299,  451,  532 

Obtain  a  good  report,  511,  535 

Obtain  mercy,  211 

Obtain  witness,  513 

Occasion,  163,  265 

Occupied,  567 

Of  earth,  305 

Of  good  behaviour,  229 

Of  wood,  309 


LNDBX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


695 


CMfence,  161 

0£Fer,  432,  466,  468,  491,  496,  571 
0£Fered,  322,  484,  524 
0£Fering,  497 
Office  of  a  biBhop,  227 
Office  of  the  priesthood,  457 
Often  (adj.),  271 
Often  {adv.),  491 
00,891 
Old-wives',  248 

Once  for  all,  444,  466,  498,  497 
Once  more,  657 
One,  125,  131,  402 
Onesiphorus,  294^  330 
Only,  162,  213 
Open  beforehand,  271 
Opened,  429 
Opportunity,  176 
Oppose,  308 
Oppositions,  283 
Oracles,  438 
Ordain,  123,  333 
Ordained,  220,  432 
Order  («ti69/.)'  ^^ 
Ordinance,  474,  480 
Others,  268 
Otherwise,  272 
Onght,  433 
Out  of  season,  319 
Overtake,  45 
Overtaken,  170 

Own  {adj.),  202,  259,  260,  272,  280, 
425,  569 

Parchments,  327 
Parents,  259,  527 
Partaker,  269,  297 
Partaker  of  afflictions,  290 
Partakers,  273,  404,  409,  418,  445, 

541,544 
Partiality,  269 
Particularly,  477 


Pass  through,  529 

Passed,  430 

Passover,  528 

Past  age,  521 

Paths,  546 

Patience,  15,  449,  587 

Patient,  69,  230,  308 

Patriarch,  457 

Pattern,  212,  469,  490 

Peace,  12,  51, 168, 179, 307, 681, 548^ 

573 
Peaceable,  217,  545 
Peculiar,  346 
People,  346,  569 
People  of  God,  424 
Perdition,  63,  277,  509 
Perfect  {adj.),  318 
Perfect  {verb),  33,  498 
Perfection,  442,  459 
Perfectly,  43 
Perilous,  310 
Perish,  61,  530 
Perjured,  208 
Permit,  443 
Persecute,  28, 158 
Persecution,  314 
Persecutor,  211 
Person,  98,  382 
Persuade,  86 
Persuaded,  289,  448,  521 
Persuasion,  159 
Pertain  to,  460 
Pertaining  to  God,  408 
Perverse  disputings,  274 
Pessinus,  74 
Philippi,  21 
Philo,  374 
Phrygia,  74 
Pierced,  278 
Piercing,  427 
Piety,  259 
Pilgrims,  522 


596 


INDEX  OF   ENGLISH  WORDS. 


Pillar,  99,  238 

Pisidia,  74 

Place,  549 

Please,  88,  515 

Please  well,  343 

Pleasing,  23 

Pleasure,  544 

Pieasurea,  348,  527 

Hedge  (subsL),  264 

Pluck  out,  145 

Pontiua  Pilate,  279 

Poor,  101 

Possess,  35,  36 

Pot,  476 

Potentate,  280 

Power,  17,  57,  70,  290,  812,  404,  461 

Powerful,  427 

Powers,  347,  446 

Praise  (subsl.),  572 

Prayer,  13 

Prayers,  434 

Preach,  116, 160,  241,  423 

Preached,  421 

Preacher,  220 

Pn^aching  (*ubsL}.  328,  332 

Preferring,  269 

Prepared,  306,  516,  523 

Presbytery,  252 

Presence,  56 

Present  (afJj\)y  84,  324,  479,  545 

Preserve,  52 

Prevent,  41 

Priest,  434,  498 

Priesthood,  459,  464 

Principalities,  347 

Principles,  438,  441 

Prisca,  329 

Prisoner,  290 

Privately,  94 

Privily,  96 

Proceed,  313 

Profane,  207,  302,  649 


Profess,  224,  278,  339 

Profession,  278,  410,  501 

Profit  (subgL),  301,  544 

Profit  {verb),  83,  2U,  567 

Profitable,  317  325,  351 

Profiting  (srdtst.)y  254 

Promise  (subsL),  120,  125,  127,  149, 

153,  285,  458,  470,  508,  521 
Promise  (verb),  657 
Proper,  527 
Prophecy,  214,  261 
Proi^besyings,  49 
Prophets,  378 
Proud,  274,  310 
Prove,  23,  50, 173,  286 
Provide,  260,  536 
Provocationi  415 
Provoke  J  419 
Provoking,  170,  502 
Pudens,  330 
Punish,  56 
Punishment,  504 
Purchase,  236 

Pure,  205,  270,  286,  307,  3^ 
Purge,  306,  384,  484 
Purify,  346 
Purity,  250 
Purloining,  343 
Purpose,  291,  314 
Put,  210,  472 
Put  away,  492 

Put  in  remembrance,  246,  300 
Put  on,  46,  130 
Put  to  open  shame,  446 
Put  trust  in,  403 
Put  under  or  in  subjection,  397,  398 

Quake,  552 

Quench,  49,  532 
Questions,  204,  274,  30/ 
Quick,  427 
Quicken,  279 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


597 


Quiet,  217 
Quietness,  70 

Race,  537 

Rahab,  580 

Raiment^  276 

Raise  irom  the  dead,  8S^  298 

Rai^d  to  life,  583 

Ransom,  219 

Reading,  251 

Ready,  847 

Ready  to  distribute,  282 

Rebuke  (ver6),  254,  268,  319 

Receive,  27, 136,  268,  447,  508,  531, 

541,558 
Receive  the  law,  459 
Receive  up,  241 
Received,  245,  621.  524 
Recompense,  394 
Recover,  309 
Red  Sea,  530 
Redeem,  118,  136,  346 
RedemptiDn,  482,  485 
Reformation,  379,  480 
Refresh,  2&4 
Heftise  (verb),  556 
Refused,  246 
Regeneration,  349 
Regions,  92 
Reign,  300 
Reject,  143 
Rejected,  447 

Rejoicing  (svbsL),  173,  414 
Relieve,  262 
Remain,  41,  391,  558 
Remaineth,  423,  424 
Remember,  100,  298,  564 
Remembrance,  33,  287,  288,  496 
Remisaion^  i^O 
Remove,  85 
Removing  (iubit.),  558 
Renew,  445 


Renewing  (subst),  349 

Repentance,  308,  365,  454,  549 

Report  (sub^L),  233 

Reported,  261 

Reproach  (suhst.),  233,  528,  570 

Reproach  fully,  265 

Reprobate,  313,  339 

Reproof,  317 

Reprove,  319 

Repute  (repuiaiim),  94,  97 

Requite,  259 

Rest  (Auht),  55,  417,  422,  424,  425^ 

426 
Restore,  171,  573 
Resurrection,  303,  365,  443,  583 
Return,  523 
Reveal,  89,  128 
Revealed,  S5 
Revelation,  87,  94 
Revellings,  166 
Reverence,  559 
Reward  (ver6),  327 
Rewarder,  515 
Rich,  281 
Riches,  282 
Right  {authority),  568 
Right  hand,  392 
Righteous,  207  514 
Eighteouiness,  158,  278,  849,  391, 

439,  454,  517,  532,  545 
Rightly  dividing,  301 
Riot,  333 
Rise,  460 
Root,  277,  548 
Rule  (verb),  179,  231,  266 
Run,  94,  158 

Sacrifice  (subsL),  497, 508, 518, 572 
Sacrifices,  432,  490 
Said,  424 
Saints,  34,  261 
Salem,  455 


598 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  W0BD8. 


Salutation,  71 

Salute,  329 

Salvation,  299, 395, 402, 436, 443, 493 

Same,  565 

Sanctification,  37,  227 

Sanctified,  306 

Sanctify,  52,  246,  402,  497,  569 

Sanctuary,  468,  474,  475 

Sand,  521 

Satan,  30,  66 

Save  {except)  f  91 

Save  (verb),  212,  226,  291,  435 

Saving  (subit.),  509 

Saviour,  201,  365 

Sawn,  534 

Say,  121, 132,  206,  388,  459 

Saying  (nAsL),  211,  299 

Scarlet,  488 

Sceptre,  391 

Schoolmaster,  128 

Science,  283 

Scourge  (ver&),  541 

Scripture,  116, 126,  266  317 

Scriptures,  315 

Seal  {subsL),  304 

Seashore,  521 

Season,  176 

Seasons,  43 

Second,  497 

Second  time,  493 

Sedition,  166 

Seducers,  315 

Seducing,  244 

See,  91,  514,  528,  556 

Seed,  121,  123,  131,  406,  520 

Seek,  471,  522 

Seek  carefully,  550 

Seem,  99,  420 

Seen,  241,  512,  516 

Selfwilled,  334 

Send  forth,  135 

Senses,  440 


Separate  (verb),  89, 466 

Servant,  308,  412 

Servants,  272 

Serve,  122,  286,  568 

Service,  474 

Set  at  liberty,  575 

Set  before,  452,  538 

Set  forth.  111 

Set  in  order,  333 

Shadow  (subsL),  469,  495 

Shadow  (verb),  477 

Shake,  557 

Shaken,  62,  558 

Shame,  539 

Shamefaced,  222 

Shamefully,  entreated,  21 

Sharper,  427 

Sharply,  338 

Shed,  349 

Shedding  of  blood,  489 

Sheep,  573 

Shepherd,  573 

Shew,  18,  301,  449 

Shew  piety,  259 

Shewbread,  475 

Shewing,  64,  342 

Short  time,  30 

Shortly,  238 

Shout  (8ubst.)j  42 

Shun,  248,  302 

Shut,  127 

Sick,  330 

Sight,  552 

Sign,  396 

Signify,  558 

Silence,  225 

Silly  women,  312 

Silvanus,  9,  10 

Similitude,  461 

Sin  (8ubst)y  63,  365,  430,  473,  537, 

540 
Sin  (verb),  268,  351 


INDEX  OF   ENGLISH   WORDS. 


599 


Sinai,  150,  151 

Sing  praise,  403 

Sinners,  104, 105,  207 

Sit,  384,  892,  539 

Sleep  (verb),  40,  47 

Slothful,  449 

Slow-bellies,  838 

Snare,  233,  309 

Sobriety,  223 

Sojourn  (verb),  519 

Sold,  549 

Soldier,  296 

Some,  202,  244,  419 

Something,  97, 172 

Son,  379,  387,  413, 484,  485, 467, 541 

Son  of  God,  456 

Son  of  man,  897,  456 

Sons,  401,  541 

Soon,  84 

Soon  angry,  384 

Sorrow  (subiL),  278 

Sorrow  (verb),  39 

Sort,  312 

Soul,  25,  52 

Sound  (adj.),  208,  294,  820,  842 

Sound  (subst),  551 

Sound  forth,  17 

Sound  mind,  290 

Speak,  340,  878,  379,  514,  540,  556, 

564 
Speaking  lies,  244 
Spies,  531 
Spirit,  52,  63,  65,  137, 158, 157, 164, 

166, 170, 171, 175,  240,  242,  889, 

483,505 
Spirits,  555 
Spiritual,  171 
Spoiling  (subit,),  507 
Spoils,  457 

Spoken  any  more,  551 
Spread  abroad,  18 
Spring  up,  461,  549 


Sprinkle,  483,  488,  501 

Sprinkling  (subsL),  529,  555 

Spy  (verb),  96 

Staff,  525 

Stand,  303,  479,  498 

Stand  fast,  83, 155 

Stand  in  doubt,  147 

Standing  (subst,),  478 

Stand  with  (as  a  patron  or  advoeaU), 

328 
Stars,  521 
Steadfast,  394,  452 
Steward,  132,  384 
Stir  up,  289 
Stomach,  270 
Stone  (verb),  534,  552 
Stop,  532 

Stop  the  mouth,  336 
Straight,  546 
Strange,  519,  566 
Strangers,  261,  522 
Strengthen,  328 
Strife,  165,  451 
Strife  of  words,  274 
Striker,  230 
Strive,  249,  296,  540 
Strive  about  words,  801 
Striving  (subst),  851 
Strong,  295,  439,  440,  451 
Study  (verb),  38,  301 
Subdued,  532 
Subject,  406 
Subjection,  97,  281 
Substance,  382,  507,  510 
Subvert,  336,  351 
Subverting  (suhst),  301 
Suddenly,  269 
Suffer,  113,  225,  300,  408,  486,  569, 

575 
Suffer  adversity,  562 
Suffer  affliction  with,  527 
Suffer  persecution,  815 


600 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


Suffer  trouble,  298 
Sufferiug,  400 
Sum,  407 

Supplication,  216, 434 
Support  (yerb)y  49 
Sure,  303,  452 
Surely,  450 
Surety,  464 
Surmisings,  274 
Swear,  422 
Swerve,  205 
Sword,  427,  532 
Synagogue,  14 
Syria,  92 

Tabernacle,  468,  478,  519,  568 

Table,  475 

Take,  325,  472,  507 

Take  away,  497,  498 

Take  care  of,  231 

Take  from,  30 

Take  heed,  254 

Take  into  the  number,  261 

Take  on,  406 

Take  part,  404 

Take  tithes,  457 

Taken,  432 

Taken  captive,  309 

Tarry,  238 

Taste  (verb),  400,  445 

Tattlers,  264 

Taught,  174,  344 

Taught  of  God,  38 

Tavium,  74 

Teach,  341,  344 

Teach  other  doctrine  or  otherwise, 

202,  273 
Teacher,  220,  292,  438 
Teachers  of  good  things,  341 
Teachers  of  the  law,  206 
Tears,  287 
Tell,  531 


Tell  before,  166 

TeU  the  truth,  145 

Temperance,  168 

Temperate,  334 

Tempest,  551 

Temple,  64 

Temptation,  143,  276,  416 

Tempted,  408,  416,  534 

Tempter,  83 

Tenth,  457 

Testament,  464,  485,  486,  494 

Testator,  487 

Testify,  514 

Testified,  219,  397 

Testimony,  412,  514 

Thank,  285 

That  bringeth  salvatioQ,  344 

That  cannot  lie,  332 

Then,  161 

Thessalonians,  10 

Thessalonica,  3 

Thief,  44,  45 

Thmgs,  495,  510 

Things  pertaining  to  Grod,  432 

Think,  172 

Thorns,  447 

Thoroughly-furnished,  318 

Thoughts,  428 

Throne,  390,  431 

Time,  64,  438,  479 

Time  appointed,  133 

Time  of  need,  431 

Times,  43,  141,  243,  280,  310,  332, 

378 
Timothy,  4,  9, 10,  575 
Tithes,  458 

To  come,  397, 445, 481, 495,  525,  570 
To-day,  415,  418 
Together,  42 
Top,  525 
Tortured,  533 
Touch,  529,  552 


IKDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


601 


Touched,  550 

Toached  with  the  feeling,  430 

Tradition,  68,  88 

Traitors,  311 

Transgression,  128,  226,  394,  485 

Transgressor,  106 

Translate,  514 

Travail  (subst),  25, 45 

Travail  (verb),  147 

Tread  out,  267 

Tread  under  foot,  504 

Tree,  118 

Tribe,  460 

Tribulation,  17 

Tried,  524 

Trophimus,  330 

Trouble  (verb),  85,  160,  162,  180, 

549 
Troubled,  62 
Truce-breakers,  811 
True,  19,  500 
Trump,  42 
Trumpet,  551 
Trust  (verb),  250,  260 
Truth,  209,  218,  245,  275 
Turn,  19, 139 
Turn  aside  or  away,  205,  294,  312, 

321,  547,  556 
Tutor,  132 
Two-edged,  427 
Tychicus,  326 

Unawares,  561 
UnbeUef,  417,  423,  426 
Unblameably,  26 
Uncertain,  282 
Unchangeable,  465 
Uncircumcj^ion,  98 
Unclean,  483 
Uncleanness,  22,  37, 165 
Under,  485,  504 
Understand,  512 


Understanding,  298 
Unfeigned,  205,  288 
Unfruitful,  352 
Ungodliness,  303,  344 
Ungodly,  207 
Unholy,  207,  311,  505 
Unlearned,  307 
Unprofitable,  351,  462,  572 
Unreasonable,  69 
Unrighteousness,  66,  473 
Unruly,  48 
Unskilful,  439 
Unthankful,  310 
Upholding,  383 
Use  (subst.),  352,  440 
Use  (verb),  439,  506 
Use  the  office  of  a  deacon^  236 
Usurp  authority,  225 
Uttermost,  29,  465 

Vain,  20,  33, 109, 114, 142,  361 

Vain  jangling,  205 

Vain  talkers,  335 

Vanish,  473 

Vengeance,  55,  505 

Veil,  475,  500 

Verily,  406 

Verity,  220 

Very  well,  295 

Vessel,  35,  305 

Vesture,  392 

Vigilant,  229 

Violence,  532 

Visit,  398 

Voice,  551 

Volume,  497 

Wait,  19, 158 
Waiting,  69 
Wake,  47 
Walk,  26, 164, 170 
Walk  uprightly,  102 


602 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


Wander,  536 

War  (verb),  216,  296 

Warfare,  216 

Warn,  516 

Wash,  601 

Wash  the  feet,  261 

Washing  (subst.),  849,  480 

Waste  (verb),  88 

Watch  (verb),  46,  821,  572 

Way,  478,  499 

Wax  bold,  21 

Wax  old,  478 

Wax  wanton,  262 

Wax  worse,  815 

Weakness,  462,  682 

Weary,  wearied,  71, 176,  540 

Weight,  537 

Well  (adv,),  146, 158,  266 

Well-doing,  71 

Well'pleasing,  576 

Well-reported  of,  261 

Went,  518 

What,  397 

Whence,  524 

Wherefore,  289,  407, 409,  546 

Whereupon,  487 

Whither,  453 

Wholly,  52,  253 

Widow,  257,  258,  266 

Wife,  228,  236 

Wilfully,  503 

Will  (subsL),  49,  309,  396,  497 

Will    (verb),    218,   220,    263, 

314 
Will  of  God,  285 
Willing,  25 

Willing  to  communicate,  282 
Wine,  270 
Winter  (tcrft),  352 
Witchcraft,  165 
Withdraw,  70 
With  grief,  572 


276, 


Withholdeth,  64 
Within,  453 
Without,  238,  480,  670 
Without  ceasing,  14,  49,  286 
Without  controversy,  289 
Without  coYetousness,  562 
Without    father,  mother,  descenti 

455 
Without  mercy,  504 
Without  natural  affection,  811 
Without  spot,  279,  484 
Without  wavering,  602 
Withstand,  827 
Witness  (subsL),  24,  604,  686 
Witness  (verb),  279,  468 
Womb,  89 
Women,  588 
Wonders,  66,  896 
Wool,  488 
Word,  17,  28,  68,  174,  260,  266, 

384,   393.  421,  489,  445,   557, 

575 
Word  of  God  or  the  Lord,  18, 27, 40, 

41,  246,  299,  426,  612 
Words,  247,  551 
Work    (svbsL),   15,    48,   806,    829, 

448 
Work  (verb),  158,  576 
Working,  66,  70 
Workman,  301 
Works,  104,  261,  349,  422,  425,  442, 

484 
World,  59, 84, 281, 397, 446, 492, 517, 

534 
Worldly,  344,  474 
Worlds,  381,  512 
Worship,  389 
Worshipped,  64,  526 
Worthy,  26,  534 
Would,  164 
Wrath,  165,  221,  528 
Wrath  to  come,  20 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


608 


Write  m  letter,  575 
Written,  554 
Wronght,  09,  5SS 

Tkabs,  141 
Yet,  161 
irie]d,545 


Yoke,  155,  272 
YouDger,  262,  265 
Yoath,  250 
Yoathfol  306 

Zkaijoub,  88,  847 
Zealoosly  ftffeci,  145, 146 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS. 


APfiii,  138 

Aya$o€fr/€to,  2B2 

dyaOomUot,  282 

AyaSoi,  33,  49,  176,  261,  282,  342, 

343,  574 
AyaBwovytfy  68, 168 
dyoAAioflris,  391 
dyairoii*,  167,  323,  324 
dyamy,  158,  163, 166,  205,  448 
dyamfro^,  285,  448 
''Ayofi,  151 
^yycAo9,  34,  86,  123,  241,  269,  389, 

393,  398,  406,  553,  561 
dyeveaXoyrproi,  455 
ayuiCoi,  52,  246,  306,  497,  569 
ayuur/A09,  6,  36,  227,  548 
cEyioc,  291,  409,  474 
aytoc  (oi),  6,  34,  261 
cEyio,  468,  475,  478,  491,  499 
dyKvpOj  452 
dyvcui,250 
dyvc^co,  250 
dyvocco,  38,  93,  433 
dyvwffio,  483,  477 
dyKos,  270 
dypvwv€w,  572 
dyu^  313,  401 
dywyijy  314 
dyfiv,  22,  278,  537 
dyttfvi^Co/iuu,  249,  278,  296 
d&X<^,  247,  403,  409,  575 
aoijAon^,  282 


dScoXciirrog,  286 

d&aAciWa>9,  14,  49 

a&xcco,  142 

d&xio,  66,  473 

d&oKi/wi,  313,  339,  447 

d&Wro9,  444 

d€i,  59,  337 

di^p,  43 

AOavaxrCoL,  281 

a^crco),  37, 109,  120,  264,  504 

deenjaKy  462,  492 

d^Acoi,  296 

a^Ai7(ri9,  506 

<lt&o9,  59,  60 

<u*8ak,  222,  223 

al^  404,  487,  540,  555,  569,  578 

oufiarcicxvcria,  489 

cuKco-iS,  572 

aipwfuuj  68 

alfitaKf  166 

aif>cracd9,  351 

aia^rfrypiov,  440 

alrxpoKtp&rfiy  234 

cuaxvn;,  222,  223,  589 

airia,289 

(urt09t  ^6 

alXIwXxiirO^vy,  312 

al<tfv,  58,  59,  84,  213,  214,  249,  281, 

379,  381,  390,  445,  492,  512 
(uWt09,  56,  58,  59,  60,  61,  213,  291, 

299,  332,  436,  443,  482,  483,  573 
dicoAi^ui,  22,  37, 165 
dxaipcus,  319 


605 


606 


INDSX  OF  GBBEK   WORDS. 


1mduco9,  466 
dmufOai,  447 
oMipfmiSf  852 
dktirdyf tiMTTOf ,  848 
^imrdXvrvif  461 

<Uoi7,  28,  112,  321,  487 

Akowd,  148,  893,  895 

dKparfj^t  811 

6jcpifimy  48 

dxpoPvarrCuL,  98 

AKpoOivvoVf  457 

aKpovy  525 

aAoC^v,  310 

(UiT^aa,  209,  218,  220,  881,  889 

dXi;^cvci»,  145 

dXi7^ivo9,  19,  468,  500 

aXAiCotno,  147 

dXXrfyoptm,  149 

^[AAo9y  85 

cUXorfM09,  519,  588 

JAAc0s,272 

iiAocuD,  267 

SXvat^f  295 

dXixrircXiTs,  572 

a/«a,42 

dfLOLfrrdviih  268,  351 

a^wipTUJw  209,  492 

^ftaprojXcJ?,  104, 105,  207 

dfjuix<Ky  230,  347 

d/AcAcV  251,  395 

dfi€fJLTma^f  26 

dfitTaOcnKj  451 

d/Ai/rcup,  455 

<i/Aoi/3i7,  259 

dfuafijoiy  484 

dvayii'aKrxca,  251 

dmyxo^o*,  96,  103,  178 

dvayxcub^,  352 

di/dyici;,  33,  487 

dvdyvfixns,  251 

dmyo),  573 


dyaiixofuUf  524 
dvo^onrvpctt*,  289 
dyd$€fiaf  86 
dva^oipctti,  564 
dvoipccu,  65 
dvoiotuvij^ctf,  445 
dvaiotuvcMris,  849 
dvojcdfiirrctf,  523 
dHOo^fLPui,  241,  325 

di/aXoy£^o^4a4,  589 
dmAiNTc^f  fJ22 

diu/icvcif,  19 
dm/Ai^i^K,  496 
dvav^if^m^  !i09 
dmTr\i^pdtti»  2ff,  172 
Avafrmm^,  83,  303,  588 
dm^TTUTWiS  162 
ava<rravpwit^  446 
dnurrpc^,  238,  506 
dnurrpo^,  87,  250,  565 
dvartXXiti^  461 
dHirt^e/ioi,  94 
dwiTpoiwiN  336 
dm<^^  493,  571 
dyo^rvxoh  294 
dr8pairo8umj^,  208 
dv8po<^vo9f  208 
AvirficKrffafif  2 -16 
dt<^c^tKtiiCDg,  ^i08 
dj'tTrata^iivTo?,  301 
di'tTTiA.i^^irTCK^  228 
dvipxofiJOLiy  90 
dv£<ri9t  55 
di/e^ofuu,  320,  575 
dio;/L£cpo9t  311 
dioyp,  228 
dvOurrtffu,  327 
dvOfHoiro^y  82,  87,  119 
dvOponroi  OeoVj  278 
dvirffUi  563 
dvUrrqiu,  83,  460 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS. 


607 


dywp-oi,  110,  276 
avotOj  314 

dvofiui,  63,  64,  346,  391 
ayofU>9»  207 
dvop$6a>j  546 
&v6(ruK,  207,  311 
dvraycDvi^o/iai,  540 
AvrairoSofia,  259 
dvrawc&oo'Kf  259 
6vT€xofmt,  49,  334 
dvrti  538 

dvri&arii^cfuu,  308 
dyriOea-K,  283 
iyrUtifuuj  164,  208 
dvroccificvos  (6),  265 
dvTtXofiPdvofmt,  273 
dvrcAcyo>,  335 
dvriXoyia,  451,  458,  539 
dvTLXvrpWy  219 
dm/uo^ui,  259 
dvrmnro?,  491 
dwirojcptro9,  205,  288 
dwirorcucrog,  207,  398 
dvoi^cv,  140 
&vtaT€pw,  497 
dF<iM^i7$,  351,  462 
df  i09,  534 
d^tdo),  57,  411 
diiuy:,  26 
doparo9,  213,  528 
dirayyiXXjo,  18 
d7rat8cvro9,  307 
dmiAAdaro'ctf,  406 
diro^,  493,  557 
dirapdj3aro9,  464 
diras,  212,  444 
dirardco,  226 
dirdn;,  66,  418 
dirdroip,  455 
diravyaafia,  381 
dirMl9aa,  423,  426 
dirotfcu),  159,  420,  530 


dirapos,  439 

dvcicS^/ioi,  158,  498 

dir^vro9,  203 

dw4p)(pfuu,  90 

dirc;^o>,  245 

dutoTcco,  300 

dirtorio,  418 

dutoTos,  260 

diro,150 

dvoPkeirto,  528 

6,ir6pkrjT<Kf  246 

diroypd^fuu,  554 

diroSeejcw/xi,  64 

diroScKardd),  457 

diroSeicro9,  217,  259 

diro8i8o»Au,  259,  323,  327,  545,  549 

diroft/gav/xi^flj,  282 
diroAnTcricfiii,  107,  504,  525 
SurotaiBumffUf  573 
dutMcoAvirrca,  89,  128 
dirofcdXv^i9,  55,  87,  94,  280 
dirdfcccfuu,  323,  493 
diroKorrco,  162 
dvoXofifiavto,  136 
dirdXavcrts,  282,  527 
diroXciinu,  423,  424 
diroAoyca,  328 
diroAvrpcMn9,  219,  485,  588 
diroAvo),  575 
diroirAavdco,  278 
diropcoH  147 
dirop^vf^co,  30 
dmaramoL,  63,  244 
dirooTcpcctf,  275 
dntxrroAos,  220,  410 
diro(rrpc<^€i>,  294,  556 
diroro^Aois,  338 
dirorpciropai,  312 
&irp6avros,  281 
dmitfcofuu,  215 
diruAcio,  277,  509 


608 


I17DEX  OF  GBEEK  WORDS. 


^161 

ApyoSf  8d8 

dpfcricM,  23 

apicMH  276,  563 

ap/A09,428 

apvoy^uu,  260,  300 

apfwayjy  507 

apfwdCot,  43 

^ipcrcvcNcocn^,  208 

cKpcTTv,  130 

^^  33,  86 

ifyrioi,  318 

^o9,  475 

apxayycAos,  42 

dpxn^    68,    347,    891,    895,    438, 

441 
dpxfTf^f  402,  538 
iipX^^P^,  432,  453 
do-^Seio,  303,  344 
iorcjSiTs,  207 
iorcXyaa,  165 

6060^00, 143,  271,  430,  433,  532 
dirtfcvcb),  330 
dcrAnn^,  462 
dovdlfofuu,  329,  372,  521 
dcnnAix,  279 
acnroFSos,  311 
daruoi,  627 
aaropyoi,  311 
doToxcoi,  205,  284 
d<rvvcro9,  277 
00-^0X17$,  452 
do'ciirta,  333 
<io'(irra>9)  333 
c[raKro9,  48 
draicr<ii9,  70 
aroiros,  69 
avOaiSrrf^,  334 
av^crrco),  225 
avrdpKtuL,  275 
avroKaraKpiros,  352 
d^vtcr/oos,  473 


2^ccn¥,489 
d^Aipiria,  292 
^^Aipros,  213,  281 
d<^tfopca,342 
df^fffu,  441 
<i^iAi£7aaoc,  311 
d^^tXapY^fWy  230,  562 
IffHorritu,  244,  305 
d^ofUMOOfuu,  455 
d^opooH  537 
d<^opi2o>,  89,  101 
d<^/xi;,  163,  265 
d^p«i>v,  277 
dxdpurro^,  310 
d^cv8i7S,332 

PaBfuk,  237 
/Sanror/Aos,  442,  480 
/SdpcK,  24, 172, 174 
Poffikila,  27,  55,  329,  550 
PoffiKm,  213,  216,  280 
)3(unAcv»,  280 
PaKTKaivWf  111 
)38cXvfcr<k,  339 
)3^|Sa«o(,  394,  452,  487 
P€Pai6to,  395,  566 
PePoLLwnif  451 
jSc/Si^Xos,  207,  302,  549 
PiXrtav,  295 
jSijSXtov,  326,  497 
)3ib9,296 
pXafitpo^,  277 
PXau'^fUiaf  273 
pXdaifnfiAJOi,  211,  310 
)8Acira>,  503,  512,  516,  556 
PctrfituL,  431 
Pfnavq^  446 
)3<m\ofuu,  220,  276,  451 
PpaSvvii},  238 
Ppaxy^i  398,  575 
Pp€<l><K,  315 
)9pu>^  245,  480,  566 


INDEX  OF  GBEEK  WOBBS. 


609 


PfAaii,  549 
/8v«Ja>,277 

>ida,439 
FoAario,  324 
raAAia,325 
To^M),  245,  263,  265 

yoon/p,  388 

ycvcoAoycofuu,  457 

ycvcoAoyio,  203 

yeiWcD,  148, 151,  308,  387 

yci^os,  88 

ycuofuu,  400,  445 

yccupycofuu,  447 

ycoifow,  297 

y5,  446,  556 

yi^pdto'jcca,  473 

yiv(Vuuu,  118, 136, 142,  226,  394,  408, 

437, 439, 453,  481, 485, 489,  515, 

541 
yivwTKio,  56, 139,  304,  309,  472 
yXcMTo-ofco/iOK,  326 
yn/crcof,  202,  332 
yvd^os,  551 
yvJptiio,  39,  87 
yiwi$,  283 
rJi^,  315 
y(»w,  527 
ypdfiiuLy  177,  315 
ypa<^^  116, 126,  266,  817 
yfia^HAj  177 
ypOAiSiTS,  248 
ypi/yopcoi,  46 
yu/Liva^o*,  248,  440 
YVfivao-Caij  248 
ywaiKopiav,  312 
yuvi^,  228,  236 

Sai/i6yujv,  244 
Seucvos  163 

VOL.   IT. — 80 


8aic^287 
AoAfu&rio,  325 
&[fuiAi«,483 

SV'«'  210'  ^34 

Set;  308,  401,  515 

Sa;iia,290 

8elcl£n^457 

Sc^uk,  100,  392 

8«o9,  559 

SccTfuos,  220,  290,  507,  561 

8cirfuk,298 

S€mr&n/Sj  273,  306 

8c;(0/iuu,  531 

8«i>,299 

SiyXdctf,  558 

Svifjuovpyisf  520 

&i£,  82,  93,  105,  295,  380,  400,  401, 

481,  483,  532 
&a  Ppax^wy  575 
ScajSou^  529 
ScajSc/Soi^Ofuu,  206,  350 
8u£i3o;U)$,  30,  31,  232,  309,  341 
8u£y«.>,217 
Sco^iciT,  119,  470,  472,  485,  486,  487, 

494,  555,  573 
Suucovittf  236 
SmKWWL,  210,  233,  325 
&^om,  32,  233,  247 
ScoXryofuu,  540 
&aAoyi4Tfuk,  221 
Suifw^rrifiOfiM,  269,  300,  897 
Scofima,  391 
8u£yoca,472 
&a  imvrds,  477 
Scairapar^M^i;,  274 
ScocrrcAAofuu,  552 
Starayfio,  527 
Scaracraco,  123,  333 
&arii9efuu,  472,  487,  494 
SuiTpo4^,  276 
&a^^p«i>,  97 


610 


INDEX  OF  GBEEK  WORDS. 


Sca^dc(pa>)  275 

SuK^optarepoVf  886 

&&ucrac69,  229,  308 

&&uricaXia,    208,    244,    254,    266, 

274 
&&£(7icaAo$,  220,  292,  438 
SAixOf  320,  334,  442,  566 
St'&ofu,  55,  219,  472 
Siipxofuu,  430 
Sii/yeofuu,  531 
Si  rfv  airuLVt  289 
SirpftKTf^t  456 
BuKviofuu,  427 

8uciuo9, 117,  207,  508,  514,  555 
StKouxrwff,  158,  278,  349,  439,  454, 

517,  532,  545 
&icaioa>,  104,  116,  193,  240,  350 
Sixatcn/io,  474,  480 
Sucouos,  26 
Sucrj,  56 
&' Xoyo9,  234 
hiopSoKni,  379,  480 
8iirAoos,  266 
&0T0fu>9)  427 

SiwyfjLOif  314 

3i(ii#cn;s»  211 

3io)Ko»,  153,  307,  315,  548 

3oKe<ii,  94,  97,  99,  172,  420,  544 

SoKi/xo^o),  23,  50, 173,  236 

SoKifJuaxruii  416 

hoKifWij  301 

8oXo«,  22 

&56x,  27,  57,  210,  213,  241,  299,  345, 

382,  476 
8of(£{a),  68,  433 
SovAcia,  151,  406 
SovAciKo,  139 
SovAos,  272,  308 
3ovAo<u,  341 
8pd/A09,  323 
SvKOfuu,  313,  435,  406 


iuvofui,  17,  57,  115,  290.  312,  396, 

445,  461,  532 
bvytuTTfjif  280 
Wards,  292,  335 

Sva'€pfi,'qV€VT09t  487 

&i»^445 
8oipci£v,  70, 109 
Siapw,4S2 

lavrov,  173 

iyyCit^  463,  503 

^yyuo9,  464 

^yyife,  447,  478 

^yccpci>,  83,  298 

ryepotg,  83 

fyicaraXciirctf,  324,  668 

iyKpartiOj  168 

lyKpan^,  334 

I8paibs,  238 

i^SpoLuofui,  238 

^^cAoi,  147 

^^aca>9,  103 

l9vo$,  104, 116,  220,  241 

I0OS,  502 

£[,417 

ei  firf^  85,  91 

ei  fiTJv,  450 

cTSos,  51 

clic^,  114,  142 

eixo),  97 

cocclii/,  495 

tifu,  253,  381 

ciircp,  55 

d^n;,  12,  51,  71, 168,  179,  307,  681, 

548 
€lfyrfvuc6ii  545 
a*9,  99,  115,  127,  129, 142,  309,  388^ 

448,  472 
di  t6  SirjvacUy  456,  496,  498 
€19  TO  TravreXis,  465 
cts,  125,  402 


INDEX  OF  6BEEK  WORDS. 


611 


daojcowo,  435 

€iir€pxofJuu,  422,  458 

CMTOdoC)  19)  499 

crTa,542 

iK,  i$,  105,  533 

iK  h€VT€fiOVy  493 

cKKurros,  449,  525 
licjSourts,  565 
Ifcyovoc,  258 
iK&fxofjuu,  519 
Ik&tAoc,  314 
^icSun^is,  55,  506 
IkSucos,  37 
^icSutficoi,  28 

^icet,  458 

^ic(7r«»,  515,  550 
^K^ifnTcris,  204 
^Kxatfoupco,  306 
iKtcXfjauif  11,  554 
^icAav^rofuu,  540 
^icAcuro),  392 
^icXcjcroSf  269 
iKXcrfi^,  6, 16 
^kXiV>^  176,  540 
cicovcruii9,  503 
iiariima,  157 
^ieim;»,143 
iKorpii^ofjuu,  351 
Micros  Ci  fi^,  268 
iicTpeirofJuu,  205,  321,  647 
iK^ynih  447 

iK4H>P<K,  552 

^icXco>,  349 
2\iuoF,  391 
^Aarrdtt,  398 
lAcyfios,  317 
2\cyxo$,  510 
^cyxoi,  268,  319,  886 
iXc«.>,211 


cAci^fioiv,  407 

l\cos,  179,  202,  349,  431 

IkevBtpia,  97,  154,  365 

Acvtfcjm,  152,  365 

iXevO€p6o>y  154,  365 

auraoi,  392 

ikviivh  250,  260 

^AiTis,  158,  201,  345,  414,  449,  468» 

501 
ifLfUyn^,  117 
ifjLvatyfiiOij  534 
ifAvCirrtih  232,  276 
ifivKtKtOy  296 
i^iJHivili^  491,  522 
^voKTibs,  343 

ivdpx9f^°'^  H2 

Meiyfio,  54 

Meucwpm,  327,  843,  449 

li^os,  394 

Mo(aiofjuUf  57 

^v&umfio(tt,  210,  295 

^v£wo»,312 

^v^uos  46, 130 

iv4py€uiy  28,  66 

iv€py€ta,  28,  99, 158 

Ivfpyijs,  427 

^vcuXoycofuu,  116 

iv€Xith  155 

MvfifjaKj  428 

Ifi,130 

^lauroS)  141 

^vum/fu,  63,  84,  310,  870, 479 

^Koii^o*,  487,  499 

^vKOicco*,  71, 176 

ivKovxojOfMoi,  54 

^Koirrai,  31,  159 

&FOca,428 

^vociccoi,  288 

^vopKiJ^oi,  53 

IvoxXiui,  549 

lyox^,  406 

ivrcAAofuu,  527 


612 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS. 


In-cu^,  216 

^vroXi;,  279,  838,  457,  461 

ivTpiww,  71,  343 

ivTpi<j>OfMBAf  247 

ivTvyx<iyatt  216,  465 

imffifH^ifi,  505 
4vi^iov,  25fi»  575 
^<^408 
i(ayopdlu^  118,  136 

c^fmrdiRS  83 J  226 
i$airofTriXXtiti  136 
i^apTiitOy  818 
l^cycipctf,  83 
i(€pxpfuut  18,  518 

2fi9,  440 

2fo8o9,526 

i(opvaxr(Oy  145 

^(ovtfevcu*,  143 

^^oiMTio,  70,  347,  568 

2^01,  233,  569 

2^<o0ev,  233 

hmyytXJk,  120,  125,  127,  149,  153, 

249,  285,  519,  532 
Iwayyi'XAo/Ku*  224,  557 
iTraxpm.  221 
liraji(T\^vOfinJ^  290,  523 
iwat<okovO€w.  262,  272 
^7ravop^(ixri$,  318 
ciropKco),  262 
^7r€MTayar)oy,  463 
ftrcira,  455 
iirtx^  254 
^7r«;  105,  121,  162,  268,  301,  331, 413, 

467,  471,  479,  485,  487,  504 
4wiliiip€iii,  24,  25,  70 
fTTtytvcacr^ffij,  245 
ImyvoMTu,  21 S,  308,  331,  503 
rjTtSturacrotJftfli,  120 
iwtj^pOota,  333 


lincuciTf  ,  230 
lirt^iTTitkh  522 
iirtlSeirt^,  252 
hnBvyJm,  167,  228,  449 
imBv/iuLy  86, 164,  306 
imxaXcu*,  307,  523 
iTTiKardpato^,  86,  117 

hnXifi^dvopdu,  278,  406,  472 
iwt^v0civofiau  560,  572 
IvifuXcofuu,  281 

iirtfLtyatf  254 
cirmpjco?,  208 
iwvjrKi^axrtik,  254 
(iriiro^ew,  287 
iwurtcirrTOfJuiLt  398 
iinent&friiti^  548 
iwia-KOffn^^  227 
ertiricoffos.  231,  334 

iTTMrroAirJ,  63 
^moTOfuJ^Qi,  336 
imoTpi^tOy  19,  139 
^incn'wayiwyij,  R2,  502 
cirtcwpcuw*  ^20 
^iTayi;,  201,  285,  347 
cViTcAccu,  113,  469,  477 
iiriTipdo},  319 

cTTtTpcrtu,  22  i],  443 

mVpoirq^*  132 

cirfTLFy^^at'Qj,  45L  532 

c7rt^tV(*>r  280,  344 

iwt4>dv€tiu  60,  280,  323,  345 

itrtj^opTf/tm^  114 

CTTovpdvio?,  329,  385,  409,  445,  469 

cpao),  166 

ipyaiofwx,  70,  176,  532 

Ipyartfi^  301 

^pyov,  15,  48,  104,  261,  349, 442,  448| 

484 
ipiOuiy  165 


INDEX  OF  QBEEK  WORDS. 


618 


kpikfjvtvfo,  454 
"Efni^pos  (ACAoinm),  530 
^ypiuu,  20,  212,  508,  518 
^120 

ImitocL,  804,  498 

liTxaroc,  243,  310,  378 

Ivutrtpoi^  453 

^rcpoSiSouricaAiBtt,  202 

lrcpo9,  85,  173,  459 

^^,  161,  459 

croifui^Qi,  306,  523 

crocfu>s,  347 

cmyycXi^ofuu,  393,  421,  423 

cmyycAiOF,  22,  98,  210,  393 

€uayyeAi4m^,  321 

€uapcoT€ti>,  515 

cvopccrroc,  343,  575 

cuapcaToi9,  559 

e{&>ic«to,  25,  88,  509 

«v&MC(a,  58 

cvcpycaca,  273 

e{;^croc,  447 

cv^eb>9,  90 

cv^un^s,  391 

cvKaif>09,  431 

cvMoupoi9,  319 

€i\aP€ui,  435,  559 

cvAa/Scofuu,  516 

cvAoycQi,  450,  525 

cvAoyi^ros,  286 

c{^Aoy<a,447 

cvficraSoros,  282 

cwcpurraroc,  537 

cvirocfii,572 

tvirpociair^  177 

tvpuTKiOj  105,  549 

cicrc/Scia,  193, 209, 217, 225, 239, 274, 

275,331 
cvcrc/Scfu,  259 
€wr€pw9,  315 


cwrxi7fiorci»9)  38 
ev^^opurroD,  12,  286 
evx^»i;(rroc,  306,  325 
^<^ira^,  466,  482,  497 
i^urrrffju,  45,  319 
i)fipis,  145 
^01,  215,  448 

{<£<»,  19, 107, 108,  427,  500,  543 
{9Ao9,  503 

CrjXntyniij  88,  347 
iffrtM,  471 
Ci^n^cw,  274,  307 
Ci^HK,  551 
Cvyds,  155,  272 
fi;^iy,159 
{a>yp«a>,  309 
Con^,  213,  249,  283 
{(iioyovcftf,  279 
{aKM^,  569 
{oioiroiccD,  279 

^y«V^  ^»  2^0,  273,  505,  528,  564 

^3on7,348 

^01,  508 

ilXucta,  521 

iffjjpa,  43,  243,  293,  310,  878^  379, 

503,  543 
^ficrcpo9,  352 
^nos,  24,  308 

^p€fM>S,217 

•^avxoiio,  38 
i^o^to,  225 
^<n^tos,  217 
5xos»  551 

OaXma,  25 

^mroc,  400,  435,  486^  487, 4M 

dapping  563 

^v/btafoi,  84 

$€aTpi(ofiiu,  506 


614 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS. 


OtXrjfio,  49,  201,  809,  497 

$€\rjaK,  396 

$€kw,  30,  38, 140, 148, 164,  206,  218, 

263,  314 
^e/icAux,  803,  442,  519 
OtiuXiov^  391 
OtoSi^axTOSy  88 
OtajTvewrroSi  817 
$€0(r€p€ia,  209,  225 
Otpairwv,  412 
^ccopcctf,  456 
Orjkxs,  130 
Orjpiovj  387 
^lyyavos  529,  552 
eXiPio,  262 
^Xa/ri9,  17 
OpoiofjuUf  62 
^povo9,  390,  431 
^ikXAa,551 
Ovfjuarrjpiov,  475 
^/uio9,  165,  528 
^ucrio,  432,  490,  497,  518,  572 
Ova-uianjpioVf  460,  567 

IStwiy  176,  219,  259,  272,  280,  882, 

425,  569 
icparto,  457 
IcpoirpcmTs,  340 
icpdg,  315 
Icpovo-oXi^/A,  152 
icpoxrvn;,  459 
*Ii;(roDs,  424 
Uavos,  295 
Ucn/pco,  434 
iXaxTKOfuUt  408 
lAxum/piov,  477 
iAc(i>9,  478 
Iaarur/ui09,  224 
Ti/a,  119,  126, 164,  214 
1ovM;o»»  108 
lov&iiKoc»  888 
lov&iio'fMS,  88 


urrop€tt>,  91 
tcrxvpos,  451 
ur;(V9,  57 
Urx^io,  158,  487 
lTaAia,372 

«ca6bpi2a>,  846,  884,  484 

KaBapuTfiiiy  884 

KoOafioi,  205,  285,  286,  307, 1 

KoBrffuUf  392 
Ka^i^u>,384 
KoBurrrffJu,  888,  482 
ica6^  xnr€pPoX.^f  88 
Ko^oSs,  115 
KOivoc,  179,  472,  485 
KOipoi,  30,  43,  64, 141, 176,  219,  243, 
249,  280,  810,  879,  479,  480,  521 
fouoi,  550 

KOKULy  348 

KOicoira^coi,  298 

KOKos,  837 

Koicovpyos,  298 

Kojcovxfofjuuf  562 

KoAcus  6,  58,  85,  89,  159,  291,  433, 

486,518 
KaAo&8a<r#caAo9,  841 
KoXicnroUta,  71 
KoXos,  51,  146,  207,  288,  261,  282, 

294,445 
KoA^,  146,  158,  266 
fcofivoi,  540 

KOKWV,  179 

Kop&ui,  69,  205,  807,  418^  600,  5M 

Kopim,  166,  545,  572 

Koprtp^  528 

icar<£,  158,  882,  415,  517 

naff  •^/upaVf  466 

icara  fiiip09,  477 

Karo^CAAos  442 

KamPapin^  24 

Karo)8oAi$,  492,  520 


INDEX  OP  GREEK  WORDS. 


615 


KarayivoKriCQi,  101 
KaTaywviiofJuu,  532 
f(ara&;Ao9,  461 
Kara&ivXoctf,  97 
Karojcpivia,  517 
KaTaXafuPdvia,  45 
KaroAcyofuu,  261 
KaraVciWoi,  32,  420,  528 
xaroXuctf,  106 
Kara  fjJpoit  477 
xaravoAiiriCQi,  559 
icaravocQi,  410,  502 
KarawaT€Q)j  504 
KordimvaKj  417,  426 
KarairavcD,  422 
jcaraveixur/io,  453,  475,  500 
Karavtyo),  530 
Kar<£pa,  86,  117,  447 
icarapycos  65,  156,  161,  292,  404 
icaTa^i^cu,  33,  171,  512,  574 
Kanunccva^Qi,  411,  516 
fcarocricia^Q),  477 
fcarocricoircQ),  96 
icarcuricojros,  531 
KardoTrffJui,  222,  340 
KarocrroXi;,  221 
KaTaarprpnau^,  262 
Karoorpo^,  301 
Kara^cvycD,  452 
icara^cipcD,  313 
KarccrtfuD,  163 
fcarcv^iW,  34 
Karc)(oi,  51,  64,  65,  414 
Karrryopui,  268,  833 

icar*  iSiav,  94 
icavcriS)  448 
JcavoTiTpca^opu,  244 
#cav;(aofiat,  179,  414 
«cav;(i]f/ia,  173,  414 
KwSxfotif  414 
iccifuii,  33,  207 


KfXxvfTiiay  42 
KcvoSofui,  170 
icevoSo^,  170 
Kcvoc,  20,  33,  301 
KcvcM^ui,  283,  302 
KC^aAaun/,  467 

KTipvyiia,  328,  332 

fci7pvf ,  220 

fci/pixro'ctf,  160,  220,  241 

KiPwrisf  516 

icXcRTiTs,  44,  45 

kXi7poi^^  154,  386,  450 

Kkfipovo/jLULf  486,  494 

KkffpwifjLOi,  132, 138,  350,  380,  517 

icA^ois,  57,  291,  409 

KXifio,  92 

icvi^Qi,321 

KocAia,  89 

KOifMOfJuUf  39,  40 

Kocvos,  332,  505 

Koivocii,  483 

KotvoiK^  174,  269,  404 

KotvcDvca,  100,  572 

KoivtaviKOfSt  282 

KotvoivoS)  506 

KOKKlVOij  488 

jcoXcucia,  23 

KoXiuris,  504 

ico^o»,  508,  521,  524 

jcoiruM),  249,  266,  297 

Koim,  15,  25, 180 

KwrfUM,  221,  343 

KwrfUKoi,  344,  474 

Koafuoi,  222,  229 

ic«r/iio9,  179,  212,  381,  517,  684 

Kfiartto,  452 
icparoc,  404 

KfKimav  or  KftfUFfrw^  885,  448, 470^ 
490,  533,  556 
232,  263 


61b 


INDEX  OF  QBEEK  WORDS. 


Kpiimy  67,562 

KpUTKy  271 

Kpcrq^y  328,  555 
#cpiri#cos,  428 
fcpvnroi,  272 

KTOJOfMOl,  36 

icrt^oi,  245 
icruris,  179,  429,  482 
Kritr/uif  246 
fcvicXow,  530 
jcupccvai,  281 
KvpuK,  281,  365 
icvpoQi,  119 
xctfAov,  420 
xcoXvo),  245 

X(ii>/Ul09,  166 

AoXccu,  840,  378,  514,  556,  564 

Xa/iPdvuh  395,  432,  457,  530 

XavOdvtOj  561 

Aao9,  346,  424,  569 

Xarpeioi,  474 

XarpewDy  286,  479,  568 

Xcyo),  121,  182,  206,  437 

XarovpyioL,  470 

Xcirovpyixos,  392 

XttToupyos,  220,  390,  467 

A.cW,  329 

Xuiv,  327 

At^(^a),534 

At^o/SoXcdi,  552 

XoyCiofjuu,  115,  328,  524 

Xoytov,  438 

XoyofjuaL)(€io,  301 

Aoyo/ia;((a,  274 

Xiyos,  17,  28,  28,  63,  174,  211,  250, 

266,  393, 426,  429, 437,  439, 441, 

575 
Aoy09  T€V  Kvptov,  18 
A.oyo$  $€ov  or  rov  0cov,  246,  299 
XoiZopui,  265 
Xoiiroi^,  TO  Xmvc¥,  323 


Xoivos,  84,  39,  45,  68, 180,  268 

XavTpc¥y  349 

Xovta,  501 

Avir€tt>,  39 

Xvmfy  545 

XvrpOGfuu,  346 

AurpcMTis,  482 

Xyxvto,  475 

fuucopcos,  210,  344 

paKopurfAoi,  144 

fiOKpodvfuia,  450 

fiOKpoev/jLuiy  168,  212,  320,  449 

fAoXXjovy  153 

fidfifirji  289 

fMov&dvtii,  264,  436 

paprvptmy  145,  261,  458,  511,  513, 

514,  535 
fioprvpia^  233 
fmpriYNOF,  219,  233,  412 
paprvpopaif  26 
fuif>rv9,  24,  504,  536 
fjuumyooh  541 
paTowXoyuif  205 
^raioXayo9,  335 
fidrauKt  20,  351 
paxfupa,  427,  532 
pjeyaXuHnvrfy  385 

|i€yas»  345,  430,  478,  500,  527,  573 
pjfBwTKopajL,  46 
/AcXcTdutf,  253 
ficAXfu,  128,  249,  379,  397,  445,  525, 

570 
fu/ifipdvoy  327 
pApj(f>opait  471 
/ACFroi,303 

^^,  227,  558,  560,  570 
pj^Hxrpjoiy  396,  428 
fic<nrcv(i>,  451 

fic<rin;9v  124, 125,  218,  470,  555 
fiC(ro9,  25 
/icra,252 


INDEX  OF  QBEEK  WOBD8. 


617 


ficrotfccns,  460,  558 

fUToXafiPdvtOy  297,  447,  544 

/icroXi/fi^is,  245 

fierdvoia,  308,  549 

furaTt$rffUj  85,  460,  514 

fjLerex^  297,  404,  489,  460 

firroxoc,  391,  409,  418,  445,  541 

furpunraB&aj  432 

^c^9,  540 

firf  ycracro,  106, 126 

fiffrpoXtfast  208 

Ikuuvio,  339,  549 

fuxpii,  473,  508 

fUfjLfOfMMt  70,  564 

fufitfrii^y  17,  449 

fUfun^KOfuUt  287 

fjLur^ir68oa£aL,  394 

/uir^iro8an;9y  .515 

/Avcta,  13,  33,  287 

/in7/Aoi^cvQi,  100,  298,  522,  526,  564 

fjuoyoy€in^j  388 

mAw,  162,  178 

^Aoi^of,  65,  213 

fjuoyoofjuuf  260 

fAopffyi^i  382 

fwpif>6ofuu,  147 

flOpifHlHTK,  312 

,io<Txo9,  482,  488 
fioxOoit  25 
fivcAos,  428 
/uii)^09,  203,  248,  338 
fivKTrjfUiofJuUf  175 
fivpidsi  553 

fixxrnjpwyy  64,  234,  239 
^pos,  277,  307 

vavayco),  215 

vcKpos,  83,  442,  484,  487 

v€Kpwa,  521 

VC09,  555 

veor79,  250 

vco^vro9,  231 


vc<^,  536 

vc<tfrcpo9t  262,  265 

vtwTtpucist  306 

vrpnal^ui,  440 

v7ino9,  24, 132,  440 

n;^aAio«,  229 

vrf^mh  46 

Fo«u>,  206,  297,  512 

v<^,  542 

vo/irj,  303 

vofiMxiij  351 

vofii/utfs,  207,  297 

vofwStidaKoXoi,  206 

v«^crcitf,  459,  471 

y^,  104,  117,  126,  127,  148,  165, 

169,  207,  461 
voo-ctt),  274 
voai^ofjuuf  343 
yov^co-fo,  351 
vou^ctii,  48,  71 
vovf,  62,  339 
w«cTos  KOL  '^/itpa^,  287 
vuK,  249,  281,  470,  528 
n;f,44,45 
viaOpis,  437,  449 

$€vC^ta,  561 
{cvo&>x€(iN  261 
^^w,  522,  566 
(vikLvoi,  305 
6i;u»^,  118 

oyico9,  537 

6&k,  478,  499 

^Si;n7,278 

5^€v,  407,  409,  487,  524 

oISo,  6,  35,  47,  55, 142,  472,  505 

oUttoi,  176,  238,  260 

o2ic<a,305 

oiicoSc<nroT«i>,  265 

oiicoSofiCQ),  47, 106 

oUovofiJuij  204 


618 


INDBX  OF   OBEEK   WOBD8. 


oUwofUK,  132,  238,  334 

oUoi,  259,  336 

oUoi  0€ov  or  Tw  tfcov,  238,  600 

oUovfuvrfj  379,  381,  397 

ocxovpyoS)  342 

oucripfiii,  504 

otvtK,  234,  270 

oXtOpoi,  56,  61 

6\iy<K,  248,  543 

oXjyAjnjxoit  49 

^AtyoipcQ),  540 

oAoicavrco/ia,  497 
6XokAi;po9,  52 
oAo9,  156 
oAxTTcAi/?,  52 

6fA€LpOfJUUf  25 

ofinxi),  450 

SfUMoriTs,  430,  461 

6/MMoo),  407 

6/Ao\ayccu,  278,  339,  522,  572 

hfuoX^ta,  278,  410,  501 

ofwXoyovfUytoij  239 

0/A(09,  119 

ovctWfios,  233,  528,  570 
ovofUL,  58,  305 
ovofta^o),  305 
ov  rpifirov,  313 
ovT<os,  258,  283 
OTnJ,  535 

OTTOiOS,  97 

oTTov,  453 

opaoi,  241,  493,  528 
6pYri,  20,  221 
opyiXoi,  334 
opeyofjuu,  227,  277,  528 
ope^is,  227 
op^cnroScctf,  102 
6p$i^^  546 
opOoTOfiiotj  301 
6^0),  423 
opKos,  451 


opicco/uuNrca,  463,  464 

^io9,  221,  466 

6o'ta>9,  26 

^crov  ocrov,  508 

^(m9,  152,  204,  478 

6<rrpaKiyoif  305 

^1,136 

o!;,416 

ov8^  95 

ovpaviiy  19,  86,  554,  557 

6^ciXcn;9,  156 

6<^tXo»,  401,  407,  433,  438 

64>0aXfwiy  111,  145 

iroyts,  233,  309 

inibfjfia,  169,  314,  400 

vo^,  36,  169 

mu&iyayyos,  128 

inuficio,  318,  541,  544 

watSevrrji,  542 

irm&ixu,  215,  308,  344,  541 

inuScoF,  404 

nxuSurfci/,  148 

WAaA,378 

iraAauND,  473 

irc[Xiv,  139,  140,  147,  156,  388,  488| 

442 
iraAxvy€v€<ria,  349 
iravqyvpi^f  553 
iravTcXi;?,  465 
iravTorc,  29 
irapa,  86,  386,  556 
irapa)8a<ri9,  123,  226,  394,  485 
vapapdrvi^t  106 
iropa/SoXiJ,  478,  524 
iropayycXio,  34,  204,  214,  279 
irapayycAA(i>,  34,  202 
irapayivofiaiy  328,  480 
trapoL^iyfjuariitaj  446 
impaBexofjuaLL,  268,  541 
irapaai3<D/u,  108,  215,  219 
vapa&MTis,  68,  88 


INDEX  OF   QBEEK   WOBDS. 


619 


mfia$^Kri,  283,  293,  294 

irapcureofuu,  248,  307,  551,  556 

vapaxaXcco,  47,  216,  319 

7rapdK\rf<rK,  22,  251,  452,  d75 

vapajcaijf  394 

irapaxokavOita^  209,  247,  314 

mpaXoLfJiPavtaj  27,  87,  558 

irapaXvofJuiL,  546 

irapafitviiif  464 

rrapofjLvOwfjLaii  26 

iropairucpacr/uuk*  415 

irapa7rtirra>,  445 

trapa7rXi;(rai>9»  404 

vapdimtifjui,  170 

mpaptm^  393 

iropan/pcdi,  140 

mpariOrffu,  214,  293,  295 

trapa^ipiD,  565 

inLpa\uiial^iih  352 

irdptifUj  545,  563 

Tap€U7aicro9«  96 

irap€ta'€p\ofJuiL,  96 

iraLf}€fi.poX,T^y  533,  569 

TTOLptiriSvjfWit  522 

mip€x<o,  180,  204,  342 

vapirjfUj  546 

iropum^fu,  301 

iropoucco),  519 

irapOivo9)  230 

irapo$v<rfiiif  502 

irapouo-fo,  31,  66,  280 

mpfniaioL,  237,  414,  499,  508 

irappirfatdiofjuuf  21 

ira9,  126,  212, 317, 320, 381, 883, 427, 

498,  544,  555,  562 
tnurxaLj  528 

TO(rxa>,  113,  408,  436,  491,  569 
trar^$  t^s  <rapKoif  542 
wan/p,  378,  527 
irar^p  rcov  irvcvfu&ranr,  542 
irarptApx^y  457 
irariKf ,  522 


9rarpoX(fMi9,  208 

irciAxpx^  ^4<^ 

7€ii9fu,  86,  159,  289,  448 

ircijpav  XofiPdvuVt  530 

ireipoCco,  33,  416,  524,  534 

irtipaxrpjk,  143,  276,  416 

irturfjLOvrjt  159 

7^9,  451 

vept;  83,  215,  499 

irtpuupioif  498 

vtpiPoXaiay,  392 

irtpupyaJCopajL,  70,  264 

vtpCiprfKy  264 

vepi€p)(pfjuuf  264 

v€piurrrffu,  302 

vcpuceifuu,  433,  536 

ircpcou(rio9t  346 

trcpiirarc(i>,  26,  164,  567 

vcpiirccJpcD,  278 

vtpiiroUofuu,  236 

vtpnroirja-Kj  46 

trtpurtroripwif  80,  393 

vtpLripLVfA,  96, 155,  178 

vtpiTOfiii,  160,  835 

vtpi^poy&o,  347 

myXuco?,  177,  456 

vucpCoL,  548 

vcVctf,  446 

vCwTiOj  426 

irtorn^w,  115,  127,  210, 212, 241, 292, 

332 
iTttrris,  105,  108,  115,  127, 168,  193, 

202,  204,  205, 215, 220, 234, 235, 

260,  264,  285, 288,  823,  343, 449, 

501,  509,  532, 538 

TtOTOOfUU,  315 

irurros,  53,  117,  211,  245,  295,  800^ 

333,  334,  408,  410 
vXavdA^  175,  244,  315,  585 
wXivn,  22,  66,  244 
rXcCm,  244 
vAoatFtt),  225 


620 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WOBDS. 


irXeyfUL,  224 

ff-AciW,  513 

vKtoytfcrttOf  37 

vAcorcKTi^c,  231 

vXanttiui,  22,  23 

wAi;#m;5,  230 

v\rfpo^M)p^  322,  329 

vkfifw^opuiy  17,  449,  501 

vXr^w^  156, 168 

vXi/pw/io,  135 

ff-Xourioc,  281 

vAovrcfef,  276 

vAovros,  282 

irvcv/io,  38,  52,  63,  65, 157, 164,  166, 

170, 175,  240, 242, 290, 389, 415, 

483,  505,  555 
irvtvfiaTiKOS,  171 

wou^  156,  216,  410,  528,  558,  575 
vouciXoi,  313,  348,  396,  566 
wtufnjvy  573 

irdAi9,  379,  519,  523,  570 
wiokTr/i,  472 
woXvfupStq,  377 
«o\tk,  153,  437,  549 
.«o\urcXi7«,  224 
«o\urp<>ir(i>9,  377 
irofUL,  480 

wxno7po9,  51,  69,  329,  418 
vof>$€iOf  88 
iropurfJLoqj  275 
iropvrfy  530 
7rdpvo9,  549 
iroppwOev,  521 
irocos,  504 
iroTc,  97 
TTov,  397 
7rov9,  547 
irpayfUL,  495,  510 
trpayfjuoLTUL,  296 
irpao'aiOj  156 
irpavwaOuL,  278 
Trpavn;?,  168,  308 


rpciroi,  340,  401,  465 

vp€aPvT€pu¥y  252 

wp€aPvr€poi,  254,  257,  333,  5U 

vpfafivnii,  340 

trpcflrjSurts,  257,  340 

v^o»,534 

«po  y^pwvw  aiomm¥y  291 

irpoayos  214,  271,  462 

vpoparw,  573 

vpopktwofjuuf  535 

7/K>yoi^,  259,  286 

vpoypd^ta,  111 

trpoS^Xos,  271,  461 

Tpo8on79,  311 

vpoSfiOfUK,  458 

vpocSSoF,  116 

vpo€pSt,  86 

vpoeuayycAi^ofuu,  116 

vfMurvi,  291,  314,  475 

rpoAnrfua,  133 

Trpbt&rrffu,  47,  231,  266,  350 

irpoicnAwyiai,  170 

wpoKtiftm,  452,  537,  538 

vpofcom^,  254 

trpoicovroi,  88,  302,  318 

vpoKpifjui,  269 

vpoXofjiPdvoi,  170 

irpoXryo),  166 

V/DOKOCCtf,  260 

vpairmrxiD,  21 
irpojrmT?,  311 
irpd?,  19,  176 
vpos  TO  irapov,  545 
vpooayopoxis  437 
irpooxtyoiyi;,  431 
npoauvaTi$€fmif  90,  98 
irpo<r8cxo/uuu,  344,  507,  533 
irpoa-tpxofuiL,  273,  431,  465,  500 
irpoccv;^,  13 

wpoaexio,  203,  234,  338,  393,  460 
irpoa-KoifHKy  527 
v/docncXto-i?,  269 


INDEX  OF  OBEEK  WORDS. 


621 


wpoaKwdbh  389,  525 
Trpocfifvio,  202 

TrpoaoxOiCoh  ^1^ 

wpwrrterffu,  123,  551 

vpoo-^roc,  499 

wpoa4^€pu^  432,  434,  479,  4b4,  491, 

493,  496,  518,  524,  541 
wpoatfiopd,  497 
vpoaxvaKf  529 
vpoatmrwj  56,  98, 101 
wpmtpoii  143 
wpoifKum,  23 
ff-pcH^cca,  49,  214,  251 
vpo^rffrq^y  878 
vpwroi^,  216,  258,  289 
irpwroc,  212,  478 
wpnaroroKttL,  549 
vpwroroKOs,  888,  529,  554 
vTctfxo?,  101, 140 
«7NCFog,  271 
1rv\1^570 
nvfh  503,  532,  550 
irvpOGfuu,  178 

^/38o9,  391,  484,  525,  526 
^vriCt^  483,  488,  501 
pavrurfjui^f  555 
pvfyyvfii,  152 
pf^/bui,  384,  445 
pTfrSfiy  243 
^a,  277,  548 
j^ofif^oMy  427 
pvofioi,  20,  814 

<mPpaTurfju69j  424 
oaivofMOLt  82 
(raAcvQ),  62,  557 
(TcLXiriyi^,  42,  551 
o-opKivos,  461 

(Top^,  105,  149,  163,  169,  175,  178, 
179,  240,  242,  404,  434,  480,  500 
Saravas,  30,  215 


o-^Scvvvfu,  532 

o'^Sao/ia,  64 

o-cfivdc,  234 

irtfiyoTfii,  217 

<nffLdo¥f  66,  396 

<nfiia6ofsait  71 

irrffufiw,  415 

Si'Aas,9 

2iv«£,151 

o-icarSoAor,  161 

VKtmuriuLy  276 

o-Kcvog,  35,  305 

(Tiopn;,  468,  478,  519,  568 

o-mo,  469,  495 

^TicKripwiA,  415 

o-Korictf,  171 

o-icoroc,  45 

00^01,316 

oiraTaAaas  260 

oircvSofuu,  322 

oir^Dfui,  121,  520 

<nro8dc,483 

OTnMt^  301,  324,  425 

ordfAvoij  476 

irratrKj  478 

<rrav/m,  161, 178,  589 

orav/ida),  112, 169 

orcyw,  32 

artXXofuut  70 

OTcvofoi,  572 
166 
rcpco9,  803,  439,  440 
rci^am,  31,  297,  828 
^c<^ayOft»,  297,  400 
"'       33, 155 
32 
180 

134,  399, 488 
,170 

oTOfiOy  427,  532 

arofrnxoiy  270 

urparuOi  215 


€rr€pyio, ! 

<rrcpco9, 

<rr/' 

cm^icoi, 
trrrfpiltoy'* 
<rriy/ia,  1 

OTOfia,  4 


622 


INDEX  OF  OBEEK  WORDS. 


crrparcuofuu,  215,  296 
{rrparitarrjij  296 
arparoXoyuoy  296 
<rrvXo9,  99,  288 

avfi^vXerri^y  28 

crw,  117 

awavofjuyvvfiai,  71 

(TVFairayofiat,  102 

trwawoBtn^Kiay  800 

owairoAAvfuu,  580 

awPfuriXtway  800 

aw^fjuUf  561 

crwci  Vcs,  205,  215,  285,  244,  286, 

889,  479,  484,  501 
awentfmpTvpiia,  896 
awttrBLfOj  101 
owccris,  298 
<n;n7Aiicui>n;9»  88 
awurrqfAit  106 
<rvi^Kaico]ra^«ti>,  290,  296 
awKOKovxfOfjuUt  527 
crvt^jccpavvvfu,  421 
owkXcod,  126, 127 
<rvi^icXi;poi^fu>9,  519 
<rvKira^cco,  480,  507 
onn^crravpcKi),  107 
<rvi^OTotxca»,  151 
crwrcXcio,  879,  492 
crwrcAco),  471 

aWVTTOKpiVOfJUU,  102 

a^payky  804 

<rxc8ov,  489 

(r(o{a>,  212,  218,  226, 485 

(Toifui,  52,  501,  562 

(TiOfJUaLTlKOqj  248 

(rcopcvd),  812 

(narrjpy  201,  865 

o-om/pio,  299,  395,  486,  448,  498 

aityn^puK,  844 

a'ia<l>pov€ta,  223 

arw<l>poy{l(Oy  224,  841 


arw^povurfw^f  224,  290 
artt^povttq,  224 
(FVtf^pocrvnf,  222,  228 
<n0^pw¥t  22^ 

n£6s,484 

r^L  irp6«  r^  0em^,  408^  488 

Topdunrtttf,  85, 160 

raxcitfSt  84 

raxos,  288 

rcicvcoF,  146 

rcfcvoyorcbi,  265 

rcfcvoyorco,  226 

rocyoK,  129, 158,  202,  883 

rocrorpo^ctt),  261 

rcXeco9,  182,  440 

T€Xa€Trj9t  442 

rc;Utoai,  402,  486,  462,  479,  408^  585, 

555 
rcXcuiKn9»'459 
TtKawnj^f  588 
rcXcvraoi,  526 
reXtti,  156, 164 
rcAo$,  29,  205,  419,  448,  449 
rifi^uBj  494 
ripa^y  66,  896 
TcxviTi;?,  520 

n/pectf,  52,  156,  270,  279,  82S 
T{»rffu,  210,  220,  880 
ri/Luiai,  257 
TCfiiiy,  36,  218,  266 
Tipwiy  562 
Tipnopui,  504 
rtVd),  56 
Ti9,  419,  541 

Ti5,  97,  172,  202,  244,  438 
roiyapovv,  585 
ropjoi,  427 
ram,  221,  549 
TOCjrovro9,  885 
rpayoiy  482,  488 
TpdirefjoL,  475 


INDEX  OF  OBBEK  WORDS. 


rpaxifXmaftat,  429 
rpixiih  68,  95,  158 
rpip^Koi,  447 
rpoim,  71,  313,  502 
rfKH^,  439,  440 
Tpo^,  25 
rpoxia^  547 
TxyxaviA,  299 
rvfiiraviiS^Qi,  533 
TvjTos,  17,  469 
rv^oopu,  232,  311 

vfipiiia,  21 
vPpurrrriy  211 
vyuuvtA,  208 
^1179,  342 
v3poirorc(k»,  270 
vloBtxruL,  136 
v2o9,45,379,387,486 
vi09  ^cov,  128 
vioi  *I<rpai7\,  527 

VflV€Qtj  403 

virtucoi;,  159,  436 
vmucouds  437,  518 
virap^i9i  507 
xnrdpxf^  102,  507 
VTrcvarruK,  503 
(rir^,  83,  219,  345,  427, 482 
virepavfavci),  54 
vtrtpPaxviA,  36 
virtpeKjrtpuramff  33 
virepi/^KOS,  310 
vircpoxi/y  216 
vir€^XcoKa{(k»,  211 
v7ro,539 

viroSay/io,  426,  469 
viroKpuris,  102,  244 
V7roficK«iH  300,  541 
virofUfunTO-iCQi,  300,  347 
virofin^o'is,  288 
virofunn;,  15,  69,  537 
virovoia,  274 


vvtkmuns,  382,  418^  510 
vwwrriXXMy  101,  508 
vvtxrroXi;,  509 
virorayi;,  97,  231 
vntyrdunroi,  342,  397,  542 
vmri^rffju,  246 
worvvciKFiSy  2iSf  «9ft 
v(r<r«Mro9)  488 
vcrrcpcu,  420,  548 
vcrrcpo9)  243 
wln/fKki  385 
v^ri^Xo^porcfef,  281 
v^furroc,  385 

^aiyWf  512 

^oyfpcKtf,  240,  280,  291 

^ayrdiofjuu,  552 

^ap/inKUL,  165 

<^vXoc,  343 

^cXon;s,  326 

<^^  383,  442,  487,  570 

^daviA,  29 

<^tf(VK£,175 

<fHXaya$<K9  334 

<MaicA<^  167,  560 

f^tXavOpunrCoLt  167,  348 
i^i\apyvp£aLi  167,  277 
^tXafrpipoii  310 
^XavrtK^  310 
<^iXci.N  166,  352 
^i^W,  311 
<^«Ao^eo^311 
^lAofcvca,  560 
<^cAa^,  229,  384 
^iVorcicvoc,  341 
^iVortfMOfuu,  38 
^cfuSoN  267 
^inpo9,264 
^/Scofuu,  141 
^^,  269,  550 
^oprCoVf  174 


624 


mDiaX,  OF  GBEEK  W0BD6. 


ippdaaiOf  582 
^pcvairarcuoy  172 
^pcvairariTS,  172,  835 

^pOFCCtf,  160 

^povriitoj  350 

^povpcQ),  127 

^vAcunro),  156,  178^  209 

<H^i7,460 

if^vpofjuif  160 

^uari$,  139 

^vo),  549 

^n^,  147,  551 

^o>9,  45 

<^a>ri2;ai,  292,  444 

XOiJfKtf,  12 

XaXcff-oS)  310 

Xap<£,  31, 168,  538,  545 

XOfKucn^p,  382 

yapU^oiUMJL,  122 

X(£pcv,  265,  559 

yapLV  ix"^  ^^ 
' io  oo   1/ 


Xolpis,  12,  99, 109,  211,  291,  296^400, 
431,566 


Xo-P^  "f^  ^ov,  344 
Xapicr/bui,  251,  289 
X€iAo9,  521,  572 
Xcip,  124,  177,  221 
X^tpoTTOirfroi,  491 

X€lfHi}Vf  315 


X^povPuvj  476 

Xi7pa,  257,  258,  265 

Xpcta,352 

XfnffULTif^tOy  469,  516,  6M 

Xpi^oifux,  301 

Xyny<rTon;s,  168,  848 

X/M(tf)  391 

Xpam,  43, 135,  291,  488 

Xpv(rtov,  476 

X<»Xo9,  547,  548 

Xcup^o>,466 

Xaip««)  430 

^cvSoSeXf^,  96 
^cv8oAoyo$,  244 
^'cvSoc,  66,  67 
^cv8(tfWfu>9,  288 
^cum;s,  337 
ilntjXa^tOy  550 
^^,  25,  52 

2;Se,458 

<SiSiF,45 

<S>8^v<.i,  147 

c0pa,3O 

d>9  liro9  dvdi^j  450 

ttxmvr(i>9,  234 

^^C  128, 145 

^Ik^«»,567 

^€Xifu>9,  248,  317,  8S1 


