Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


'i.ts-.i 


\"\ 


">,  > 


n? 


9 

WORD  STUDIES 


IN   THE 


NEW  TESTAMENT 


BY 

MARVIN  R.  VINCENT,  D.D. 

BALDWIN  ntOFBSSOH  OF  SACKED   UTSKATUHB  IN   UNION  THBOU>GICAL  SBMIMAKY,  NBW  VOKIC 


VOLUME  III. 
THE    EPISTLES    OF    PAUL 

ROMANS  PHILIPPIANS 

CORINTHIANS    COLOSSIANS 
EPHESIANS  PHILEMON 


,«•« 


*  The  uwrdt  that  I  have  spoken  unto  you  are  spirit,  and  are  life." 


John  yL,  68L 


NEW  YORK 

CHARLES  SCRIBNER'S  SONS 

1905 


V^773 


• 


••;  COPYMIGHT,   1890,  BT 

CHARLES  SCRIBNER'S  SONS 


••• 


•  ••  •• 


•  •  ••, 


•••  ••••• 

•••••       ••    •  ••••• 

•  •   •   •  •-, 

•  •••  ••••• 

•••••      •••••  ••••• 


•  •  •  < 


,•       "• 


•  ••'"      ^«..i  ••••• 

•  •          •/•••  .   ,   » 

•••  •        • 

•  •  •  •  •  .  . 

:*:•• 

.   :  •  •  •  • . 

•  ■••■    ••••  ••.  • 

•  •      •     •  •  •  • 

•••  •,    ••••  •  •• 

».       •••••  •••• • 

.:••    •..••.  • 

•*        •••••  ••••• 

•     •  • 

•• •  ••, 


I  *  ■ 


■•  •  • 


•  ••• 


•. 


• 


TROW* 
MlHTlNa  AND  MOKnMOlNQ  COMMl', 

mw  rowu 


UST  OF  AUTHORS  AND  EDITIONS, 

IN  ADDinOK  TO  THOSB  CITED  IK  VOLUMES  L  AND  JL 


The  names  of  a  few  works  cited  in  the  former  volumes  are  repeated^ 
because  of  their  special  bearing  upon  the  writings  of  Paul. 

Allen,  Alexander  Y.  G. :  The  Continaity  of  Christian  Thought. 
Boston,  1884 

Abbott,  Lyman :  The  Epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Bomans.  New  York, 
1888. 

Alexander,  J.  A. :  The  Psalms,  Translated  and  Explained.  New 
York,  1869. 

Aeschylus :  Ed.  Paley  :  4th  edition.     London,  1879. 

Beet,  Joseph  Agar :  A  Commentary  on  St  Paul's  Epistle  to  the 
Bomans.     London,  1877. 

Bingham,  Joseph :  Origines  Ecclesiasticae.  The  Antiquities  of 
the  Christian  Church.     2  yols.     London,  1878. 

Bruder,  Carolus  Hermann  :  Concordantiae  Omnium  Yocum  Novi 
Testamenti  GraecL     4th  edition.     Leipsic,  1888. 

Brown,  David:  Commentary  on  First  Corinthian&  SchaflTs 
Popular  Commentary.     New  York,  1882. 

Busbnell,  Horace :  The  Vicarious  Sacrifice.     New  York,  1866. 

Bruce,  Alexander  B. :  The  Humiliation  of  Christ  Edinburgh, 
1876. 

Cook,  F.  C. :  Speaker's  Commentary  on  Exodus.  New  York, 
1872. 

Conder,  F.  R  and  C.  R  :  A  Handbook  to  the  Bible.     New  York. 

Chambers,  Talbot  W. :  Notes  on  American  edition  of  Meyer's 
Commentary  on  First  and  Second  Corinthian& 

Cox,  Samuel :  The  Resurrection.     London,  1881. 

Dickson,  William  P. :  St  Paul's  Use  of  the  Terms  Flesh  and 
Spirit    Baird  Lecture  for  1888.    Glasgow,  1883. 


%!.  ^\.\ 


iv  LIST  OF  AUTHORS  AND  BDITION& 

Domer,  J.  A. :  Gbristliohe  Glaubenslehre.    3  vols.     Berlin,  1879. 

Dwigbt,  Timothy  :  Notes  on  American  edition  of  Meyer's  Com- 
mentary on  Bomans,  Ephesians,  Colossians,  Philippians  and  Phile* 
mon. 

Ducange,  Carolus  D. :  Olossarium  Mediae  et  Infimae  Latinitatis. 
Ed.  G.  A.  HensoheL    Paris,  1842. 

Edwards,  Thomas  Charles  :  A  Commentary  on  the  First  Epistle 
to  the  Corinthian&     London,  1885. 

Euripides :  Ed.  Paley.     4th  edition.     London,  1872. 

Ellicott,  Charles  J. :  Commentary  on  the  Epistles  of  PauL  2 
vola     Andover,  1872. 

Ellicott,  Charles  J. :  Si  Paul's  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians. 
London,  1887. 

Eadie,  John  :  A  Commentary  on  the  Greek  Text  of  the  Epistle 
of  Paul  to  the  Ephesian&     Sd  edition.     Edinburgh,  1883. 

Eadie,  John :  A  Commentary  on  the  Greek  Text  of  the  Epistle 
of  Paul  to  the  Philippiana     2d  edition.     Edinburgh,  1884. 

Eadie,  John :  A  Commentary  on  the  Greek  Text  of  the  Epistle 
of  Paul  to  the  Colossiana     2d  edition.     Edinburgh,  1884. 

Forsyth,  William  :  Life  of  Marcus  Tullius  Cicero.    London,  1869. 

Farrar,  Frederick  W. :  The  Gospel  according  to  Luke.  Cam- 
bridge Bible.     Cambridge,  1884. 

Farrar,  Frederick  W. :  Lives  of  the  Fathers.  2  vols.  London, 
1889. 

Farrar,  Frederick  W. :  The  Life  and  Work  of  St  PauL  2  vols. 
London,  1879. 

Fritzsche,  D.  Car.  Frid.  August :  Pauli  ad  Bomanos  Epistola. 
2  vols.     Halle,  1836. 

Freeman,  Edward  A. :  Historical  Geography  of  Europe.  2  vols. 
London,  1881. 

Ferrazzi,  Jacopo :  Manuale  Dantesco.     6  vols.     Bassano,  1865. 

Froude,  James  Anthony :  Calvinism.     New  York,  1871. 

Godet,  F. :  Commentary  on  St  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Bomans. 
Translated  by  A.  Cusin.     2  vola     Edinburgh,  1880. 

Godet,  F. :  Commentary  on  St  Paul's  First  Epistle  to  the  Co- 
rinthiana     Translated  by  A.  Cusin.     2  vols.     Edinburgh,  1886. 

Geikie,  Cunningham :  The  Holy  Land  and  the  Bibla  2  vola 
New  York,  1888. 


UST  OF  AUTHORS  AND  EDITION&  v 

HarleeB,  Gtofctlieb  C.  A. :  Commentar  tlber  den  Brief  Pftnli  an  die 
Ephesier.     Erlangen,  1834. 

Heinrioi,  C.  F.  G^rg:  Das  zweite  Sendaohreiben  des  Apoaiel 
Paulua  an  die  Korinthier,    Berlin,  1887. 

Hengstenberg,  K  W.  :  Oommentarj  on  the  Psalma  Translated 
by  Fairbaim  and  Thomson.     8  vols.     Edinburgh,  1846. 

Hodge,  Charles:  Systematio  Theology.  3  toIs.  New  York, 
1872. 

Hatch,  Edwin  :  Essays  in  Biblical  Oreek.     Oxford,  1889. 

Jebb,  R  C. :  The  Oedipus  Ooloneus  of  Sophodes.  Cambridge, 
1885. 

Jebb,  R  C. :  The  Oedipus  Tjrrannus  of  Sophodes.  Cambridge, 
1883. 

Eingsley,  Charles :  The  Boman  and  the  Teuton.     London,  1864. 

Kingsley,  Charles :  Hypatia.     London,  1874. 

Lange,  J.  P. :  The  Epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Boman&  Translated 
by  J.  F.  Hurst,  with  Additions  by  Philip  Schaffand  M.  R  Biddle. 
New  York,  1869. 

Lundy,  John  P. :  Monumental  Christianity.  2d  edition.  New 
York,  1882. 

limciani,  Bodolfo  :  Ancient  Rome  in  the  Light  of  Beoent  Dis* 
coyerie&     Boston  and  New  York,  1888. 

Lenormant,  FraD9ois :  Beginnings  of  History.    New  York,  1882. 

Lightfoot,  J.  R  :  St  Pferal's  Epistle  to  the  Oalatians.  London, 
1866. 

Lightfoot^  J.  R  :  St  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Philippians.  London, 
1869. 

Lightfoot,  J.  R  :  St  Paul's  Epistles  to  the  Colossians  and  Phile- 
mon.    London,  1875. 

Lightfoot,  J.  R  :  The  Apostolic  Father&  2d  edition.  Part  XL 
3  Tola     London,  1885. 

lightfoot,  J.  R :  Essays  on  Supernatural  Beligion.  London, 
1889. 

Lumby,  J.  Bawson :  The  Epistle  of  Paul  the  Apostle  to  the 
Philippian&     SchaflTs  Popular  Conmientary.     New  York,  1882. 

Lux  Mundi,  A  Series  of  Studies  in  the  Beligion  of  the  Incarna- 
tion.   Edited  by  Charles  Qore.    4th  edition.    London,  1890. 

Meyer,  Heinrich  A.  W. :  Commentaries  on  Bomans,  First  and 


vi  LIST   OF  AUTHOKS  AND   EDITIONS. 

Secosd  OoriathiaDa,  Oalatiana,  EpheBiana,  PhilippianB,  ColoBeiana, 
and  Philemon.     Americiiu  edition. 

Merivale,  Charlee:  The  CoDVersion  of  the  Roman  Empire. 
Bojle  Lectures  for  1864.     New  York,  1865. 

Moule,  H.  C.  G.  :  The  Epialle  of  Paul  the  Apoatle  to  the  Eo- 
maiiB.     Cambridge  Bible.     Cambridge,  1887. 

Moule,  H.  C.  O.  :  The  Epistle  to  the  Epheai&ns.  Ccunbridge 
Bible.     Cambridge,  1887. 

MorisoQ,  James  :  A  Critical  Exposition  of  the  Third  Chapter  of 
Pind'a  Epistle  to  the  Romana.     London,  1866. 

Moriaon,  Jamea  ;  St,  Paul'a  Teaching  on  Sanctification  ;  a  Critic- 
al Exposition  of  Romans  vi.     London,  1886. 

Moriaon,  James:  An  Exposition  of  the  Ninth  Chapter  of  the 
Epistle  to  the  Bomana.     New  edition.     Loudon,  1888. 

Mahaffy,  J.  P. :  Romblea  and  Studies  in  Greece.     London,  187a 

Mailer,  Mai :  The  Science  <if  Language.  2  vols.  New  York, 
1862. 

Maclaren,  Alexander  :  The  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  to  the  Coloaaians 
and  Philemon.     Expositor's  Bible.     New  York,  1888. 

Newman,  John  Henry ;  The  Ariana  of  the  Fourth  Century. 
London,  1876. 

Nitzsch,  Oregor  Wilbelm :  Erkliirende  Anmerkungen  zu  Homer'a 
Odyaee.     Hannover,  1826. 

Perowne,  J.  J,  Stewart :  The  Book  of  Paalma.  2  vols.  3 J  edi- 
tion.    London,  1873. 

Boasetti,  Maria  Franceaca  :  A  Shadow  of  Dante.     Boston,  1872. 

Raleigh,  Walter  :  History  of  the  World.     London,  1614. 

Symonds,  John  Addington  :  Studies  of  the  Greek  Poeto.  2  vols. 
New  York.  1880. 

Shedd,  William  G,  T, :  A  Critical  and  Doctrinal  Commentary 
upon  the  Epistle  of  St  Paul  to  the  Romans.     New  York. 

Schaff,  Pbilip,  and  Riddle,  Matthew  B. ;  The  Epistle  of  Paul  to 
the  Romans.     Schaffs  Popular  Commentary.     New  York,  1882. 

Stallbaum.  Godofredns:  Platonis  Opera  Omnia.  10  vola.  Gotha, 
1833. 

Salmon,  George  :  A  Historical  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  the 
Books  of  the  New  Testament.     3d  edition.     London,  1888. 

Stalker,  James :  The  Life  of  St.  PauL     New  York. 


UBT  OF  AUTHORS  AND  EDITIONS.  vii 

Stanley,  Arthur  P.  :  The  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  to  the  Corinthiaua 
4th  edition.     London,  1876. 

Stanley,  Arthur  P.  :  Christian  Institutiona     New  York,  1881. 

Schleusner,  Johann  Friedrich :  Novus  Thesaurus  Philologico- 
Critious,  siye  Lexicon  in  LXX.  2d  edition.  3  vols.  Glasgow, 
1822. 

Smith,  W.  Robertson:  The  Prophets  of  Israel  Edinburgh. 
1882. 

Toy,  Crawford  H. :  Quotations  in  the  New  Testament  New 
York,  1884. 

Tholuck,  A  :  Commentar  zum  Brief  an  die  Eomer.    Halle,  1856. 

Trommius,  Abraham  :  Concordantiae  Graecae  Yersionis  vulgo 
dictae  LXX.  Interpretum.     2  yol&     Amsterdam,  1718. 

Yiger,  Francis:  De  Praecipuis  Graecae  Dictionis  Idiotismis 
Liber.     2  vols.     Sd  edition.     London,  1824. 

Westcott,  Brooke  Foss :  The  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  London, 
1889. 

Whately,  Richard :  On  Some  of  the  Difficulties  in  the  Writings 
of  the  Apostle  Paul,  and  in  other  parts  of  the  New  Testament.  8th 
edition.     London,  1861. 

Wilson,  Daniel,  Bishop  of  Calcutta :  Expository  Lectures  on  St. 
Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Colossians.     New  York,  1846. 

Wordsworth,  Christopher:  Greece,  Pictorial,  Descriptive,  and 
HistoricaL     London,  1839. 

Weiss,  Bemhard  :  A  Manual  of  Introduction  to  the  New  Testa- 
ment Translated  by  A.  J.  K.  Davidson.  2  vols.  New  York, 
1889. 

WeiBs,  Bemhard :  Das  Marcusevangelium  und  seine  synoptischen 
Parallelen.     Berlin,  1872. 

Young,  Robert :  Analytical  Concordance  to  the  Bible.  Edin- 
burgh, 1880. 

Young,  John :  The  Life  and  Light  of  Men.    London,  1866. 


INTRODUCTION. 


Thb  life  and  labors  of  Paul  are  folly  treated  in  well-known 
and  easily  accessible  works.  His  language  and  style  will  be 
discussed  in  the  fourth  and  final  volume  of  this  work.  I  shall 
confine  this  introduction  to  an  account  of  the  several  epistles 
treated  in  the  present  volume. 

1*HB   EPISTLB  TO  THB  BOMAllB. 

The  Roman  Church  had  been  for  some  tinie  in  existence 
when  Paul  wrote  this  epistle  (see  ch.  i.  8,  10,  12,  13  ;  xv.  23). 
That  he  was  acquamted  with  many  of  its  members  appears 
from  the  salutations  in  the  sixteenth  chapter.  In  Acts  xxviii. 
15,  the  existence  of  the  Church  is  assumed  as  well  known,  and 
the  company  which  meets  the  apostle  at  Appii  Forum  has  clear- 
ly the  character  of  a  deputation.  The  date  and  circumstances 
of  the  origin  and  organization  of  the  Church  cannot,  however, 
be  certainly  determined. 

The  Church  consisted  of  both  Jews  and  Gentiles ;  but  the 
predominance  of  the  Gentile  element  is  apparent  from  the 
epistle  itself  (see  ch.  i.  5,  12-16  ;  iii.  27-30  ;  iv.  6  ;  vi.  19  ;  xi. 
13,  25,  28,  30 ;  xv.  1,  8,  15).* 

Paul  had  long  desired  to  preach  the  Gospel  at  Rome,  but 
when,  apparently,  on  the  eve  of  accomplishing  his  wish,  his 
plan  was  complicated  by  the  necessity  of  visiting  Jerusalem 
with  the  collection  for  "  the  poor  saints."  He  did  not,  in  any 
event,  contemplate  a  long  stay  in  Rome,  intending  to  take  it 
en  routs  for  £pain.     Being  thus  delayed,  he  determined  to 


*  The  itndent  will  find  a  dear  tammarj  of  the  eridenoes  for  the  Gentile 
charaeter  of  the  Church  in  Weias*  **  Introduction  to  the  New  Testament** 


X  DiTHODCCTION. 

write  at  once,  in  order  botli  to  meet  the  immediate  needs  of  the 
Church  and  to  prepare  the  way  for  his  personal  presence.  The 
epistle  was  written  during  his  last  visit  at  Corinth  (Acts  xx.  2, 
3),  and  was  despatclied  by  the  liands  of  Phoebe  the  deaconess,* 
about  A.D.  59-  Its  authenticity  is  generally  conceded,  together 
with  the  fact  that  it  was  written  in  Greek,  though  some  Roman 
Catholic  critics  have  maintained  that  it  was  written  in  Latin, 
There  is  nothing  surprising  in  its  having  been  written  in 
Greek,  since  the  Greek  language  was  prevalent  at  Rome,  hav- 
ing become  indeed  the  general  language  of  the  world,  and  the 
composition  of  the  letter  in  Greek  accords  with  Paul's  Hellenic 
associations  and  training.  The  Latin  fathers  never  claim  their 
own  language  as  the  original  of  any  part  of  the  Xew  Testa- 
ment, and  Ignatius,  Justin,  and  Irenaeua  all  wrote  in  Greek  to 
Eomans. 

The  aim  of  the  epistle  is  didactic  rather  than  polemic,  though 
it  acquires  a  polemic  flavor  in  its  opposition  of  Christianity  to 
legalism.  It  is  distinguished  among  the  epistles  by  its  system- 
atic character.  Its  object  is  to  present  a  comprehensive  state- 
ment of  the  doctrine  of  salvation  through  Christ,  not  a  com- 
plete system  of  christian  doctrine.  Its  theme  is,  The  Gospel, 
the  power  of  God  -unto  aaVoation  to  Jew  and  Gentile  alike  ;  a 
power  because  of  its  revelation  of  a  righteous7tees  of  God  for 
believers. 

In  the  development  of  this  theme  Paul  shows  that  Jew  and 
Gentile  are  alike  violators  of  divine  law,  and  are  consequently 
exposed  to  the  divine  wrath,  from  which  there  is  no  deliverance 
through  works  or  ordinances,  but  only  through  the  Gospel  of 
Jesus  Christ  accepted  by  faith. 

In  insisting  upon  thi$  universal  condition  of  salvation,  God 
neither  violates  Ris  original  covenant  with  Israel,  nor  deprives 
Himself  of  the  right  to  judge  sin. 

The  truth  of  justification  by  faith  is  an  Old-Testament  truth, 
illustrated  in  tlie  case  of  Abraham,  and  applicable  to  both  Jews 
and  Gentiles.     The  troe  seed  of  Abraham  are  those  who  fol- 


J 


INTRODUCTION.  XI 

low  him,  not  in  circumcision  but  in  faith.  The  saving  provi- 
sion in  Christ  is  coextensive  with  the  results  of  the  fall  in 
Adam,  and  assures  present  and  future  salvation  to  its  subjects. 
The  office  of  the  law  was  to  develop  and  manifest  the  sin  which 
originated  in  Adam's  fall,  and  thus  to  give  full  scope  to  the  re* 
demptive  work  of  Christ. 

This  truth  neither  encourages  immorality  nor  convicts  Ood 
of  unfaithfulness  to  His  covenant  with  IsraeL  Justification  bj 
faith  involves  personal  union  with  Christ,  and  consequent  death 
to  sin  and  moral  resurrection  to  newness  of  life.  Grace  does 
not  imply  liberty  to  sin,  but  a  change  of  masters  and  a  new 
obedience  and  service.  Grace  does  not  do  away  with  God's 
holy  law,  but  only  with  the  false  relation  of  the  natural  man  to 
that  law ;  in  which  sin  made  use  of  the  law  to  excite  man's 
opposition  to  it,  and  thus  to  bring  him  into  bondage  and  death. 
This  is  illustrated  from  Paul's  own  experience. 

The  deliverance  from  this  bondage,  which  the  law  could  not 
effect,  is  wrought  by  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ 
Jesus,  which  frees  from  condemnation  and  initiates  a  life  of 
sonship  inspired  and  controlled  by  the  Spirit  of  Qod.  The 
power  of  this  life  appears  in  the  assurance  of  hope  which  it 
imparts  amid  the  trials  of  this  mortal  state,  a  hope  founded  in 
the  divine  election. 

To  the  claim  that  Qod  cannot  reject  the  unbelieving  Jew 
without  breaking  His  own  covenant  and  stultifying  His  decree, 
is  opposed  the  doctrine  of  absolute  divine  sovereignty,  uncon- 
ditioned by  human  merit  or  service,  but  exercised  in  perfect 
righteousness  and  mercy,  which  are  vindicated  by  God's  forming 
for  Himself  a  people  of  believers,  both  Jew  and  Gentile.  It  is 
further  shown  that  this  divine  economy  includes  the  operation 
of  human  froe  agency  no  less  than  of  divine  sovereignty,  and 
that  the  rejection  of  Israel  was  therefore  due  to  their  blind 
reliance  on  their  original  election,  and  their  refusal  of  the  right- 
eousness which  is  through  faith  in  Christ.  This  rejection  is 
only  partial  and  temporary.  God  has  not  cast  off  His  people, 
but  has  overruled  their  unbelief  for  the  salvation  of  the  Gen- 
tiles, who,  in  turn,  shall  be  the  means  of  the  restoration  of  the 
Jews.     See  note  at  the  end  of  ch.  xi. 


INTBODUCTIOS.  

.A,. 

The  practical  and  hortatory  portion  of  the  epistle,  which 
begins  with  eh,  xii.,  treats  of  the  cultivation  of  different  graces, 
civil  duties,  the  right  of  private  judgment,  and  the  doctrine  of 
christian  expediency  in  its  relations  to  weak  faith. 

Critics  are  not  unanimoiis  as  to  the  integrity  of  the  epistle. 
The  authenticity  of  the  dojtology  has  been  questioned,  and  the 
Tiibingen  critics  declared  the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth  chapters 
to  be  spurious.  By  some,  the  greater  part  of  eh.  xvi.  is  sup- 
posed to  be  addressed  to  the  Ephesians.  See  on  ch.  xiv.  23  ; 
xvi.  25. 

The  epistle  is  characterized  by  system,  masculine  vigor,  logic- 
al acuteneag,  copiougness  of  thought,  and  depth  of  feeling. 
Logic  is  backed  by  history,  and  christian  doctrine  and  precept 
are  iliumined  from  the  Prophets  and  Psalms.  Neither  personal 
feeling  nor  national  sentiment  is  allowed  to  turn  the  keen  edge 
of  truth.  The  opening  theme — all  alike  under  sin — is  evolved 
with  remorseless  sternness.  The  picture  of  tlie  moral  condition 
of  the  pagan  world  is  the  work  of  an  eye-witness,  and  is  terri- 
ble in  its  stark  realism.  Tet  the  logic  is  aglow  with  intense 
feeling,  which  rieea  st  times  toward  the  level  of  the  Ephesian 
epistle.  The  emotion  is  as  deep  as  in  Second  Corinthians,  but 
leas  turbulent.  The  irony  of  that  epietle  is  almost  wholly 
abeent.  The  opening  of  the  ninth  chapter  is  a  veritable  sob. 
The  perBonal  expressions  are  affectionate  and  laudatory,  but 
the  companion  and  friend  who  appears  in  First  Thessalonians, 
Philippians,  and  Philemon,  mostly  gives  place  to  the  apostle  and 
teacher.  The  powerful  dramatic  element  in  the  epistle  is  over- 
looked in  the  popular  impression  of  a  hard  theological  treatise. 
It  appears  in  the  forensic  moulds  in  which  the  great  spiritual 
processes  are  occasionally  cast ;  in  the  embodiment  of  the  an- 
tagonism of  sin  and  holiness  in  a  personal  struggle ;  in  the 
introduction  of  objections  as  by  an  interlocutor;  in  the  vivid 
contrasts  of  life  and  death,  spirit  and  flesh,  bondage  and  free- 
dom, condemnation  and  acquittal ;  in  the  impersonation  of  the 
whole  creation  groaning  and  travailing  for  deliverance  from  the 
bondage  of  corrnption. 

Tlie  transitions  are  as  easy  and  natural  as  the  contrasts  are 
sharp.     The  nervous  but  steady  movement  of  cha.  ii.,  iii.,  iv., 


fe. 


are  ■ 


INTRODUCnON.  xiii 

suddenly  subsides  with  the  opening  of  ch.  v.,  and  one  can  pause 
and  bare  his  forehead  to  the  sweet  air  ere  he  begins  upon  the 
new  ascent  from  ver.  12.  The  first  words  of  the  eighth  chapter 
succeed  the  seventh  like  a  quiet  melody  given  out  by  flute  or 
horn  after  the  tumultuous  harmonies  of  the  ochestra ;  and  one 
is  conscious  of  no  shock  in  the  descent  from  the  high  themes  of 
sovereignty  and  grace  to  their  applications  in  common  life  and 
duty.     . 

The  epistle  must  be  grasped  entire.  No  portion  of  the  New 
Testament  lends  itself  to  more  dangerous  distortions  of  truth 
through  fragmentary  use.  No  one  of  Paul's  epistles  is  so 
dependent  for  its  just  effect  upon  the  perception  of  the  relation 
of  its  parts  to  the  whole.  Its  logic  and  its  feeling  are  inseparable. 
It  answers  the  highest  test  of  eloquence  in  stimulating  emotion 
with  profound  thought,  and  in  fusing  thought  in  feeling. 

But  to  acquire  such  a  grasp  is  no  easy  task,  especiaUy  for  the 
English  reader.  It  requires  far  more  than  close  grammatical 
analysis,  and  adjustment  of  the  special  theological  problems 
raised  by  the  epistle.  The  letter  must  be  studied  in  the  light 
of  the  whole  body  of  the  Pauline  writings,  and  with  the  largest 
possible  acquaintance  with  the  logical  and  rhetorical  habits 
of  the  apostle.  The  fulness  and  impetuosity  of  his  thought 
sometimes  render  him  careless  of  its  arrangement.  Sugges- 
tions, striking  into  the  main  line  of  reasoning,  are  pursued  with 
an  eagerness  and  to  a  length  which  may  easily  divert  the  reader 
from  the  principal  track.  Possible  qualifications  of  a  truth  are 
temporarily  neglected  in  the  concentration  of  thought  upon  a 
single  aspect.  It  is  not  always  easy  to  discover  where  the  mat- 
ter of  a  parenthesis  gives  place  to  the  resumption  of  the  main 
thought ;  sometimes  indeed  the  parenthesis  is  carried  on  as  if 
it  were  the  main  thought.  The  first  member  of  a  proposition 
often  acquires  a  headway  which  makes  him  forget  to  offset  it 
with  its  complementary  member.  His  antiUieses  are  not 
always  evenly  balanced,  and  one  member  may  be  literal  and  the 
other  metaphorical.  Certain  expressions  depend  for  their  force 
upon  word-plays  which  cannot  be  translated,  and  prepositions 
are  accumulated  with  reference  to  shades  of  meaning  which  tax 
the  utmost  resources  of  the  translator  and  commentator. 


ISTRODUCnON. 


THE   FIBBT   EFIBTLE  TO   THE   OOBINTHIAMS. 

The  account  of  Paul's  first  visit  to  Corinth  ie  given  in  Acta 
xvii.  lie  continued  there  a  year  and  six  inonthe,  going  thetice 
to  Syria,  and  making  a  hrief  stay  on  bis  way  to  Jenisalem  at 
Epheans,  to  which  he  returned  and  remained  for  over  two 
years.  The  church  at  Corinth  became  the  moat  important  of 
those  founded  by  tlie  apostle,  and  probably  embraced  the 
church  at  the  adjoining  aeaport  of  Cencbreae  (see  on  Horn, 
xvi.  1),  and  the  Cbristiatia  scattered  throughout  Acbaia  (2  Cor. 
i.  1). 

After  Paul's  departure  from  Corinth,  ApoUos,  commended 
by  the  Kpbeeian  cburcb,  waa  sent  to  labor  there.  Kotwitb- 
standing  his  e£&ciency  he  involuntarily  became  the  cause  of 
division  in  the  church,  as  the  nucleus  of  a  party  which  pre- 
ferred liis  polished  rhetoric  to  the  plainer  utterances  of  Paul 
(1  Cor.  iii.  4,  5). 

Besides  this,  tbe  characteristic  sensuous  and  pleasure-loving 
tendencies  of  the  Corinthiana  began  to  assert  themselves  within 
the  church.  The  majority  of  the  converts  were  of  a  low  social 
grade,  many  of  thera  slaves,  and  the  seductions  of  the  gay  city 
often  proved  too  atrong  for  resistance. 

Tbe  report  of  these  evils,  brought  to  Ephesus  by  Apollos  on 
hia  return  from  Corinth,  called  out  a  letter  from  Paul  which  is 
loat,  but  which  is  referred  to  in  1  Cor,  v.  9.  Additional  tidings 
came  in  a  letter  from  tlie  church  to  Paul,  aaking  advice  on  tlie 
following  points:  1.  Celibacy  and  marriage.  Was  married 
life  a  lower  condition  than  celibacy,  or  was  it  wrong  in  itself  ? 
Were  marriages  allowable  between  Christians  and  heathen  ? 
Bhould  a  Christian  wife  or  husband  abandon  a  lieathen  spouae  ? 
2,  MeaiB  offered  to  idols.  Idol  sacrifices  were  festivals.  Gen- 
tile converts  refused  to  abandon  the  society  of  their  heathen 
friends,  and  mingled  with  them  at  the  idol  feasts ;  while  a  meal 
at  a  public  festival  was  a  aubatantial  help  to  the  poor.  Might 
Christiana  attend  these  festivals?  Might  they  buy  in  the  mar- 
ket the  resold  meat  which  had  been  offered  to  idols  ?  3.  StUea 
in  astembUea.     Should  men  cover  their  heads  \     Should  women 


J 


INTRODOCnON.  XV 

appear  uncovered  ?  Might  women  speak  and  teach  in  public } 
4.  SpirtttuU  gifts.  Which  was  the  more  important,  speaking 
with  tongnes  or  preaching  ?  What  should  be  done  when  sev- 
eral began  to  speak  at  once  ?  5.  77ie  resurrection.  Some 
maintained  that  it  was  purely  spiritual  and  that  it  was  already 
past.  6.  They  also  desired  to  hear  something  more  about  the 
collection  for  the  poor  in  Judaea,  and  to  have  Apollos  sent 
back. 

The  bearers  of  the  letter,  Stephanas,  Fortunatus,  and  Achai- 
cus,  together  with  those  of  the  household  of  Chloe  (1  Cor.  i. 
11),  also  brought  tidings  of  the  factions  which  had  divided  the 
church  and  the  quarrels  over  the  different  preachers.  Certain 
Judaic  teachers  had  come,  with  commendatory  letters  from 
Jerusalem,  claiming  the  authority  of  Peter  and  impugning  that 
of  Paul,  declaring  that  Peter  was  the  true  head  of  the  Christian 
Church  and  Paul  an  interloper.  A  fourth  distinct  party  is 
supposed  by  some  to  be  indicated  by  the  words  ^^  I  of  Christ " 
(see  on  1  Cor.  L  10).  It  also  appeared  that  the  assemblies  of 
the  church  had  become  disorderly;  that  the  agapae  and  the 
eucharist  were  scenes  of  gluttony,  brawling,  and  drunk- 
enness; while  the  gatherings  for  worship  were  thrown  into 
confusion  by  the  simultaneous  speaking  of  those  who  professed 
the  gift  of  tongues.  Women  were  speaking  unveiled  in  these 
assemblies.  One  prominent  church-member  was  living  crim- 
inally with  his  stepmother. 

On  the  receipt  of  this  letter  Paul  abandoned  his  intended 
visit  to  Corinth,  sent  Titus  to  inform  the  church  of  his  change 
of  plan  and  to  arrange  for  the  collection,  and  dictated  to  Sos- 
thenes  the  first  epistle  to  the  Corinthians.  Notwithstanding 
the  subscription  of  the  letter,  "  written  from  Philippi,"  a  mis- 
take which  grew  out  of  1  Cor.  xvi.  5,  it  was  written  at  Ephesus, 
as  appears  from  1  Cor.  xvi  8, 19. 

He  begins  by  stating  his  complaints  against  the  church 
(i.  10-vi.  20).  He  then  answers  the  questions  contained  in 
their  letter :  Marriage  (vii,  1-40) ;  Sacrificial  feasts  (viii.  1-13). 
From  this  he  diverges  to  the  insinuations  against  his  character 
and  authority,  noticing  the  charge  based  upon  his  refnsal  to 
receive  pecuniary  support,  and  asserting  his  unselfish  devo- 


XTl  INTRODUCTION. 

tion  to  the  Go6pel  (ix.).  lie  returns  to  the  sftcrificial  feaets 
(x.).  Then  he  p^ees  to  the  regulation  of  the  assemblies  (xi.). 
The  difFereot  epiritu&l  gifts  and  their  mutual  relation  are  dis- 
cussed in  ch.  xii.,  and  Love  is  shown  to  be  greater  and  more 
euduring  than  all  gifts  (xiii.).  The  subject  of  speaking  witli 
tongues  is  tlieii  taken  up,  and  the  superiority  of  prophecy  to 
the  gift  of  tongues  is  asserted  (xiv.  1-40).  Ch.  xv.  discusGes 
the  resurrection,  and  the  epistle  concludes  with  references  to  cer- 
tain personal  and  incidental  matters,  including  the  collection. 

Authorities  are  generally  agreed  in  placing  the  date  of  the 
epiatle  a.d.  57.     Its  authenticity  is  conceded  on  all  hands. 

The  key-note  of  the  epistle  is  struck  in  two  correlated 
thoughts — the  supreme  headship  of  Christ,  and  the  union  of 
believers  as  one  body  in  and  with  Him,  Tlie  former  thought 
finds  expression  in  Paul's  humble  disclaimer  of  all  merely  per- 
sonal authority,  and  of  all  right  to  a  hearing  save  as  Christ's 
ggeut  and  mouthpiece.  The  power  of  preaching  resides  in  its 
theme — Christ  crucified — and  not  in  its  philosophic  wisdom 
nor  in  the  personal  culture  of  its  preachers.  The  gifts  and 
graces  of  the  Church  are  due  to  Christ  alone.  The  other 
thought  is  the  standing  confutation  and  rebuke  of  all  the  errors 
and  abuses  which  liave  invaded  the  Church.  Faction,  fornica- 
tion, litigation,  fellowship  with  idolaters — all  are  sufBciently 
condemned  by  the  fact  that  they  break  the  sacred  tie  between 
the  Church  and  Christ,  and  between  individuals  and  the 
Church,  Union  in  Christ  implies  divine  order  in  the  Church, 
The  sexes  fall  into  their  true  relation.  The  subordinations  of 
the  heavenly  hierarchies  are  perpetuated  in  the  Church.  Con- 
fusion is  banished  from  public  worship,  and  the  mystery  of  the 
eucharist  is  expounded  in  the  mutual  love  and  helpfulness  of 
the  participants.  Diversities  of  spiritual  gifts  are  harmonized 
and  utilized  through  their  relation  to  the  one  body  and  the 
informing  power  of  one  divine  Spirit — the  Spirit  of  love. 
Christian  expediency,  involving  individual  sacrifice  for  the  com- 
mon welfare,  becomes  an  authoritative  principle.  This  unity 
finds  its  crowning  exhibition  in  the  resurrection,  in  which  be- 
lievers share  the  resurrection  of  their  Lord,  and  enter  into  final 
and  perfect  communion  with  His  glorified  life. 


t 


INTRODUCTION.  xvii 

It  has  been  tmthfally  said  that  no  portion  of  the  11  ew  Test- 
ament discusses  so  directly  the  moral  problems  of  that  age  or 
of  our  own.  Many  of  the  same  questions  emerge  in  the  social 
and  church-life  of  modem  times.  Such  are  the  rally  of  cliques 
round  popular  preachers;  the  antithesis  of  asceticism  and 
christian  liberty ;  of  christian  zeal  and  christian  wisdom ;  the 
true  relation  of  the  sexes  and  the  proper  position  and  function 
of  woman  in  the  Church  ;  the  assertion  of  individual  inspiration 
against  the  canons  of  christian  decency;  the  antagonism  be- 
tween individualism  and  the  subordination  of  the  members  to 
the  body;  the  resurrection  in  the  light  of  modem  science; 
aestheticism  and  morals. 

No  epistle  of  the  New  Testament,  therefore,  should  be  more 
carefully  studied  by  the  modem  pastor. 

THB  SBOOND  BPI8TLB  TO  THB  OOKINTHIANB. 

Paul's  stay  at  Ephesus  was  cut  short  by  the  riot  He  de- 
parted to  Troas,  and  thence  to  Macedonia  (Acts  xx.),  where  he 
met  Titus,  for  whose  arrival  he  had  anxiously  waited  in  order 
to  leam  the  effect  of  his  letter  (2  Cor.  i.  8 ;  ii.  13 ;  vii.  6). 
Titus'  report  was  both  gratifying  and  disheartening.  Be  had 
been  cordially  received,  and  the  epistle  had  caused  penitence 
and  amendment ;  but  the  influence  of  the  anti-Pauline  parties 
had  increased,  and  they  were  openly  assailing  Paul's  character 
and  insisting  on  their  own  superior  apostolic  claims.  Accord- 
ingly Titus  was  again  sent  to  Corinth  with  a  second  epistle, 
written  from  some  point  in  Macedonia.  The  statement  of  the 
sabscription  that  it  was  written  from  Philippi,  lacks  evidence, 
besides  being  in  itself  improbable.  The  date  is  the  autumn  of 
AJD.  57. 

The  epistle  is  among  the  least  systematic  of  Paul's  writings, 
for  the  reason  that  it  was  written  in  a  conflict  of  feeling,  in 
which  joy,  grief,  and  indignation  straggled  for  the  mastery. 
Its  main  motives  are  three  in  number.  1.  Thankfulness  for 
the  effect  of  his  first  letter.  2.  Indignation  at  the  work  and 
increasing  influence  of  the  false  teachers.  3.  Anxiety  for  the 
completion  of  the  collection,  and  that  the  Corinthians  should 


XTllT  INTRODUCTION. 

imitate  the  good  example  of  the  Macedonian  cbnrches.  "  Tlie 
tliree  objects  of  tLe  epistle  are,  in  point  of  arrangement,  kupt 
distinct ;  but  eo  velieraent  were  tiie  feelings  under  whicli  he 
wrote,  that  the  thankful  expreBsion  of  the  first  part  ia  darkened 
by  the  indignation  of  the  third  ;  and  the  directions  about  the 
business  of  the  contribution  are  colored  by  tlie  reflections  botli 
of  his  joy  and  of  his  grief  "  (Stanley). 

The  style  accords  with  tliis  turbulence  of  feeling.  It  ie  sur- 
charged with  passionate  emotion.  No  one  of  Paul's  epistles  in 
BO  intensely  personal.  Hero  only  he  reveals  two  of  those  great 
spiritual  e.fperiences  which  belong  to  a  Christian's  inmost 
heart-life — persona!  crises  which  are  secrets  between  a  man 
and  his  God.  One  of  these — the  thorn  in  the  flesh — is  a  crisis 
of  agony ;  the  other — the  rapture  into  the  third  heaven — a  crisis 
of  ecstasy.  Bengel's  remark  is  familiar,  that  the  epistle  is  an 
itinerary.  "  The  very  stages  of  his  journey  are  impressed  upon 
it ;  the  troubles  at  Ephesus,  the  repose  at  Troas,  the  anxieties 
and  consolations  of  Macedonia,  the  prospect  of  removing  to 
Corinth  "  (Stanley).  His  self -vindication  is  not  only  a  remark- 
able piece  of  personal  history,  bnt  a  revelation  of  his  high  sense 
of  honor  and  his  keen  eensitiveness,  llis  "  boasting,"  into 
which  he  is  driven  by  persistent  alander,  throws  into  relief  his 
aversion  to  self-praise.  lie  formally  announces  his  intention 
to  boast,  as  though  he  can  bring  himself  to  the  task  only  by 
committing  himself  to  it.  Thrice  he  repeats  the  annonncement, 
and  each  time  seems  to  catch,  with  a  sense  of  relief,  at  an  oppor- 
tunity for  digressing  to  a  different  subject.  Ecstatic  thanks- 
giving and  cutting  irony,  self-assertion  and  self-abnegation, 
commendation,  warning  and  authority,  paradox,  apology,  all 
meet  and  cross  and  seethe ;  yet  out  of  the  swirling  eddies  rise, 
like  rocks,  grand  Christian  principles  and  inspiring  hopes. 
Such  are  the  double  power  of  the  Gospel  for  life  or  death  ;  the 
freedom  and  energy  of  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit ;  suffering 
the  path  to  glory ;  the  divine  purpose  in  the  decay  of  the  fleshly 
tabernacle ;  the  new  and  heavenly  investment  of  the  mortal 
Hfe;  the  universal  judgment ;  the  nature  of  repentance  as  dis- 
tinguished from  sorrow,  and  the  principles  of  christian  liberal- 
ity.    Fnll  and  swift  as  is  the  torrent,  there  is  ever  a  hand  on 


INTRODUCnON.  XIX 

the  floodgate.  In  the  most  indignant  ontborst  the  sense  of 
suppression  asserts  itself.  Indignation  and  irony  never  run 
into  malediction.  We  cease  to  be  surprised  at  the  apostle's 
capability  of  indignation  when  we  catch  glimpses,  as  we  do 
throughout  the  epistle,  into  the  depths  of  his  tenderness. 

It  is  not  strange  that  sach  a  tempest  should  set  its  mark  upon 
the  style  and  diction,  especially  if  we  assume  that  the  epistle  was 
dictated  to  an  amanuensis.  In  some  particulars  the  epistle  is  the 
most  difficult  in  the  New  Testament.  The  style  is  broken,  in- 
volved, at  times  obscure.  The  impetuosity  of  the  thought  car- 
ries it  from  point  to  point  with  a  rapidity  which  makes  it  often 
hard  to  grasp  the  sequence  and  connection.  It  is  preeminently 
picturesque,  abounding  in  metaphors  which  sometimes  lie  un- 
developed in  the  heart  of  single  words,  and  sometimes  are 
strangely  mixed  or  suddenly  shifted.  Building  and  clothing 
blend  in  describing  the  heavenly  investiture  of  the  believer ; 
now  the  Corinthians  are  a  commendatory  letter  written  in  the 
apostles'  hearts,  now  the  letter  is  written  by  Christ  on  the  Co- 
rinthians' hearts ;  the  rush  of  thought  does  not  stop  at  the  in- 
congruity of  an  epistle  on  stone  and  of  ink  on  stone  tables ; 
now  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  now  the  apostles  themselves  are 
a  sweet  odor.  Paul  does  not  huckster  the  word  of  God.  He 
does  not  ienumb  his  converts  like  a  toi*pedo.  Here  a  word  calls 
up  Gideon's  lamps  and  pitchers,  there  the  rocky  strongholds  of 
the  Cilician  pirates.  A  rapid  series  of  participles  carries  us 
through  the  successive  stages  of  a  battle — the  hemming  in,  the 
cutting  the  way  out,  the  pursuit,  the  blow  of  the  enemy's 
sword.  The  high  citadel  is  stormed,  the  lofty  towers  are  over- 
thrown, the  captives  are  led  away.  Paul  bears  about  a  daily 
death :  affliction  is  a  light  weight,  glory  an  overwhelming  bur- 
den :  the  fleshly  body  is  a  tent,  the  glorifled  body  an  eternal 
building,  or  a  garment  dropped  from  above. 

Certain  words  appear  to  have  a  peculiar  fascination  for  the 
writer,  as  if  they  gathered  up  into  themselves  the  signiflcance  of 
whole  masses  of  thought  Without  arresting  its  main  current, 
the  stream  eddies  round  these.  Sometimes  he  dwells  on  them 
caressingly,  as  "  the  Qod  of  all  comfort^  who  comforteth  us,  that 
we  may  be  able  to  comfort  with  the  comfort  wherewith  we  are 


XI  INTRODUCTION. 

oonifofied"  Sometimes  he  ringe  them  out  like  a  challenge,  aa 
contmend,  eomfnsjidatuyn,  boast.  Sometimes  lie  touches  and  re- 
touches them  with  a  sarcastic  emphasis,  as  bear  with  me,  bear 
witii  them.  "  So  full  of  turns  is  he  everywhere,"  saj-s  Eraeiims, 
"  fio  great  is  the  skill,  you  would  nut  believe  that  the  eanie  man 
was  speaking.  Now,  as  some  limpid  fountain,  he  gently  bubbles 
forth;  anon,  like  a  mighty  torrent,  he  rolls  crashing  on,  whirl- 
ing many  things  aloug  in  his  course :  again  he  flows  calmly  and 
Bmoothly,  or  spreads  out  into  a  lake." 

The  authenticity  of  the  epistle  is  conceded.  Unsuccessful 
attempts  have  been  made  against  its  integrity,  aa  the  eSort  to 
ihow  that  it  coDfiietfl  of  three  separate  epistles,  or  of  two. 


THE    EPISTLES    OF    THE    IMPRISONMENT. 

This  name  is  given  to  the  Epistles  to  the  Philippiana,  Ephes- 
ians,  Golossians,  and  Philemon,  because  they  were  composed 
during  Paul's  first  imprisonment  at  Rome.  By  a  few  critics 
they  have  been  assigned  to  the  period  of  the  confinement  at 


' 


Paul  arrived  in  Rome,  under  guard,  after  his  shipwreck  at 
Malta,  in  March,  a.d.  61,  in  the  seventh  year  of  the  reigu  of  Nero. 
He  was  placed  in  charge  of  the  Praetorian  Guard,  the  mem- 
bei-B  of  which  relieved  each  other  in  his  custody,  each  soldier 
being  chained  to  his  hand.  This  interruption  of  liis  missionary 
labors  was  a  blessing  in  disguise.  Twenty  years  of  exh.iusting 
toil  had  brought  the  necessity  for  rest  and  meditation.  The 
two  years  of  confiuemeut  in  Caesarea  afforded  the  apostle  the 
leisure  for  sinking  his  thought  deeper  into  the  mystery  of  the 
Gospel.  The  effect  is  apparent  in  the  epistles  from  his  Roman 
prison.  Nothing  in  these,  indeed,  contradicts  his  previous  writ- 
ings; the  fundamental  tliemcs  of  the  earlier  epistles  recnr,  and 
Philippians  in  particular  exhibits  marked  parallels  with  Ro- 
mans. In  all  Christ  is  central.  In  Romans  and  in  the  Corin- 
thian epistles  there  are  not  wanting  instances  of  the  exalted 
feeling  which  is  so  marked  in  Ephesians,  Colossians,  and  Phi- 


J 


INTRODUCTION.  XXi 

lippiana.  The  Jndaizing  iDaolence,  castigated  in  Gralatians,  is 
sharply  toached  again  in  Philippians.  The  relations  of  Jew 
and  Gentile  reappear  in  Ephesians ;  and  Christ's  headship  of 
the  Chnrch,  assumed  in  First  Corinthians,  is  developed  and  em- 
phasized in  Ephesians  and  Colossians. 

Nevertheless,  the  Epistles  of  the  Imprisonment  carry  us  into 
a  new  atmosphere.  The  thought  takes  new  directions  and  a 
wider  range.  The  apostle's  personality  appears  in  an  aspect 
which  it  is  not  easy  to  analyze,  but  which  carries  with  it  the 
sense  of  a  broadening  and  deepening  of  the  whole  man.  In 
the  discussion  of  christian  truth  the  points  of  emphasis  are 
shifted.  In  the  earlier  epistles  he  deals  largely  with  unbeliev- 
ers, in  the  latter  with  Christians.  In  the  one  he  is  aiming  to 
initiate  union  with  Christ ;  in  the  other  to  develop  communion. 
In  the  one  he  points  to  the  cross,  in  the  other  from  the  cross  to 
the  inheritance  of  grace  and  glory  which  it  commands.  In  the 
one  he  emphasizes  Christ  crucified,  in  the  other  Christ  risen, 
ascended,  and  reigning.  In  all  alike  the  cross  is  central,  but  in 
these  latter  epistles  it  is  coordinated  with  the  vast  economy  of 
creation,  redemption,  the  Church  on  earth  and  in  heaven,  as  it 
lies  entire  in  the  eternal  counsels  of  God.  Here  the  person 
rather  than  the  work  of  Christ  is  in  the  foreground :  here,  for 
the  first  time  in  the  Pauline  writings,  the  eye  is  distinctly  fixed 
upon  the  pre-iucamate  Son  of  God.  While  in  the  earlier  groups 
of  epistles  the  moral  applications  of  doctrine  are  not  overlooked, 
in  these,  the  ethical  element  is  more  evenly  balanced  with  the 
theological.  In  Philippians  the  ethical  element  dominates  the 
theological.  The  great  christological  truths  are  translated  into 
christian  experience,  and  brought  to  bear  as  the  principles  and 
motives  of  duty.  ^^  No  duty  is  too  small  to  illustrate  one  or 
other  of  the  principles  which  inspired  the  divinest  acts  of 
Christ.  The  commonest  acts  of  humility  and  beneficence  are 
to  be  imitations  of  the  condescension  which  brought  Him  from 
the  position  of  equality  with  God  to  the  obedience  of  the  cross ; 
and  the  ruling  motive  of  the  love  and  kindness  practised  by 
Christians  to  one  another  is  to  be  the  recollection  of  their  com- 
mon connection  with  Him.'*  * 

*  StaUcer. 


Xxii  1NTBOD0CTION. 

A  difference  from  tlie  earlier  epiBtlea  also  develops  throiigli 
tlie  new  pbaee  of  error  with  wliicii  tlie  apoBtle  has  to  de:il. 
Epaphraa  announced  the  apjiearauee  of  a  new  enemy  in  the 
churchee  of  the  Lycus.  The  point  of  assanlt  had  begun  to  shift 
from  legalism  to  philosophic  niyBticiein,  LegaliBm  itself  be- 
trayed the  infusion  of  Essenic  asceticism  and  Gnostic  specula- 
tiveness.  These  were  the  forces  which  brought  to  the  front  the 
doctrines  of  Christ's  person  and  of  the  Church ;  the  one  as  the 
bulwark  against  the  fancy  of  mediate  creation  and  the  affected 
humility  of  angel- worship,  and  the  other,  in  its  exhibition  of 
Christ  as  the  head  of  the  body  of  believers,  contesting  the 
claim  of  philosophy  to  be  the  euprcnie  source  of  wisdom,  and 
the  right  of  legal  ordinances  to  give  the  law  to  life. 


For  Philippi,  see  on  Philip.  !.  1. 

With  the  arrival  of  Paul  at  Philippi  (Acts  svi.),  the  Gospel 
entered  Europe.  On  Iiis  departure  he  left  Luke  to  complete 
the  organization  of  the  Chnrch.  He  subsequently  visited  the 
city  twice,  after  which  we  hear  nothing  of  the  Philippian 
church  until  be  writes  to  it  from  bis  Roman  prison.  On  hear- 
ing of  his  transfer  to  Rome,  the  Philippians,  with  the  same 
generosity  which  they  had  shown  on  former  occasions  (Philip, 
iv.  15,  16  ;  2  Cor.  xi.  8,  9),  sent  a  supply  of  money  by  Epaph- 
roditus,  who,  on  his  return,  brought  this  letter. 

The  epistle  is  unofficial  and  familiar  in  character,  even  the 
spoEtolic  title  being  dropped  in  the  opening  salutation.  In  its 
unsystematic  strnclnre  it  rivals  Second  Corinthians.  It  opens 
with  an  account  of  the  progress  of  the  Gospel  in  Kome  since 
his  arrival,  the  efforts  of  his  opposers,  and  the  zeal  of  hie 
friends,  and  an  expression  of  his  own  feelings  as  to  his  pos- 
sible death  or  continued  life.  An  exhortation  follows  to  christ- 
ian unity,  courage,  and  humility,  the  latter  illustrated  by  the 
great  act  of  Christ's  humiliation.  He  hopes  soon  to  be  re- 
leased :  he  is  about  to  send  Timothy  to  Philippi ;  Epaphrodi- 
tus  has  been  sick,  and  is  about  to  retni-n  home.  Let  them 
beware  of  the  Judaizere — the  doge,  the  concision.     Their  arro- 


INTRODUCTION.  xxiii 

gant  claims  are  contrasted  with  the  rights  and  privileges  of 
Christians,  and  the  contrast  is  pointed  bj  his  own  spiritual 
history  and  a  recital  of  the  legal  privileges  which  he  relin- 
qnished  for  Christ.  Then  follow  an  exhortation  to  steadfast- 
ness, a  lament  over  the  victims  of  sensuality,  and  a  contrast 
of  such  with  those  whose  life  and  hope  are  heavenly.  Two 
prominent  ladies  are  entreated  to  reconcile  their  differences, 
after  which  come  some  parting  admonitions  to  entertain  pure 
thoughts  and  high  aims,  and  a  grateful  acknowledgment  of  the 
gift  brought  by  Epaphroditus. 

In  the  tone  of  strong  personal  attachment  which  pervades 
the  epistle,  it  resembles  the  first  to  the  Thessalonians.  It  con- 
tains no  formulated  doctrinal  teaching,  and  no  indication  of 
the  presence  of  doctrinal  errors  within  the  Church.  Only  the 
severe  allusions  in  the  third  chapter,  to  Judaizers  and  Antino- 
mian  loose-livers,  have  the  flavor  of  controversy,  and  the  treat- 
ment of  these  is  not  argumentative,  but  denunciatory,  hortative, 
and  expostulatory.  The  only  warning  to  the  Church  is  against 
internal  dissensions.  Christ  is  set  forth,  not  in  His  relation  to 
great  christian  mysteries,  but  as  a  living  power  in  personal 
experience — notably  in  the  apostle's  own. 

The  words  and  imagery  reveal  occasional  traces  of  the  con- 
tact of  Stoicism,  as  citizenship  (i.  28 ;  iii.  20) ;  content^  or  self' 
sufficient  (iv.  2) ;  and  the  passage,  i,  21-27,  presents  a  vivid 
contrast  with  the  Stoic's  theory  of  life  and  his  justification  of 
suicide.  The  epistle  abounds  in  picturesque  words,  as  earnest 
expectation  (i.  20);  terrified  (i.  28);  depaH  (L  23);  robbery 
(ii.  6) ;  holding  forth  (ii.  16) ;  offered  (ii.  17) ;  not  regarding 
(ii.  30) ;  keep  (iv.  7) ;  learned  (iv.  11),  etc.     See  notes. 

Bishop  Lightfoot  observes :  ^^  The  Epistle  to  the  Philippians 
is  not  only  the  noblest  reflection  of  Paul's  personal  character 
and  spiritual  illumination,  his  large  sympathies,  his  womanly 
tenderness,  his  delicate  courtesy,  his  frank  independence,  his 
entire  devotion  to  the  Master's  service — ^but  as  a  monument  of 
the  power  of  the  Gospel  it  yields  in  importance  to  none  of  the 
apostolic  writings.  ...  To  all  ages  of  the  Church — to  our 
own  especially — this  epistle  reads  a  great  lesson.  While  we  are 
expendying  our  strength  on  theological  definitions  or  ecclesias- 


xxiv  INTRODUCTION. 

tical  I'ulee,  it  recalls  ns  from  these  distractioDs  to  the  very  liearE 
and  centre  of  the  Gospel — the  ]ife  of  Chrifit  and  the  life  in 
Christ.  Here  is  tlie  meeting-point  of  all  our  differences,  the 
healing  of  all  our  feuds,  the  true  life  alike  of  individuals  and 
Becta  and  churches;  here  doctrine  and  practice  are  wedded  to- 
gether ;  for  here  is  the  '  creed  of  creeds '  involved  in  and  arising 
out  of  the  '  work  of  works.'  " 

The  authenticity  and  genuineness  are  generally  conceded, 
though  violently  assailed  by  the  Tubingen  critics.  The  date  of 
composition  is  probably  about  il.d.  62,  and  the  epistle  is,  I  thinks 
to  be  placed  in  order  before  the  other  three.* 


THK   EPISTLE   TO   THE   EFHEBIANB. 


L 


For  Ephesos,  see  on  Apoc.  ii.  1. 

The  church  in  Ephesua  was  founded  during  Paul's  long  reei- 
denee  there  (Acta  xix.  10 ;  xx.  31j.  He  left  the  city  unnjedi- 
ately  after  the  great  riot  (Acts  six.),  and  never  returned.  Hia 
last  personal  coutaut  with  the  church  was  when  he  met  its 
eldei-s  at  Miletus  (Acts  xx.  IS,  35). 

There  has  been  much  discussion  aa  to  the  destination  of  the 
epistle.  The  principal  views  are  three;  1.  That  it  was  ad- 
dressed to  the  church  at  Ephesus.  2.  To  the  church  at  Laodi- 
caoa.  3.  That  it  was  an  encyclical  or  circular  epistle,  intended 
for  the  church  at  Ephesus  along  with  a  body  of  neighboring 
churches.  Some  also  have  regarded  it  aa  designed  for  the 
churches  of  Ephesus  and  Laodieaea,  and  others  for  the  Lao- 
dicaean  church  along  with  a  circle  of  churches. 

I  regard  the  epistle  as  addressed  to  the  Churcli  at  Ephesut;. 
Such  was  the  general  opinion  of  the  early  church.  The  words 
"  in  Ephesus"  (i.  1),  though  omitted  in  two  important  manu- 
Bcripts,  are  found  in  the  majority  of  manuscripts  and  in  all  the 
old  versions.  The  Laodicaean  theory  f  was  started  bj-  Mai-cion, 
who  was  severely  taken  to  task  by  Tertullian  for  altering  the 
title  to  "  the  Epistle  to  the  Laodicaeans."     Marcion  himself  in- 

*  Agftinst  ths  lUkjorltT  of  anthorltlM. 
f  Advooated  bj  BUhop  LIghtfoot 


1 


J 


IHTBODUCfnOlL  XXV 

Berted  the  epistle  in  his  canon  as  '^  the  Epistle  to  the  Eplies- 
ians ; "  and  it  is  significant  that  no  manuscript  which  omits 
^Mn  Ephesns"  sabstitntes  ^^in  Laodicaea."  The  encyclical 
theory  rests  mainly  on  internal  grounds,  such  as  the  general 
tenor  of  the  epistle,  and  the  absence  of  personal  reminiscences, 
appeals  and  greetings,  and  of  local  references.  Bnt  when  ad- 
dressing a  circle  of  churches,  Paul  is  wont  to  specify  the  fact, 
as  in  First  and  Second  Corinthians  and  Galatians.  If  the  words 
^^  in  Ephesus  "  be  rejected,  the  epistle  is  entirely  without  local 
designation,  and  is  catholic  rather  than  encyclical.  Moreover, 
whenever  Paul,  in  the  address  of  an  epistle,  uses  roU  oiatv 
which  are^  he  follows  these  with  the  name  of  a  place,  as  *'  at 
Rome,''  "  at  Philippi,"  «  at  Corinth." 

The  Ephesian  church,  so  far  as  is  indicated  by  the  letter, 
furnished  no  special  reason  for  its  composition.  It  contains  no 
references  to  the  dangers  which  Paul  predicted  at  Miletus,  no 
allusions  to  his  personal  relations  with  the  church,  and  no  salu- 
tations to  individuals.  Its  theme  is  the  Church  of  Christy 
founded  in  the  will  of  the  Father^  developed  hy  the  work  of  the 
Sany  and  united  in  him  ihrovgh  the  indwelling  and  energy  of 
the  Holy  Spirit, 

The  body  of  believers  is  chosen  of  God :  their  privilege  is 
adoption :  the  motive  of  adoption  is  grace,  its  medium  Jesus 
Christ,  its  element  love,  its  end  holiness  and  the  glorification  of 
divine  grace  (i.  3-6). 

The  work  of  the  Son  in  this  scheme  is  redemption,  remission 
of  sins,  and  the  gift  of  wisdom  and  discernment  His  central 
position  in  the  divine  plan  will  appear  in  the  consummation, 
which  will  consist  in  the  summing  up  of  all  things  in  Him  (i. 
7-12). 

The  agent  and  earnest  of  this  inheritance  of  believers  is  the 
Holy  Spirit  (i.  13-14). 

Hence  the  prayer  that  the  operation  of  the  Spirit  may  appear 
in  the  bestowment  of  wisdom  and  revelation  (compare  i.  8),  and 
of  quickened  spiritual  discernment ;  so  that  believers  may 
recognize  the  divine  call,  and  experience  the  hope  which  it  en- 
genders, the  riches  of  the  inheritance  which  it  assures  (compare 
i.  11),  and  the  efficiency  of  the  divine  power  which  is  exhibited 


JXVl  INTRODUCTION. 

aod  pledged  to  them  in  tbe  resurrection  and  exaltation  of 
Christ  (i.  15-22). 

The  election,  the  call,  the  redemptive  work,  the  adoption, 
the  personal  holiiiegs,  the  knowledge  and  diBcernment—all  find 
their  embodiment  in  the  Church,  the  body  of  Christ,  in  which 
the  divine  fnlneBS  dwells  (i.  22,  23). 

Tbe  scope  of  this  plan  is  universal,  inclnding  both  Jews  and 
Gentiles.  Its  operation  ia  illustrated  in  the  turning  of  tbe 
Gentiles  from  their  sins,  and  in  the  destnictiou  of  tbe  national 
and  religious  barriers  between  them  and  the  Jews,  making  of 
the  two  one  Church  in  Christ,  the  dwelling- place  of  the  Spirit, 
built  on  the  foundation  of  the  apostles  and  prophets,  with 
Christ  as  the  corner-stone  {ii.  1-22). 

The  inclusion  of  the  Gentiles  in  the  divine  covenant  ia  a 
mjstery  of  which  Paul  lias  been  made  the  minister.  The 
intent  of  this  mystery  is  to  manifest  through  the  Church  to  the 
heavenly  powers  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God  (iii.  2-10), 

Thus  far  the  theme,  the  Church,  is  struck  at  i.  22,  23;  it 
19-22 ;  iii.  10. 

The  prayer  (iii.  14-21)  includes  the  points  already  touched — 
the  universal  fatherhood  of  God;  the  sonship  of  Christ;  the 
work  of  the  Spirit  in  believers;  the  indwelling  of  Christ  by 
faith  ;  love  as  tiie  element  of  christian  life  ;  knowledge  of  the 
deep  things  of  God — and  returns  to  the  main  theme,  tbe 
Church. 

The  key-note  of  the  practical  portion  of  the  epistle  is  given 
in  eh.  iv.  1 :  "  Walk  wortliy  of  your  calling."  Tbe  practical 
exhortations  contemplate  individuals  in  their  relation  to  the 
Church.  The  fundamental  duty  is  unily  through  the  one  in- 
formiug  Spirit  (iv.  3,  4).  The  great  factors  of  chui-ch  feliow- 
ehip  are  specified  :  "  One  Lord  "  (Christ) ;  one  principle  of 
"  faith,"  uniting  to  Christ ;  one  formal  sign,  "  baptism,"  mark- 
ing admission  to  the  body  of  Christ ;  one  universal  "  Father," 
ruling,  pervading,  and  dwelling  in  all  (iv.  5,  d). 

Tliis  unity  of  the  Church  includes  and  is  furthered  by  various 
manifeetationa  of  the  Spirit  in  the  form  of  different  gifts ;  and 
the  authority  of  Christ  to  confer  and  distribute  these  gifts 
is  indicated  by  His  descent  to  earth  and  Hades,  and  His  ascent 


J 


iNTRODucnoir.  xxvii 

to  the  glory  of  the  Father  (iv.  7-16).  In  the  thought  that  tne 
purpose  of  these  gifts  is  the  edifying  of  the  body  of  Christ,  the 
theme — the  Church — is  again  sounded. 

Practical  exhortations  follow,  to  spiritual  renewal,  truthful- 
ness, peace,  honesty,  purity  of  speech  and  life,  love,  godly 
caution,  temperance,  holy  meditation  and  christian  interchange, 
gratitude,  and  the  reciprocal  duties  of  husband  and  wife,  in 
which  last  the  church-theme  is  once  more  enunciated  in  typ- 
ifying by  the  marriage-rite  Christ's  love  for  the  Church 
(iv.  7-v.). 

The  Church  includes  the  household.  The  exhortations  to 
fidelity  in  household  relations  are  continued  (vi.  1-9).  The 
ideal  of  the  Church  and  of  individual  character  is  realized  only 
through  conflict  with  the  evil  world  and  the  powers  of  dark- 
ness, in  which  the  power  of  God  alone  can  insure  victory. 
Hence  the  Christian  is  urged  to  clothe  himself  with  the  divine 
panoply  (vi.  10-18). 

The  authenticity  of  the  epistle  has  been  challenged  on  the 
ground  of  dissimilarity  to  the  other  writings  of  Paul,  unusual 
words  and  phrases,  and  a  general  un-Pauline  character  in  doc- 
trine and  diction.  As  regards  doctrine,  the  charge  is  beneath 
notice.  As  to  diction,  the  argument  from  unusual  expressions 
would  bear  equally  against  the  genuineness  of  some  of  the  best- 
attested  epistles.  While  there  are  forty-two  unique  words  in 
this  letter,  there  are  thirty-eight  in  Colossians,  above  a  hundred 
in  Romans,  and  two  hundred  and  thirty  in  First  Corinthians ; 
while  the  well-known  peculiarities  of  Paul's  style  are  as  evident 
in  this  as  in  the  other  epistles. 

The  epistle  has  also  been  assailed  as  '^  a  mere  verbose  expan- 
sion "  of  the  Colossian  letter.  There  are,  indeed,  marked  resem- 
blances between  the  two  both  in  matter  and  form,  and  some- 
times literal  correspondences,  as  might  be  expected  in  two  epis- 
tles written  about  the  same  time ;  but  both  the  subject  and  the 
treatment  of  the  two  epistles  present  too  many  differences  to 
bear  out  this  charge  of  amplification.  On  the  contrary,  the 
same  subject  is  sometimes  treated  more  concisely  in  Ephesians 
than  in  Colossians  (Eph.  i.  16-17 ;  Col.  i.  3-6 ;  Eph.  iv.  32 ; 
Col.  iii.  12-14).     Ephesians,  moreover,  contains  matter   not 


XXviii  INTRODUCTION. 

found  in  CoIosBians  (Epli.  i.  13-14;  iv.  8-15;  v.  7-14,  23-31 ; 
vi.  10-17). 

The  polemic  element  in  Coloseiane  ia  wanting  in  Ephesians. 
The  Chriatologjof  ColoBsiana  is  more  metaphysical  than  that 
of  Epheeiane,  while  the  predeetinarianiBm  of  Ephesians  does 
not  appear  in  Cotoasians. 

This  epistle  presents  peculiar  difficulties  to  the  student. 
Dean  Alford  says  :  "  Tiie  difficulties  lie  altogetlier  beneath  tlie 
surface ;  are  not  discernible  by  the  cursory  reader,  wlio  liuda 
all  very  atraight forward  and  simple.  .  ,  .  But  wiien  we 
begin  to  inquire  why  thought  succeeds  to  thought,  and  one 
cumbrous  parenthesis  to  another — depths  under  depths  disclose 
themselTes,  wonderful  syatetns  of  parallel  alhiaton,  frequent  and 
complicated  underplots — every  word,  the  more  we  search,  ap- 
provea  itself  as  set  in  its  esact  logical  place;  ws  see  every 
phrase  contributing  by  its  own  similar  organization  and  articu- 
lation to  the  carrying  out  of  the  organic  whole.  But  this  result 
IB  not  won  without  much  labor  of  tliougJit,  without  repeated 
uid  minute  laying  together  of  portions  and  expressions,  with- 
out bestowing  on  single  words  and  plirases,  and  their  aucceasion 
tad  aiTangeraent,  as  much  atudy  aa  would  suffice  for  whole  sec- 
tioDS  of  more  exoteric  epistles." 

While  the  diction  is  marked  by  a  peculiar  sonorousness  and 
depth  of  tone,  it  does  not  surpass  in  variety  and  picturesqueness 
that  of  some  other  epistles.  Second  Corinthiana,  for  instance. 
The  shorter  epiatle  to  the  Colossians  contains  thirty-eight 
unique  words  to  forty-two  in  Epheaiaiia.  But  no  writing  of 
Paul  equala  this  in  the  liturgical  majeaty  of  its  movement. 
The  Epistle  to  the  Romans  is  the  ever-deepening  flow  of  a 
stately  i-iver ;  Second  Corintliians  is  the  rush  of  a  rapid  ;  Ephes- 
iana  is  the  solemn  swell  of  a  calm  sea.  Not  a  familiar  and 
personal  letter  like  Philippians  and  Philemon,  it  is,  equally  with 
these,  devoid  of  official  stateliness.  Its  dignity  is  that  of  the 
seer  rather  than  of  the  bishop  and  teacher.  It  riaes  at  times 
to  the  height  of  apocalypse.  The  impression  of  a  teacher  ex- 
pounding his  theme  ia  largely  merged  in  the  impression  of  a 
great  mind  and  an  adoring  aoul  maatered  and  swept  onward 
by  the  theme. 


i 


INTRODUCTION.  xxix 

The  figure  of  a  cathedral,  into  which  Professor  Longfellow  has 
BO  finely  cast  his  general  conception  of  the  '^  Divina  Commedia," 
eqnaUj  well,  perhaps,  even  better,  suits  the  Ephesian  letter. 
If  the  expression  may  be  allowed,  that  epistle  is  the  veritable 
high-Grothic  of  sacred  literature  ;  every  line  and  detail  carrying 
the  eye  upward,  and  the  whole  combining  in  one  great  upreach, 
irradiated  with  the  rich  hues  of  ^^  the  many-tinted  wisdom  of 
God.''  Even  as  St.  Ouen  mirrors  its  lines  in  the  font  at  the 
portal,  the  whole  magnificent  ideal  of  the  Church  of  Christ 
condenses  itself  into  the  inscription  round  the  baptismal  laver 
— "one  Lord,  one  Faith,  one  Baptism."  Every  window  is 
blazoned  with  its  story,  but  in  eadi  the  central  figure  is  the 
same— now  the  Victim  of  the  cross,  now  the  Conqueror  with  his 
train  of  captives,  now  the  King  ascended  and  throned  in  light. 
No  partition  with  its  rigid  lines  sunders  the  band  of  wor- 
shippers.  Jew  and  Gentile  kneel  side  by  side,  every  face 
turned  toward  the  cross.  On  the  very  threshold  the  ear  is 
greeted  with  a  burst  of  choral  thunder.  The  vast  aisles  throb 
with  praise,  crossed  with  the  minor  chords  of  penitent  rehearsal, 
and  the  deep  sighs  of  tempted  souls  struggHng  with  the  powers 
of  darkness ;  while  from  the  side-chapels  fioat  the  words  of 
admonition  to  the  newly-wedded,  and  of  homely  precept  for 
the  children  and  servants ;  and  over  all  the  sweet,  sad,  trium- 
phant tumult  is  heard  the  voice  of  the  great  apostle,  rising 
with  the  incense-cloud  from  before  the  altar  in  that  wondrous 
prayer,  never  surpassed  save  by  the  intercessions  of  Jesus  Him- 
self— "  That  He  would  grant  you,  according  to  the  riches  of 
His  glory,  to  be  strengthened  with  might  by  His  Spirit  in  the 
inner  man ;  that  Christ  may  dwell  in  your  hearts  by  faith ; 
that  ye,  being  rooted  and  grounded  in  love,  may  be  able  to 
comprehend,  with  all  saints,  what  is  the  breadth,  and  length, 
and  depth,  and  height ;  and  to  know  the  love  of  Christ  which 
passeth  knowledge,  that  ye  might  be  filled  unto  all  the  fulness 
of  God.'' 


INTRODUCnOB. 


THE   EPISTtK  •] 


i   COL08SIAN8. 


For  Ck>Ioe8ae,  Bee  on  Col.  i.  2. 

The  GoBpel  was  first  preached  in  the  cities  of  the  Ljcub  by 
Epaphras  (Col.  i.  7 ;  iv.  12 ;  Phileiii.  23),  who  may  also  have 
founded  the  churches  there.  Tlie  theory  that  tlie  church  at 
ColoBsae  was  founded  by  Paul  lias  no  sufficient  foundation.* 
The  church  had  never  been  personally  visited  by  Paul.  Thougli 
his  missionary  journeys  had  carried  hira  into  the  Galatian  and 
Phrygian  country  (Acts  xvi.  6),  the  indefinite  usage  of  these 
terms,  the  absence  of  all  hints  of  a  visit  in  the  epistle  itself, 
and  the  notices  of  his  route  in  the  Acts,  go  to  show  that  bis 
path  did  not  lie  through  the  valley  of  the  Lycus.  Ch.  ii.  1, 
appears  to  indicate  that  the  Colossians  were  personally  unknown 
to  him. 

The  occasion  of  the  letter  was  the  visit  of  Epaphras  to  the 
apostle  in  prison,  and  Paul's  communication  with  Colossae  in 
the  matter  of  the  restoration  of  Onesimus.  Whether  Epaphras 
ahared  his  captivity  or  not  (see  on  Fhilem.  23),  he  did  not  re- 
turn to  Colossae  witli  this  letter,  but  remained  in  Paul's  com- 
pany (Col.  iv.  12);  and  his  stay  in  Kome  was  long  enough  to 
put  the  apostle  fnlly  in  possesston  of  the  dangers  which  men- 
aced the  Colossian  chureli.  Paul  took  the  opportunity  of  Ty- 
chicus'  jonmey  to  Colossae  with  Onesimus,  to  send  this  letter. 

Phrygia  was  a  favorable  soil  for  the  development  of  error. 
"  Cosmological  speculation,  mystic  theosophy,  religious  fanati- 
cism, all  had  their  home  there."  +  The  leading  worship  was 
tliat  of  Cybele,  the  great  Mother  of  the  Gods,  which  was  spread 
over  Asia  Minor  generally,  and  especially  prevailed  in  Mysia 
and  Galatia.  It  was  orgiastic,  accompanied  with  frenzied 
dances,  howlings,  and  self-tnntilations.  Phrygia  was  also  the 
home  of  Ophitism,  or  serpent-worship.     Montanism,  with  its 

*  This  theor?  iths  eUboratelj  sdvocated  by  Dr.  Lardner  I"  Works,"  iii.,  gIl 
xlv.).  SommarieB  and  diEioiiBBions  of  Ijib  nrgument  may  hi!  tanad  In  AKord's 
mad  Eadle'a  commenlarles,  and  in  Dr.  DaTidBOn's  "  In&odnotioa  Ut  theBtndj 
of  the  Now  Testameut." 

fUghtfoot. 


1 


INTBODUCTION.  XXXI 

ecstasy  and  trance,  its  faith-cores,  its  glooinj  asceticism,  its  pas- 
sion for  martjrrdom,  and  its  savage  intolerance,  owed  to  Phry- 
gia  its  leader ;  and  the  earlier  name  of  the  sect  was  '^  the  S^t 
of  the  Phrygians." 

Under  Antiochas  the  Great,  two  thousand  Jewish  families 
had  been  transplanted  into  Phrygia  and  Lydia ;  and  while  the 
staple  of  the  chnrch  was  GtentQe,  the  epistle  distinctly  recog- 
nizes the  presence  and  operation  of  Jewish  inflaences  (ii.  16-21). 

The  form  of  error  which  prevailed  at  Colossae  included  three 
elements :  Jewish  formalism ;  speculative  mysticism,  represent- 
ing the  germs  of  what  afterward  developed  as  Gnosticism  ;  and 
Essenism,  the  medium  through  which  the  Jewish  and  Gnostic 
elements  came  into  combination. 

Though  Gnosticism,  as  such,  had  not  developed  itself  at  this 
time,  a  knowledge  of  its  principal  features  is  necessary  to  an 
intelligent  reading  of  this  epistle. 

It  took  its  name  from  grums  hnawledgej  since  it  claimed  for 
a  select  few  the  possession  of  a  superior  acquaintance  with 
truth.  Its  tendencies  were  thus  exclusive  and  aristocratic.  The 
Gnostics  denied  the  direct  creation  of  the  world  by  God,  be- 
cause Grod  would  thus  be  shown  to  be  the  creator  of  evil.  Ghxl's 
creative  energy  was  thwarted  by  the  world  of  matter,  which  is 
essentially  evil,  in  eternal  antagonism  to  God,  and  with  which 
Gk)d  could  not  come  into  direct  contact  without  tainting  His 
nature.  Hence  creation  became  possible  only  through  a  series 
of  emanations  from  God,  each  successive  emanation  being  less 
divine,  until  the  point  was  reached  where  contact  with  matter 
became  possible.  These  emanations  were  called  aeonSy  spirits, 
or  angels  ;  and  to  these  worship  was  rendered  with  an  affecta- 
tion of  humility  in  approaching  the  lower  grades  of  divinity,  in- 
stead of  venturing  into  the  immediate  presence  of  the  Supreme. 
The  evil  of  matter  was  to  be  escaped  either  by  rigid  abstinence 
from  the  world  of  sense,  or  by  independence  of  it.  The  system 
therefore  tended  to  the  opposite  extremes  of  asceticism  and 
licentiousness. 

Essenism,  in  the  apostolic  age,  had  established  itself  in  Asia 
Minor.  The  Essenes  combined  the  ritualism  of  the  Jew  with 
the  asceticism  and  mysticism  of  the  Gnostic.     They  rigorously 


xxxii  rSTRODUCTION. 

observed  the  Mosaic  ritual,  except  id  the  matter  of  slain  sacri 
ficGB,  which  tliey  refueed  to  offer,  regarding  their  ordinary 
meals  bb  eacrificial  rites.  The;  discountenanced  nuarriage,  and 
foreswore  oil,  wine,  and  animal  food.  Their  theology  revealed 
traces  of  son-worship.  Holding  the  immortality  of  the  soul, 
they  denied  the  resurrection  of  the  body.  They  also  held 
some  mystical  doctrine  of  emanations,  as  agents  in  creation, 
akin  to  that  of  the  Gnostic  aeoDS.  Like  the  Gnostics,  they 
maintained  the  evil  of  matter. 

Id  this  epistle  Paul  strikes  at  the  intellectnal  exclusiveness 
of  the  Colossian  heretics  with  the  doctrino  of  the  universality  of 
the  Gospel  (i.  6,  23,  28;  iii.  11).  Their  pnoaw — the  pretended 
higher,  esoteric  wisdom — is  met  with  the  assertion  of  the  Gos- 
pel as  the  true  wisdom,  the  common  property  of  all  believers. 
The  words  wivdom,,  knowledge,  fvR  hnowled^e,  inteUigencey  oc- 
cur frequently  in  tlie  epiatlo.  Tv&tTK  kn<yioledge  is  used  but 
once,  while  hrirfvatai/;  full  knowledge,  occurs  four  times,  em- 
phasiziDg  the  knowledge  of  God  and  of  Christ  aa  the  perfection 
of  knowledge.  Divine  wisdom  is  offered  and  prayed  for  as 
the  privilege  of  Chrietians  (i.  9,  27,  2S;  iii.  10,  16).  The  pre- 
tended wisdom  is  denounced  as  deceitful  philosophy,  founded 
in  tradition,  and  both  its  Gentile  and  its  Jewish  phases  are 
characterized  aa  more  elemenU  or  rudiTnetiie,  unworthy  of  men 
in  Christ  (ii.  8,  20).  It  is  presumptuous  and  arrogant;  a  mere 
show  of  wisdom  (ii.  18,  23). 

The  doctrine  of  angelic  mediators  in  the  creation  and  govern- 
ment of  the  world  is  offset  by  the  truth  of  tJie  Eternal  Son, 
begotten  before  the  creation,  by  whom  all  things  were  created 
and  are  maintained,  and  who  is  also  the  only  and  absolute  head 
of  the  Church  (i.  15-18).  For  a  succession  of  augeJic  emana- 
tions,  each  less  divine  than  its  predecessor,  is  substituted  the 
Son  of  God,  in  whom  dwells  the  sum-total  of  the  divine  powers 
and  attributes  (i.  19;  ii.  9).  An  angel  or  spirit,  who  is  neither 
God  nor  man,  cannot  reconcile  God  and  man.  For  the  hazi- 
nese  which  invests  the  personality  and  character  of  these  inter- 
mediaries, we  have  the  sliarply  defined  personality  of  Christ, 
the  Word  made  flesh,  uniting  in  Himself  the  human  and  tlio 
divine,  human  even  unto  death,  divine  unto  the  eternal  life  and 


A 


INTBODUCnON.  XXXiii 

power  of  the  Godhead,  and  thus  reconciling  and  bringing  into 
perfect  nnity  all  things  in  Himself  (i.  19,  22 ;  ii.  9,  10). 

The  person  of  Christ  is  thus  exhibited  in  two  aspects,  the 
oosmical  and  the  theological,  in  its  relations  to  the  nniverse 
and  to  the  Church.  On  the  one  hand,  Christ  is  supreme  in  the 
creation  and  administration  of  the  world  (i.  15-17).  ^^  He  is 
the  beginning,  middle,  and  end  of  creation."  On  the  other 
hand,  Christ  is  supreme  in  the  spiritual  economy.  *^If  the 
function  of  Christ  is  unique  in  the  universe,  so  is  it  also  in 
the  Church."  In  Him  alone  man  is  reconciled  and  united  to 
Gk>d.  In  Him  alone  the  individual  children  of  Qtod  are  com- 
pacted into  one  body,  propelled  and  guided  in  their  several  ac- 
tivities, and  each  placed  and  held  in  due  relation  to  the  whole 
(L  18,  22 ;  ii.  10-15, 19). 

In  this  rigorous  insistence  upon  the  person  of  Christ  as  alone 
solving  the  problem  of  God's  relation  to  the  world,  Paul  strikes 
not  only  at  the  Colossian  error,  but  also  at  the  later  error  of 
Arius,  whose  Christ  is  of  a  different  essence  from  God,  His 
participation  in  the  divine  attributes  partial,  and  His  revelation 
therefore  limited  and  imperfect.  Arianism  furnishes  a  prin- 
ciple of  conduct,  but  not  a  basis  of  communion  between  the  di- 
vine and  the  human.  ^^  The  supernatural  being  whom  Arius 
sets  forth  as  a  mediator  between  God  and  man,  does  not  unite, 
but  separates  them,  for  He  serves  to  reveal  the  infinite,  impass- 
able gulf  that  lies  between  them."  * 

Bishop  Lightfoot  most  truthfully  remarks :  ^^  Christ's  media- 
torial function  in  the  Church  is  represented  as  flowing  from 
His  mediatorial  function  in  the  world.  With  oui^selves  this 
idea  has  retired  very  much  into  the  background.  Though  in 
the  creed  common  to  all  the  churches  we  profess  our  belief  in 
Him  as  the  Being  through  whom  all  things  were  created,  yet 
in  reality  this  confession  seems  to  exercise  very  little  influence 
on  our  thoughts.  And  the  loss  is  serious.  How  much  our 
theological  conceptions  suffer  in  breadth  and  fulness  by  the 
neglect,  a  moment's  reflection  will  show.     How  much  more 


*  Alexander  V.  6.  AUen,  *'The  Gontinaity  of  Christian  Thought."    See 
alio  Newman's  **  Ariana  of  the  Fourth  Oentnry,**  oh.  iL,  seo.  ▼. 


Xxxiv  INTHODLCTION. 

hearty  would  be  the  ejmpatby  of  theologians  with  the  revela- 
tions of  ecience  and  the  developiuentB  of  history,  if  they  habit- 
ually connected  them  with  tiie  operation  of  tiie  same  Divine 
Woid,  who  is  the  centre  of  all  tiieir  religioue  aspirations,  it  is 
needless  to  say."  * 

The  doctrine  of  Christ  as  the  true  and  only  medium  of  union 
between  God  and  man  is  fatal  to  the  voluntary  humility  which 
substitutes  the  worship  of  angels  for  that  of  Christ.  Cbriet  is 
presented  as  the  legitimate  object  of  adoration,  the  refusal  of 
which  is  a  ruptnre  of  the  connection  between  the  membera  of 
the  body  and  tiieir  Head  (ii.  18,  19).  AJl  things  must  be  done 
in  His  name.  The  intercourse  of  the  Church,  the  relations  of 
the  household,  are  to  take  their  impulse  and  character  directly 
from  the  indwelling  word  of  Christ  (iii.  16-25),  The  Essene 
view  of  marriage  is  tlius  assailed  (iii.  18,  19).  Asceticisin, 
legalism,  ritualism  are  condemned  as  fixing  the  mind  upon 
mere  external  things.  Their  precepts  are  the  merest  rudiments 
of  an  earthly  and  sensual  economy—"  shadows  of  things  to 
come."  The  imposition  of  these  precepts  is  a  moral  tyranny  ; 
"mere  legal  obligations  are  a  part  of  a  dead  compact,  a  torn 
and  cancelled  bond,  which  is  now  nailed  to  Christ's  cross." 
Tliey  do  not  lift  the  life  into  the  higher  moral  and  spiritual 
plane;  they  do  not  protect  it  against  tiie  temptations  of  the 
flesh;  they  furnish  no  efficient  remedy  for  sin  (ii.  8,  16,  20, 
23).  Reconciliation  with  God  through  the  blood  of  the  cross 
will  set  the  thoughts  on  heavenly  things,  will  strangle  unholy 
passions  and  indulgences,  and  will  create  a  new  man  in  tlio 
image  of  Christ  (i.  20 ;  ii.  11,  14;  iii.  1-10).  By  this,  asceti- 
cism and  licentiousness  are  alike  branded  (iii.  5). 

The  genuineness  and  authenticity  of  the  epistle  were  uni- 
versally acknowledged  by  the  early  Church,  and  not  seriously 
questioned  until  the  attack  of  Mayerhoff  in  1838,  followed  by 
Baiir  and  Schwegler.  Holtzmann  (1872)  held  that  it  was  partly 
spurious,  though  containing  a  genuine  epistle,  which  he  fancied 


*  Introduotlon   to   the    "  CommenUrj   on   ColoMUas."     Sea   »1bo   Aubrey 
Modts'b  Biwy,  "  The  Chriitlaa  Doctrine  of  Ood,"  in  "  Lnx  Haiidi,"  p.  M 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXV 

that  he  could  extract  Dr.  Davidson  denies  the  Pauline  author- 
aliip,  and  thinks  it  was  written  about  120  a.d.  The  assaults  are, 
in  part,  on  the  same  grounds  as  those  against  Ephesians — textual 
and  grammatical  departures  from  Paul's  style,  unique  forms  of 
expression,  and  differences  of  idea.  Against  Colossians  in  par- 
ticular it  is  urged  that  the  errors  it  attacks  are  later  than  Paul's 
date. 

The  Pauline  authorship  cannot  be  overthrown  by  any  of 
these  considerations.  As  to  the  errors  treated  in  the  epistle, 
it  has  already  been  shown  that  they  contained  the  germs  of 
later  Gnosticism.  The  variations  in  style  are  no  greater  than 
those  which  appear  in  different  writings  by  the  same  author. 
They  are  easily  explained  by  difference  of  subject,  and  by 
the  mental  changes  in  the  writer  himself.  Many  of  the 
unique  words  are  echoes  of  the  vocabulary  of  the  heretical 
teachers  (see  especially  in  ch.  iL  and  notes),  and  every  epistle 
of  Paul  contains  numerous  words  which  are  found  nowhere 
else.  Not  counting  those  which  occur  in  the  Septuagint,  there 
are  over  a  hundred  in  both  Romans  and  First  Corinthians ;  over 
ninety  in  Second  Corinthians;  thirty-three  or  four  in  6ala- 
tians ;  forty-one  in  Philippians ;  over  thirty  in  the  two  Thes- 
salonian  letters,  and  above  one  hundred  and  fifty  in  the  three 
Pastorals.  The  absence  of  peculiarly  Pauline  words  and  phrases 
it  is  only  necessary  flatly  to  deny.  Any  Greek  student  may 
satisfy  himself  on  that  point  by  means  of  a  Concordance. 

The  Christology  of  the  epistle  is  that  of  the  earlier  epis- 
tles, only  more  fully  developed.  Notably  the  preexistence  of 
Christ  is  emphasized.  The  doctrine  of  Christ's  person  is  more 
fully  and  precisely  stated  than  in  any  other  of  Paul's  letters. 

The  style  lacks  the  richness  and  rhythmical  sonorousness  of 
Ephesians.  This  arises  in  part  from  its  more  controversial 
character,  which  betrays  itself  in  Paul's  style,  here  as  elsewhere, 
by  his  employment  of  unusual  words  and  long  compounds. 
The  earlier  chapters  especially  are  marked  by  a  certain  stiffness 
which  is  imparted  by  the  rarity  of  the  ordinary  connecting 
particles,  and  the  connection  of  the  sentences  by  participial 
constructions  and  relative  pronouns,  or  by  "  causal  and  inferen- 
tial conjunctions  "  (see  ch.  i.).    Bishop  Lightfoot  observes  that 


XIXVl  UJTRODDCTIOM. 

"  the  absence  of  all  personal  connection  with  tlie  Colossiaa 
church  will  partially,  if  not  wholly,  explain  the  dimiiiifihed 
fluency  of  this  letter.  At  the  eanie  time  no  epistle  of  Paul  is 
more  vigorous  in  conception  or  more  instinct  with  meaning. 
It  is  the  very  compreaflion  of  the  thoughts  which  creates  the 
difficulty.  If  there  is  a  want  of  fluency,  there  is  no  want  of 
force." 

THE   EPISTLK  TO    PHILEMON. 

This  epistle  is  the  only  private  letter  of  Paul  which  has  been 
preserved,  and  the  only  one  in  the  Kew  Testament  except  3 
John.* 

Oneaimus,  a  shive,  had  run  away  from  his  master,  Philemon, 
of  Colossae,  and  had  hidden  himself  in  Rome,  where  he  came 
under  Paul's  influence  and  was  converted  to  Christianity. 

In  Ilia  loyalty  to  the  civil  law,  Paul  felt  that  Onesimus,  in 
fulfilment  of  his  Christian  duty,  should  return  to  his  master. 
Ue  had  probably  robbed  Philemon,  and  should  make  at  least 
this  restitution.  Ue  therefore  sent  Onesimus  back  to  Colossae 
under  the  escort  of  Tychicus,  who  carried  this  letter  to  Phile- 
mon. 

Paul  did  not  attack  slavery  aa  an  institution.  He  did  not 
charge  Philemon  to  emancipate  his  slave.  For  the  final  extinc- 
tion of  slavery  he  relied  on  the  spirit  of  the  Gospel,  and  on  its 
principle  that  all  men  are  brethren  in  Christ  and  alike  servants 
of  tlie  one  heavenly  Master. 

After  salutations  to  Philemon  and  his  household,  and  ac- 
knowledgments of  Philemon's  loving  service  to  the  Church  and 
to  himself,  he  introduces  the  main  subject  of  the  letter.  He 
asks  as  a  personal  favor  that  Philemon  will  kindly  receive 
Onesimus.  He  praises  the  ministries  of  the  latter  to  himself, 
playing  upon  his  name,  "  once  ■unprojUahle  but  -aoviprojitaih" 
and  expressing  his  desire  to  keep  him  with  himself.  This,  how- 
ever, he  will  not  do  without  Philemon's  consent.  If  Philemon 
shall  see  flt  to  retain  him  in  his  own  service,  he  will  find  him, 

*  Possibly  2d  Jolin,  lliough  tu^la  lady  m«y  refer  to  a  ohurcb.  See  on  3 
John,  ver.  1. 


L 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXVii 

as  a  Christian,  far  more  valnable  than  he  was  as  a  pagan  slave. 
Perhaps  his  flight  was  divinely  permitted,  in  order  that  he 
might  retnm  to  his  master  as  a  Christian  brother.  He  hints 
delicately  at  Onesimos'  possible  thefts,  offering  his  personal 
security  for  the  amount  stolen,  though  intimating  that  Phile- 
mon is  already  in  his  debt  for  his  own  conversion.  He  is  sure 
that  Philemon  will  comply  with  his  request  He  thinks  he  will 
soon  be  released  from  prison,  and  asks  his  friend  to  prepare 
him  a  lodging  in  view  of  his  visit 

The  epistle  has  always  been  celebrated  as  a  model  of  Christ- 
ian tact  and  courtesy.  Paul  waives  his  apostolic  right  to  com* 
mand,  and  throws  himself  upon  the  appeal  of  Christian  friend- 
ship, backing  it  with  a  delicate  allusion  to  his  sufferings  for  the 
Gospel's  sake.  Without  palliating  Onesimus'  fault,  he  throws 
round  him  the  protection  of  his  own  confidence  and  esteem. 
He  softens  the  phrases  which  describe  the  slave's  flight  and 
theft  He  does  not  say  ^^  he  ran  away,"  but  ^^  he  was  separated 
from  thee."  He  does  not  say  ^^he  stole,"  but,  ^^if  he  hath 
wronged  thee  or  oweth  thee  aught."  With  exquisite  tact  he 
assumes  that  Philemon  will  regard  Onesimus'  ministries  to  the 
prisoner  as  his  own,  and  will  rejoice  in  them  as  an  expression 
of  his  own  affection. 

Few  sections  of  Scripture  contain  within  the  same  space  more 
topics  for  the  preacher.  Among  these  may  be  noted.  Fellowship 
in  Christian  service  (1,  2,  11,  12,  13,  19) :  Friendship  founded 
in  faith  (3,  5-7,  20) :  The  practical  quality  of  love  and  faith  (2, 
5,  6,  7) :  The  true  method  of  Christian  persuasion  :  The  power 
of  the  Gospel  to  deal  with  the  worst :  The  Christian  method  of 
dealing  with  bad  social  institutions :  The  union  of  all  classes 
and  conditions  in  Christ.''^ 

The  letter  has  often  been  compared  with  the  younger  Pliny's 
epistle  to  Sabinianns,  written  under  similar  circumstances. 
Doddridge  remarks  that  although  antiquity  furnishes  no  exam- 
ple of  the  epistolary  style  equal  to  Pliny's  letter,  Paul's  letter 


*  These  and  other  topics  are  most  beantifnUj  and  foroefnUj  treated  bj  the 
Rey.  Alexander  Maclaren  in  his  volnme  on  Colossians  and  Philemon  ;  **  Exposi- 
tors Bible." 


XXXViii  IHTBODUCTION. 

to  Pbilemon  is  far  Bnperior  as  a  human  compoeition.  Dr. 
Davidson  says :  "  It  puts  Paul's  character  in  a  light  which  none 
other  of  his  writings  exhibit.  The  qualities  which  dictated  its 
composition  are  eminently  attractive.  Dignity,  generosity,  pru- 
dence, friendship,  politeness,  skilful  address,  purity,  are  appar- 
ent. Hence  it  has  been  called,  with  great  propriety, '  the  polite 
epiatle.'  Trne  delicacy,  fine  address,  consummate  courtesy,  nice 
strokes  of  rhetoric,  make  it  a  unique  specimen  of  the  epistolary 
style.  It  shows  the  perfect  Christian  gentleman."  Ewald : 
"  Nowhere  can  the  sensibility  and  warmth  of  tender  friendship 
blend  more  beautifully  with  the  higher  feeling  of  a  eupeiior 
raiad,  nay,  of  a  teacher  and  apostle,  than  this  brief  and  yet  so 
eminently  significant  letter."  Kenan  :  "  A  little  chef-d'oeitvro 
of  the  art  of  letter-writing."  Calvin  :  "  Though  he  bandleth  a 
subject  which  otherwise  were  low  and  mean,  yet  after  bis  man- 
ner he  is  borne  up  aloft  unto  God.  With  such  modest  entreaty 
doth  he  humble  himself  on  behalf  of  the  lowest  of  men,  that 
scarce  anywhere  else  is  the  gentleness  of  his  spirit  portrayed 
more  truly  to  the  life."  Maclaren :  "  Without  thought  of 
effect,  and  with  complete  imconsciousneBB,  this  man  beats  all 
the  famous  letter-writers  on  their  own  ground.  That  nnist 
have  been  a  great  intellect,  and  closely  conversant  witli  the 
Fountain  of  all  light  and  beauty,  which  could  shape  the  pro- 
found and  far-reaching  teachings  of  the  epistle  to  the  Colossians, 
and  pass  from  thera  to  the  graceful  simplicity  and  sweet  kind- 
liness of  this  exquisite  letter;  as  if  Michael  Angelo  had  gone 
straight  from  smiting  his  magnificent  Moses  from  the  marble 
mass,  to  incise  some  delicate  and  tiny  figure  of  Love  or  Friend- 
ship on  a  cameo." 

The  authenticity  of  the  epistle  is  conceded.     The  assaults  of 
Banr  and  Holtzmann  require  do  notice. 


INTRODUCTION.  xxxix 


Paul's  missionaby  joubneys. 


First  Journey  (Acts  xiii.,  xiv.),  aj>.  45-46.     Starting  from 
Antioch  in  Syria. 

Cyprus, 

Perga, 

Antioch  in  Pisidia, 

Iconinm, 

Lystra  and  Derbe, 

Ketnrn  to  Iconium, 

Antioch  in  Pisidia, 

Perga, 

Attaleia, 

Syrian  Antioch. 
Second  Journey  (Acts  xv.  36-xviiL  22),  aj>.  63-56.     Start- 
ing from  Antioch  in  Syria. 

Churches  of  Syria  and  Cilicia, 

Derbe  and  Lystra, 

Phrygia  and  Galatia, 

Troas, 

Macedonia, 

Philippi, 

Thessalouica, 

Beroea, 

Athens, 

Corinth  (writes  1  and  2  Thessalonians), 

Ephesus, 

Caesarea, 

Jerusalem. 
Third  Journey  (Acts  xviiL  22-xxL  15),  a.d.  66-60.     Start* 
ing  from  Jerusalem. 

Syrian  Antioch, 

Galatia, 

Phrygia, 

Ephesus  (writes  First  Corinthians,  and,  accordinr^  to 
some,  Oalatians), 

Troas, 


Xl  INTRODUCTION. 

Macedonia  (writes  Second  Corinthians,  place  uncertain), 

Dlyricum, 

Corinth  (writes  Epistle  to  the  Bomans), 

Troas, 

Assos, 

Mitjlene, 

Chios, 

Trogyllium, 

Miletus, 

Cos, 

Rhodes, 

Patara, 

Tyre, 

Ptolemais, 

Caesarea, 

Jerusalem. 
From  Jerusalem  to  Caesarea.     Two  years  in  confinement. 
Voyage  to  Rome.    Writes  Ephesians,  Colossians,  Philippians, 
and  Philemon  from  his  Roman  prison. 

Subsequent  movements  uncertain.     Epistles  to  Timothy  and 
Titus  commonly  assigned  to  a  second  imprisonment  at  Rome. 


ABBREVUTIONS. 


A.  V.     Authorized  Version. 
Apoa     Apocalypse. 
Cit     Cited. 
=     Equivalent  to. 
Expn.     Explanation, 
lit     Literally. 

Bev.     Beyised  Version  of  the  New  Testament. 
Bev.  O.  T.     Revised  Version  of  the  Old  Testament.  ^ 
Sept     Septuagint  Version  of  the  Old  Testament 
Sqq.     Following. 
Synop.     Synoptista 
Tex.  Bee.     Beceived  Text 
Tynd.    Tyudale's  Version  of  the  New  Testament 
Vulg.     Vulgate  or  Latin  Translation  of  the  New  Testament 
Wye.     Wycliflfe's  Version  of  the  New  Testament 
The  phrase  "only  here  in  New  Testament"  refers  to  Greek 
words  only. 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


CHAPTER  I. 


SuPEBSORiFTioN  (w.  1,  2).  Dr.  MoriBon  observes  that  the 
saperscription  is  peerless  for  its  wealth  of  theological  idea. 

1.  Paul  (iloSXo^).  A  transcript  for  the  Latin  pavlus  or 
paidlu8,  meaning  litUe.  It  was  a  favorite  name  among  the 
Cilicians,  and  the  nearest  approach  in  sound  to  the  Hebrew 
SatU.  According  to  some,  both  names  were  borne  by  him  in 
his  childhood,  Paulas  being  the  one  by  which  he  was  knovm 
among  the  Gentiles,  and  which  was  subsequently  assumed  by 
him  to  the  exclusion  of  tlie  other,  in  order  to  indicate  his  posi- 
tion as  the  friend  and  teacher  of  the  Gentiles.  The  practice  of 
adopting  Gtentile  names  may  be  traced  through  all  the  periods 
of  Hebrew  history."*^  Double  names  also,  national  and  foreign, 
often  occur  in  combination,  as  Belteshazzar-Daniel ;  Esther- 
Iladasa ;  thus  Saul-Paulus. 

Others  find  in  the  name  an  expression  of  humility,  according 
to  Paul's  declaration  that  he  was  '^  the  least  of  the  apostles  " 
(1  Cor.  XV.  9).  Others,  an  allusion  to  his  diminutive  stature ; 
and  others  again  think  that  he  assumed  the  name  out  of  com- 
pliment to  Sergius  Paulus,  the  deputy  of  Cyprus.  Dean  How- 
son,  while  rejecting  this  explanation,  remarks:  '^  We  cannot 
believe  it  accidental  that  the  words  ^  who  is  also  called  Paul,' 
occur  at  this  particular  point  of  the  inspired  narrative.  The 
heathen  name  rises  to  the  surface  at  the  moment  when  St.  Paul 


*  See  iUuitratioiis  in  Conjbeare  and  Howson's  *'Life  and  Epistles  of  Paul/* 
ch.  ▼. 


2  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Cb.  L 

visibl;  enters  on  his  ofBce  &e  the  apoetle  of  the  heathen.  The 
Roman  name  ie  stereotyped  at  the  moment  when  he  converts 
the  Roman  governor." 

A  servant  {KovKot).  Lit.,  hondservofU  or  sla/ve.  Paul  &p- 
plies  the  term  to  himself,  Gal.  i.  10  ;  Philip,  i.  1 ;  Tit.  i.  1 ;  and 
frequently  to  expreaa  the  relation  of  believers  to  Christ.  The 
word  involves  the  ideas  of  belonging  to  a  master,  and  of  service 
as  a  slave.  The  former  is  emphasized  in  Panl's  use  of  the 
term,  since  Christian  service,  in  his  view,  has  no  element  of 
servility,  but  is  the  expression  of  love  and  of  free  choice. 
From  this  stand-point  the  idea  of  service  coheres  vrith  those  of 
freedom  and  of  sonship.  Compare  1  Cor.  vii.  22 ;  Gal.  iv.  7 ; 
Eph.  vi.  6;  Philem.  16. 

On  the  other  hand,  believers  belong  to  Christ  by  purchase 
(1  Cor.  vi.  20 ;  1  Pet.  i.  IS ;  Eph.  i.  7),  and  own  Him  as  ab- 
solute Master.  It  is  a  question  whether  the  word  contains 
any  reference  to  official  position.  In  favor  of  this  it  may  be 
said  that  when  employed  in  connection  with  the  names  of  in- 
dividuals, it  is  always  applied  to  those  who  have  some  special 
work  as  teachers  or  ministers,  and  that  most  of  such  instances 
occur  in  the  opening  salutations  of  the  apostolic  letters.  The 
meaning,  in  any  case,  must  not  be  limUed  to  the  ofBcial  sense. 

Callad  to  be  an  apostle  (xXfp'ov  aTrooroXo?).  As  the  pre- 
vious phrase  describes  geti^rally  Paul's  relation  to  Christ,  tliis 
expression  indicates  it  specifically.  "Called  to  be  an  apostle" 
(A.  v.  and  Rev.),  signifies  called-  to  the  office  of  an  apostle* 
Yet,  as  Dr.  Morison  observes,  there  is  an  ambiguity  in  the 
rendering,  since  he  who  is  simply  called  to  be  an  apostle  uiay 
have  his  apostleship  as  yet  only  in  the  future.  The  Greek  in- 
dicates that  the  writer  was  actually  in  the  apostolate— d  called 
aposlU.     Godet,  "  an  apostle  by  way  of  call." 

Separated  unto  the  gospel  of  God  (o^/jur/ici^if  «(\  cuot- 
yiJuov  Seov).  Characterizing  the  preceding  phrase  more  pre- 
cisely :  definitely  separated  from  the  rest  of  mankind.     Com- 

*  Wjolif  has  depeif,  I.e.,  ydept,  Jowett,  fo&al  an  apottle;  ho  Hodge.  Ob- 
jeotiontble,  beoaase  it  tnlgbt  be  aonttmed  ae  equivaleoi  Ut  named. 


Ch.  L]  THB  EPISTLB  to  the  ROMANa  3 

pare  Oal.  i.  15,  and  *^  choseu  Tessel,"  Acts  ix.  15.  The  verb 
means  *^  to  mark  off  {pari)  from  others  by  a  hounda/ry  {6pos:).^ 
It  is  used  of  the  final  separation  of  the  righteous  from  the 
wicked  (Matt.  xiiL  49 ;  xxv.  32) ;  of  the  separation  of  the  dis- 
ciples from  the  world  (Lake  vi.  22) ;  and  of  the  setting  apart 
of  apostles  to  special  functions  (Acts  xiii.  2).  Gospel  is  an 
exception  to  tlie  almost  invariable  usage,  in  being  without 
the  article  (compare  Apoc.  xiv.  6) ;  since  Paul  considers  the 
Gospel  rather  as  to  its  quality — ^good  news  from  God — than  as 
the  definite  proclamation  of  Jesus  Christ  as  a  Saviour.  The 
defining  elements  are  added  subsequently  in  w.  3,  4.  Not 
the  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  but  the  message  itself  is  meant. 
For  Gospdj  see  on  superscription  of  Matthew. 

2.  Had  promised  afore  {TrpoemrfietKaro).  Only  here  in 
the  New  Testament.  Rev.,  J3e  jmmidaed  afore.  Paul's  Old 
Testament  training  is  manifest.  Naturally,  in  beginning  tlie 
more  precise  description  of  the  new  revelation,  he  refers  first  to 
its  connection  with  ancient  prophecy.  The  verb  hrarf^iSXoiuu 
means  more  than  to  jproclcdm.  It  occurs  frequently,  and  al- 
ways in  the  sense  of  profess  or  promise.  See  Mark  xiv.  11 ; 
Acts  vii.  5 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  10 ;  vi.  21. 

Prophets.  Not  limited  to  the  prophets  proper,  but  includ- 
ing all  who,  in  the  Old  Testament,  have  prophesied  the  Gkwpel 
— Moses,  David,  etc.    Compare  Heb.  i.  1. 

In  the  holy  scriptures  {iv  yfHuf>dk  atfUw;).  Or,  more 
strictly,  in  holy  writi/ngs.  TTie  scriptures  would  require  the 
article.  See  on  John  v.  47 ;  ii.  22.  Here  again  the  absence 
of  the  article  denotes  the  qualitative  character  of  the  phrase — 
books  which  are  holy  as  conveying  God's  revelations.  On  Srfiof; 
holy^  see  on  Acts  xxvi.  10.  This  is  the  only  passage  in  which 
it  is  applied  to  scriptures. 

3.  Concerning  His  son.  Connect  with  promised  afore. 
Christ  is  the  great  personal  object  to  which  the  promise  re- 
ferred. 

4.  Declared  {opurShrro^).  Bev.,  in  margin,  determined. 
The  same  verb  as  in  the  compound  separated  in  ver.  L    Ben- 


4  WORD  3T0DIE8  IN  THK  NEW  TB8TAMBNT.  ICa,  L 

gel  Bays  that  it  expresses  more  tlian  "  separated,"  since  oae  of 
a  number  is  separated,  but  only  one  is  dejmed  or  declared. 
Compare  Acta  x.  42  ;  xvii.  31,  It  means  to  designate  one  for 
aometkmg,  to  nomifuUe,  to  inataie.  There  is  an  antithesis  be- 
tween bom  (ver.  3)  and  declared.  As  respected  Christ's  earthly 
descent,  He  was  born  like  other  men.  As  respected  Ilia  divine 
essence,  Ue  was  declared.  The  idea  is  that  of  Christ's  inatate- 
ment  or  esfailUhment  in  the  rank  and  dignity  of  His  divine 
sonship  with  a  view  to  the  conviction  of  men.  Tliis  was  re- 
quired by  His  previous  homiliation,  and  was  accomplished 
by  His  resurrection,  which  not  only  nianifeMed  or  demon- 
strated what  He  was,  but  wrought  a  real  transformation  in 
His  mode  of  being.  Compare  Acts  ii.  36 ;  "  God  mWe," 
etc 

With  power  (iv  Swdfiei).  Lit.,  in  power.  Construe  with 
was  declared.  He  was  declared  or  instated  mightily ;  in  a 
striking,  triuinp/iant  manner,  through  His  resurrection. 

Spirit  of  holiness.  In  contrast  with  according  to  the  flesh. 
The  reference  is  not  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  is  nowhere  desig- 
nated by  this  phrase,  but  to  the  spirit  of  Christ  as  the  seat  of 
the  divine  nature  belonging  to  His  person.  As  God  is  spirit, 
the  divine  nature  of  Christ  is  spirit,  and  its  characteristic  qual- 
ity is  holiness. 

Resurrection  from  the  dead  (diturroo-cai;  pexpav).  Wrong, 
since  this  would  require  the  preposition  exfrom.  Rev.,  cor- 
rectly, of  the  dead.  Though  this  resurrection  is  here  repre- 
sented as  actually  realized  in  one  individual  only,  the  phrase, 
as  everywhere  in  the  New  Testament,  signifies  the  resurrection 
of  the  dead  absolutely  and  generically — of  all  the  dead,  as 
exemplified,  included,  and  involved  in  the  resurrection  of 
Christ.     See  on  Philip,  iii.  11. 

5.  We  have  received  (i\d0ofiev).  Aorist  tense.  Rev.,  we 
received.  The  categorical  plural,  referring  to  Pan],  and  not  in- 
cluding the  other  apostles,  since  the  succeeding  phrase,  atnong 
ail  ths  nations,  points  to  lumaelf  alone  as  the  apostle  to  the 
Gentiles. 


Ch.  L]  the  EPISTLB  to  the  ROMANS.  5 

Grace  and  apostleship.  Chraoe^  the  general  gift  bestowed 
on  all  believers:  apoMeship^  the  special  manifestation  of 
grace  to  Paul.  The  connecting  kcX  andy  has  the  force  of  and 
in  particular.     Compare  ch.  xv.  15,  16. 

For  obedience  to  the  faith  (ew  {nraxoffv  Trurreto^),  Rev.y 
unto  obedience  of  faith.  Vhto  marks  the  object  of  the  grace 
and  apostleship :  in  order  to  bring  about.  Obedience  of  faith 
is  the  obedience  which  characterizes  and  proceeds  from  faith. 

Nations  {eSvea-ui).  Or  Gentiles.  Not  geographically,  con- 
trasting the  inhabitants  of  the  world,  Jew  and  Gentile,  with 
the  Jews  strictly  so  called,  dwelling  in  Palestine,  but  Gentiles 
distinctively,  for  whom  Paul's  apostleship  was  specially  insti- 
tuted.    See  on  Luke  ii.  32,  and  compare  on  1  Pet.  ii.  9. 

6.  Ye  also.  As  Bomans  among  other  Gentiles  :  not.  cal^eo 
as  I  am  called. 

7.  In  Rome  (&  'P<ofjLy).  The  words  are  omitted  in  a  MS. 
of  the  tenth  or  eleventh  century,  and  in  a  cursive  *  of  the 
eleventh  or  twelfth.  The  words  iv  ^E<f)i<r<p  in  EphesuSj  are 
also  omitted  from  Eph.  i.  1,  by  two  of  the  oldest  MSS.,  on 
which  fact  has  arisen  the  theory  that  the  Ephesian  Epistle 
was  encyclical^  or  addressed  to  a  circle  of  churches,  and  not 
merely  to  the  church  at  Ephesus.  This  theory  has  been  very 
widely  received.  With  this  has  been  combined  the  omission 
of  in  Rome  from  the  Roman  Epistle,  and  the  attempt  has 
been  made  to  show  that  the  Boman  Epistle  was  likewise  en- 
cyclical, and  was  sent  to  Ephesus,  Tliessalonica,  and  possibly  to 
some  other  churches.  Archdeacon  Farrar  advocates  this  view 
in  "The  Expositor,"  first  ser.,  ix.,  211 ;  and  also  in  his  "  Life 
and  Work  of  Paul,"  ii.,  170.  This  theory  is  used  to  defend 
the  view  which  places  the  dozology  of  zvi.  25-27  at  the  end 
of  ch.  ziv.     See  note  there. 

Called  to  be  saints  (/cXip-oZ?  aryioi^).  Or,  saints  by  way  of 
call.  See  on  called  to  be  an  apostle^  ver.  1.  It  is  asserted  that 
they  are  what  they  are  called.    The  term  &yu}i  saints^  is  ap- 

*  Cunrire^  a  MS.  written  in  running  hand.  MSS.  written  in  eapitals  are 
distingaiBhed  aa  undaU. 


WORD  BTUDIE8  IN  THE  NEW  TH8TAMEST.  [Ch.  L 

plied  to  ChrietianB  in  threo  Beneea  in  the  New  Teetameiit. 
1,  Ab  membere  of  a  vieible  and  local  community  (Acts  ix.  32, 
41 ;  xxvi.  10) ;  2.  as  members  of  a  spiritual  community  (1  Cor. 
i.  2;  Col.  iii.  12);  3,  as  individoally  holy  (Epb.  i.  18;  Col.  i. 
12;  Apoc.  xiii.  10). 

8.  First  {■jrpioTov  fiiv).  Not  above  ail,  but  in  the  first  place. 
The  form  of  the  phrase  leads  us  to  expect  a  succeeding  clause 
introduced  by  secondly  or  7iext ;  but  thta  is  omitted  in  the  ful- 
ness and  rapidity  of  Paul's  thought,  which  so  often  makes  hini 
negligent  of  the  balance  of  his  clauses. 

Through  Jesus  Christ.  As  the  medium  of  his  thanksgiv- 
ing:  "As  one  who  is  present  to  liis  grateful  thoughts;  in  so 
far,  namely,  as  that  for  which  he  thanks  God  is  vividly  per- 
ceived and  felt  by  him  to  have  been  brought  about  through 
Christ."  Compare  vii,  25  ;  Col.  iii.  17 ;  Eph.  v.  20.  In  peni- 
tence and  in  thanksgiving  alike,  Jesus  Christ  is  the  one  mediator 
through  whom  we  have  access  to  God. 

For  you  all  {irtpl  ttAvtiov  v[iS>v).  The  preposition  means 
rather  concer^iing,  about. 

Is  proclaimad  {KaTctyyeWercu).  The  different  compoimds 
of  the  simple  verb  arfyekXo)  to  onTuntn^c,  are  interesting.  The 
simple  verb  occurs  only  at  John  xx.  18.*  'AvayyeXKtiv  is  to 
report  with  tiie  additional  idea  of  bringing  tidings  up  to  or 
back  to  the  person  receiving  them.  So  John  v.  15.  The  im- 
potent man  broitght  hack  information  to  the  Jews.  Compare 
Hark  v.  14.  So  Christ  will  send  the  Comforter,  and  He  will 
bring  hack  to  the  disciples  tidings  of  things  to  come.  John 
xvi.  13-15.     See  Acts  xiv.  27  ;  2  Cor.  vii.  7;  1  Pet.  i.  12. 

' Airtvf^tKKsiv  is  to  announce  witii  a  reference  to  the  source 
from  {airo)  which  the  message  cornea.  So  Matt.  ii.  8 ;  Acts 
xii.  14.     Compare  Luke  vii.  22 ;  viii.  34  ;  Acts  v.  22. 

Kara/f^^KKetv  is  to  proclaim  with  authority,  as  commissioned 
to  Bpread  the  tidings  throughout,  down  among  those  that  hear 

■  Where  Tisohendorf,  TregellHS  uid  WealcoU  and  Hort  reul  iryyiWowa 
for  iiirfyi\kovat.  In  John  Ir.  51,  TUoheniitirf  reads  naJ  fiyf"*^"  'or  ""J  ^'*^- 
yuKmr,  and  omits  A^ywtu.     WWcott  sad  Hort,  limplj  Kiyarm, 


Cb.  L]  THB  BPI8TLB  TO  THB  BOMAN&  7 

them,  with  the  included  idea  of  celebt*cUing  or  commending. 
So  here.  Compare  Acts  xvi.  21 ;  xvii.  3.  Thus  in  dvarfyeXXeiv 
the  recipient  of  the  news  is  contemplated ;  in  aTrtvfyeXXeiv  the 
source  /  in  tcarar/yiXXeip  the  relation  of  the  bearer  and  hearer 
of  the  message.  The  first  is  found  mostly  in  John,  Mark,  and 
Acts ;  the  second  in  the  Synoptists  and  Acts ;  the  third  only 
in  the  Acts  and  Paul. 

Throughout  the  whole  world.  Hyperbolical,  but  accord- 
ing with  the  position  of  the  metropolitan  church.  Compare 
1  Thess.  L  8. 

9.  I  serve  (Karpewo).  See  on  Luke  i.  74.  The  word  was 
used  in  a  special  sense  to  denote  the  service  rendered  to  Jehovah 
by  the  Israelites  as  His  peculiar  people.  See  Bom.  ix.  4 ;  Acts 
xxvi  7.  Compare  Heb.  ix.  1,  6.  As  in  his  Philippian  letter, 
Paul  here  appropriates  the  Jewish  word  for  the  spiritual  Chris- 
tian service.     See  on  Philip,  iii.  3. 

10.  1  might  have  a  prosperous  journey  (evo&ASi/o-o/uu). 
Rev.,  /  may  be  prospered.  The  A.  V.  brings  out  the  etymo- 
logical force  of  the  word.     See  on  3  John  2. 


11.  Some  spiritual  gift  (r^  ')(apuTiid).  Note  the  modesty 
in  9cm€.  XdpuTfJM  is  a  gift  of  grace  (;^api9),  a  f(W0T  received 
without  merit  on  the  recipient's  part.  Paul  uses  it  both  in  this 
ordinary  sense  (ch.  v.  15, 16 ;  vi.  23),  and  in  a  special,  technic- 
al sense,  denoting  extraordinary  powers  bestowed  upon  indi- 
viduals by  the  Holy  Spirit,  such  as  gifts  of  healing,  speaking 
with  tongues,  prophecy,  etc.  See  Bom.  xii.  6 ;  1  Cor.  i.  7 ;  xii. 
4,  31 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  10.  In  1  Tim.  iv.  14 ;  2  Tim.  i.  6,  it  is  used 
of  the  sum  of  the  powers  requisite  for  the  discharge  of  the 
o£Sce  of  an  evangelist 

To  the  end  ye  may  be  established  {m  to  imfptxSrjvcu 
vfAo^).  Not  that  I  may  establish  you.  The  modest  use  of  the 
passive  leaves  out  of  view  Paul's  personal  part.  For  established, 
see  on  Luke  xxii.  32 ;  1  Pet.  v.  10.  The  word  shows  that  he 
had  in  view  their  christian  character  no  less  than  their  instruct- 
ion in  doctrine. 


8  WORD  8TUDIE8  IS  THE  NEW  TE8TAMKNT.  [Cii.  1. 

12.  That  is  {tovto  Si  i<mv).  Tlie  A.  V.  and  Rev.  omit  hi 
however,  thus  losing  an  important  eliade  of  meaning.  TTiat  in 
is  not  merely  an  explanatory  repetition  of  the  preceding  pliraBC, 
but  modifies  the  idea  contained  in  it.  It  is  a  modest  and  deli- 
cate explanation,  by  wliicli  Paul  guards  himself  against  the 
possible  appearance  of  underestimating  the  chrislinn  stand- 
point of  hie  readers,  to  whom  he  was  still,  personally,  a  stranger. 
Ilence  he  would  say :  "  I  desire  to  impart  Bome  spiritual  gift 
that  you  may  be  strengthened ;  not  that  I  would  imply  a  re- 
proach of  weakness  or  instability ;  but  that  I  desire  for  you  the 
strengthening  of  which  I  stand  in  need  along  with  yon,  and 
which  I  hope  may  be  wrought  in  us  both  by  our  personal  in- 
tercourse and  our  mutual  faith." 

13.  I  would  not  have  you  ignorant.  An  emphatic  ex- 
pression calling  special  attention  to  what  follows.  Compare 
1  Cor.  X.  1 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  13. 

Have  some  fruit  {tivo.  Kaprjrov  trySi).  For  the  phrase,  com- 
pare ch.  vi.  22.  A  metaphorical  statement  of  what  is  stated  liter- 
ally in  ver.  11,  Not  equivalent  to  bear  fruU,  but  to  gather  as 
a  harvest.  Compare  John  iv.  36;  Philip,  i,  23;  Col.  i.  6. 
FruU  is  a  favorite  metaphor  with  Paul.  He  uees  it  in  both  a 
good  and  a  bad  sense.     See  Kom.  vii.  4,  5  ;  vi.  22 ;  Cial.  v.  22. 

14.  Debtor  (ot^iXeri]?).  All  men,  without  distinction  of 
nation  or  culture,  are  Paul's  creditors,  "  He  owes  them  his  life, 
bis  person,  in  virtue  of  the  grace  bestowed  upon  him,  and  of 
the  ofQce  which  lie  has  received  "  (Godet). 

Greeks — Barbarians.  Gentiles  without  distinction.  Paul 
takes  the  conventional  Greek  division  of  all  mankind  into 
Greeks  and  non-Greeks.  See  on  Acts  vi,  1,  The  question 
whether  he  includes  the  Romans  among  the  Greeks  or  the 
Barbarians,  is  irrelevant. 

15.  To  you  also  that  are  in  Rome.  To  you  refers  to 
the  christian  Church,  not  to  the  population  generally.  In 
every  verse,  from  6  to  13,  u/Mtf  ijou  refers  to  the  Church. 

16.  For  iycip).  Marking  the  transition  from  the  introduetioh 
to  the  treatise.     "  I  am  ready  to  preach  at  Rome,  for,  though 


Cb.  LI  THB  EPISTLB  T9  THE  ROMAN&  ST 

I  might  seem  to  be  deterred  by  the  contempt  in  which  the 
Goepel  is  held,  and  by  the  prospect  of  my  own  humiliation  as 
its  preacher,  I  am  not  ashamed  of  it."  The  transition  occupies 
vv.  16,  17. 

The  Gospel.    Omit  of  Christ. 

Power  (Sinwifo?).  Not  merely  a  powerful  means  in  God's 
hands,  but  in  itself  a  divine  energy. 

First.  Not  jmncipalh/j  nor  in  j>reference  to  the  Greek ; 
bnt  first  in  paint  of  time.  Compare  John  iv.  22 ;  Bom.  iii.  1 ; 
ix.  1 ;  Matt.  xv.  24. 

17.  For  therein  is  the  righteousness  of  God  revealed 
{Bucauxrvvff  yhp  Seat)  hf  aur^  cnroKaXuTrrerai).  Bev.,  more  cor- 
rectly, therein  is  revealed  a  righteoueneea  of  Ood.  The  absence 
of  the  article  denotes  that  a  peculiar  kind  of  righteousness  is 
meant  This  statement  contains  the  subject  of  the  epistle : 
Highteauenese  is  by  faith.  The  subject  is  not  stated  formally 
nor  independently,  but  as  a  proof  that  the  Gospel  is  a  power, 
etc. 

This  word  Sucaiotnhni  righteoitsness^  and  its  kindred  words 
hUaut^  riffhieotUj  and  Bixaiim  to  make  righteoitSy  play  so  im- 
portant a  part  in  this  epistle  that  it  is  desirable  to  fix  their 
meaning  as  accurately  as  possible. 

Classical  usage.  In  the  Greek  classics  there  appears  an 
eternal,  divine,  unwritten  principle  of  right,  dwelling  in  the 
human  consciousness,  shaping  both  the  physical  and  the  moral 
ordering  of  the  world,  and  personified  as  Themis  (6^/09). 
This  word  is  used  as  a  common  noun  in  the  phrase  Mfii^  iarl 
it  is  right  (fundamentally  and  eternally),  like  the  Latin  fas  est. 
Thus  Homer,  of  Penelope  mourning  for  Ulysses,  ^fiis;  iarl 
jmHwcAf;  it  is  the  sacred  obligation  of  the  wife  (founded  in  her 
natural  relation  to  her  husband,  ordained  of  heaven)  to  mourn 
("  Odyssey,"  xiv.,  130).  So  Antigone  appeals  to  the  unwritten 
law  against  the  barbarity  of  refusing  burial  to  her  brother. 

"  Nor  did  I  deem  thj  edicts  strong  enongh, 
That  thoo,  a  mortal  man,  shoaldst  overpaaa 
The  unwritten  laws  of  God  that  know  not  change." 

Sophocles,  ''  Antigone,*'  45d-455. 


10  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Oa.  L 

See,  also,  " Od^'saey,"  xvi.,  91;  Arietophanee,  "Clouds,"  14U  ; 
"  Antigone,"  880. 

Thie  divine  ordering  requireB  tliat  men  ehoidd  be  shown  or 
pointed  to  tliat  which  is  according  to  it — a  definite  circle  of 
datieB  and  obligations  wliicii  conBtitute  ri^/it  {Buerj).*  ThuB 
what  IB  Blxaio^  righteous,  is  properly  the  expression  of  the 
eternal  Thentis.  While  ZU^  and  -de/it;  are  not  to  be  distin- 
guished  as  human  and  divine,  Si'jw;  baa  a  more  distinctively 
human,  personal  character,  and  comes  into  sharper  definition. 
It  introduces  the  distinction  between  absolute  right  and  power. 
It  imposes  the  recognition  of  a  moral  principle  over  against  an 
absolutely  constraining  natural  force.  The  conception  of  Si'wj 
is  strongly  moral. f  AUtuot  is  right ;  Biicawtrvvi}  is  j-ightiicss 
as  characterizing  the  entire  being  of  man. 

There  is  a  religious  background  to  the  pagan  conception. 
In  the  Homeric  poems  morality  stands  in  a  relation,  loose  and 
undeveloped  indeed,  but  none  the  less  real,  to  religion.  This 
appears  in  the  use  of  the  oath  in  compacts ;  in  the  fear  of  the 
wrath  of  heaven  for  omission  of  sacrifices;  in  regarding  refusal 
of  hospitality  as  an  offence  against  Zeus,  tbe  patron  of  stran- 
gers and  suppliants.  Certain  tribes  which  are  fierce  and  un- 
civilized are  nevertheless  described  as  BiKaun  righteous.  "  The 
characteristic  stand-point  of  the  Homeric  ethics  is  that  the 
Bpheres  of  law,  of  morals,  and  of  religion  are  by  no  means 
Beparate,  but  lie  side  by  aide  in  undeveloped  unity"  (Nagelsbach). 

In  later  Qi-cek  literature  this  conception  advances,  in  some 
instances,  far  toward  the  christian  ideal ;  as  in  the  fourth  book 
of  Plato's  "  Laws,"  where  he  asserts  that  God  holds  in  His 
Land  the  beginning,  middle,  and  end  of  all  things;  that  justice 
always  follows  Him,  and  punishes  those  who  fall  short  of  His 
laws.  Those  who  would  be  dear  to  God  must  be  like  Him. 
Without  holiness  no  man  is  accepted  of  God. 

*  Aim?  uiil  ttt  kindred  words  were  derived  by  Arialotle  from  tf^a  tuvfold, 
tite  fuudameDUl  ida»  beini;  tbat  of  >n  even  relstioo  between  parU.  Modern 
philologiBtB,  bowBTer,  assign  tbe  words  to  the  root  Sue,  whioli  tppevs  in 
ItiiuMfu  Ithoie  at  jioini  out. 

f  This,  however.  U  dispnted  bj  those  who  oliim  tbaC  the  e&rlier  Benw  of 
ttitn  UnutOTnor  utagt.     See  Schmidt,  "  Sjnonymilc,"  18,  4. 


Cb.  L]  the  EPlJdTLB  TO  THB  BO]fAN&  11 

Xevertbelessy  however  clearly  the  religious  background  and 
fianction  of  morality  may  be  recognized,  it  is  apparent  that  the 
basifi  of  right  is  foand,  very  largely,  in  establiBhed  social  usage. 
The  word  ethics  points  first  to  what  is  established  by  custom. 
While  with  Mr.  Orote  we  must  admit  the  peculiar  emphasis 
on  the  individual  in  the  Homeric  poems,  we  cannot  help 
observing  a  certain  influence  of  social  sentiment  on  morals. 
While  there  are  cases  like  the  suitors,  Paris  and  Helen,  where 
public  opinion  imposes  no  moral  check,  there  are  others  where 
the  force  of  public  opinion  is  clearly  visible,  such  as  Penelope 
and  Nausicaa.  The  Homeric  view  of  homicide  reveals  no  re- 
lation between  moral  sentiment  and  divine  enactment  Mur- 
der is  a  breach  of  social  law,  a  private  and  civil  wrong,  entail- 
ing no  loss  of  character.  Its  penalty  is  a  satisfaction  to  the 
feelings  of  friends,  or  a  compensation  for  lost  services. 

Later,  we  find  this  social  aspect  of  morality  even  more 
strongly  emphasized.  ^^The  city  becomes  the  central  and 
paramount  source  of  obligation.  The  great,  impersonal  au- 
thority called  ^  the  Laws '  stands  out  separately,  both  as  guide 
and  sanction,  distinct  from  religious  duty  or  private  sympathy  " 
(Orote).  Socrates  is  chained  with  impiety  because  he  does 
not  believe  in  the  gods  of  the  state,  and  Socrates  himself 
agrees  that  that  man  does  right  who  obeys  what  the  citizens 
have  agreed  should  be  done,  and  who  refrains  from  what  they 
forbid.* 

The  social  basis  of  righteousness  also  appears  in  the  frequent 
contrast  between  Sucff  and  /31a,  right  and  force,  A  violation  of 
right  is  that  which  forces  its  way  over  the  social  sanction. 
The  social  conception  of  BUom^  is  not  lost,  even  when  the  idea 
is  so  apprehended  as  to  border  on  the  christian  love  of  one's 
neighbor.  There  is  a  wrong  toward  the  gods,  but  every  wrong 
is  not  in  itself  such.  The  inner,  personal  relation  to  deity,  the 
absolute  and  constraining  appeal  of  divine  character  and  law 
to  conscience,  the  view  of  duty  as  one's  right,  and  of  personal 
right  as  something  to  be  surrendered  to  the  paramount  claim 
of  love — all  these  elements   which  distinguish  the  christian 

•XenophoDf  ''Memorabilia,^  i.  It  1 ;  !▼•»  4,  8. 


12  WORD  STDDIB8  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  (Cb.  L 

conception  o£  righteousnesB — are  tiius  in  sharp  contrast  with 
a  righteouaneaB  dictated  by  social  claims  which  limit  the  in- 
dividual desire  or  preference,  but  whioli  leave  untouched  the 
tenacity  of  pereonal  right,  and  place  obligation  behind  legiti- 
macy.* 

It  ie  desirable  that  the  classical  usage  of  these  terms  should 
be  understood,  in  order  to  throw  into  sharper  relief  the  Bibli- 
cal usage,  according  to  which  God  is  the  absolute  and  final 
standard  of  right,  and  every  wrong  is  a  sin  against  God  (Ph.  li. 
4).  Each  man  stands  in  direct  and  primary  relation  to  the 
holy  God  as  lie  is  by  the  law  of  Ilia  own  nature.  Righteous- 
ness is  union  with  God  in  character.  To  the  Greek  mind  of 
the  legendary  ago  such  a  conception  is  both  strange  and  essen- 
tially impossible,  since  the  Greek  divinity  is  only  the  Greek 
man  exa^erated  in  his  virtues  and  vices  alike.  According  to 
the  christian  ideal,  righteousness  is  character,  and  tiio  norm  of 
character  is  likeness  to  God.  This  idea  includes  all  the  social 
aspects  of  right.  Love  and  duty  toward  God  involve  love  and 
duty  to  the  neighbor. 

Here  must  be  noted  a  peculiar  usage  of  SUovk  righteoia, 
and  itKMoirwTt  righteousne-^s,  in  the  Septuagiut.  They  are  at 
times  interchanged  with  eKeijftotrvv^  mercy,  and  eXeov  kind- 
iiesa.  The  Hebrew  che«ed  kindness,  though  usually  rendered 
by  eXeov,  ia  nine  times  translated  by  htKotoavvri  riglUeouaness, 
and  once  by  hUaio^  ri^hieous.  The  Hebrew  tsedakuh,  usually 
rendered  by  ZtKCuotrwrf,  is  nine  times  translated  by  i\^/io<xvinf 
vtercy,  and  three  times  by  iKetK  kindness.  Compare  the 
Ileb.  and  Sept.  at  Dent.  vi.  25 ;  xxiv.  13  (15) ;  Gen.  xix.  19 ; 
xxiv.  27.  This  usage  throws  light  on  the  reading  ZtKtuoirvvt^v, 
Rev.,  Tiglcteousneas  {kindness  f),  instead  of  ekdjftoavvTjv  mercy, 
A.  v.,  alms.  Matt.  vi.  1.  Mr.  Hatch  ("'Essays  in  Biblical 
Greek  ")  says  that  the  meaning  kindness  is  so  clear  in  this 
passage  that  scribes,  who  were  unaware  of  its  existence,  altered 
the  text.     He  also  thinks  that  this  meaning  gives  a  better 

'  On  the  Greek  conoeptlDli  of  rlghtRtmanesa,  nee  Nagelslittch,  "  HouieruicliK 
Theologle,"  1 88-207  l  Sohmidt.  "Synonyinlk  der  GrLBcliinclien  Sprache, ' '  [. , 
18  ;  Gl«il9tone,  "  Homer  Mid  the  Homeric  Age,"  il.,  433  Bqq.  ;  Orole,  "  Qistorj 
of  Greece."  L,  oh.  a. 


Cm  L]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMANS.  13 

senae  than  any  other  to  Matt.  i.  19 :  ^^  Joseph,  being  a  kindly 
{Sduuo^,  A.  Y.yjtist)  man."* 

1.  In  the  New  Testament  SUaio^  is  used  both  of  Gkxl  and  of 
Christ.  Of  Qodf  1  John  i.  9 ;  John  xvii.  25 ;  Apoc.  xvi.  5 ; 
Rom.  iiL  26.  Of  Christ,  1  John  ii.  1 ;  iii.  7 ;  Acts  iii.  14 ; 
viL  52 ;  xxii.  14.  In  these  passages  the  word  characterizes 
God  and  Christ  either  in  their  essential  qaalitj  or  in  their  ac- 
tion ;  either  as  righteous  according  to  the  eternal  norm  of  di- 
vine holiness  (John  xviL  25  ;  1  John  iii.  7 ;  Rom.  iii.  26),  or  as 
holiness  passes  into  righteous  dealing  with  men  (1  John  L  9). 

2.  AUaio^  is  used  of  men,  denoting  their  normal  relation  to 
the  will  and  judgment  of  Gh>d.  Hence  it  means  virtuouSj  tip- 
rights  pure  in  life,  correct  in  thinking  and  feeling.  It  stands 
opposed  to  atfoiUa  lawleeeness /  afjtofyria  sin;  cueaSapa-la  im- 
purity,  a  contrast  wanting  in  classical  usage,  where  the  concep- 
tion of  sin  is  vague.  See  Rom.  yi.  13,  16,  18,  20 ;  yiii.  10 ;  2 
Cor.  VI.  7,  14 ;  Eph.  v.  9 ;  vi.  14 ;  Philip,  i.  11 ;  Jas.  iiL  18. 

Where  Suuuoavvff  righteousness,  is  joined  with  00-407179  hM- 
ness  (Luke  i.  75 ;  Eph.  iv.  24),  it  denotes  right  conduct  toward 
men,  as  holiness  denotes  piety  toward  Gk)d.  It  appears  in  the 
wider  sense  of  answering  to  the  denumds  of  God  in  generaly 
Matt.  xiiL  17 ;  x.  41 ;  xxiii.  29 ;  Acts  x.  22,  35 ;  and  in  the 
narrower  sense  of  perfectly  answering  the  divine  demands, 
guiltless.  So  of  Christ,  Acts  iii.  14 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  18 ;  1  John 
11.  1. 

3.  It  is  found  in  the  classical  sense  of  it  is  right,  Philip,  i.  7, 
or  that  which  is  right.  Col.  iv.  1.  This,  however,  is  included 
within  the  Christian  conception. 

Aucatoawrf  righteousness,  is  therefore  that  which  fulfils  the 
claims  of  Bltttf  right.     ^^  It  is  the  state  commanded  bj  God  and 

*  Dr.  BnBhneU,  though  evidentlj  not  aware  of  this  usage*  has  seized  the 
connection  between  the  ideas  of  kindness  and  righteousness.  **  Righteous- 
ness, translated  into  a  word  of  the  affections,  is  love ;  and  love,  translated 
baek  into  a  word  of  the  conscience,  is  righteousness.  We  associate  a  more 
fixed  exactness,  it  maj  be,  and  a  stronger  thunder  of  majestj,  but  there  is  no 
repugnance  between  it  and  the  rerj  love  itself  of  Christ  .  .  .  Nowhere 
do  we  feel  such  a  sense  of  the  righteousness  of  God  as  we  do  in  the  dying 
scene  of  Christ— * Certainlj  this  was  a  righteous  man' — and  wo  only  feel  the 
more  powerfully  that  Ood  is  a  forgiving  God  "  (**  Vicarious  Sacrifice  '*). 


11  WORD  STDDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TKBTAMENT.  [Cn.  I. 

Btanding  the  test  of  His  jndgnient ;  the  character  and  acts  of  a 
man  approved  of  Ilira,  in  virtne  of  wliich  tlie  man  correepoiiils 
with  Him  and  Hie  will  as  llis  ideal  and  standard"  (Crciner). 

The  medium  of  this  righteousness  isj'aif/t.  Faith  ia  said  to 
he  counted  or  reckoned  ioT  righteousness;  2.£.,  righteousness  is 
ascribed  to  it  or  recognized  in  it.  Rom.  iv.  3,  6,  9,  22;  Gal. 
ill.  6;  Jaa.  ii.  23. 

In  this  verse  the  righteonsness  revealed  in  the  Gospel  is  de- 
scribed as  a  righteonsness  of  God.  This  does  not  mean  right- 
eousness as  an  attribute  of  Ood,  as  in  ch.  iii.  5;  hut  righteous' 
ncHS  as  bestowed  on  man  hy  God.  The  state  of  the  justified 
man  is  due  to  God,  The  rigiiteousness  which  becomes  his  is 
that  which  God  declares  to  be  righteousness  and  ascribes  to 
liim.  HijrhteousneES  thus  expresaea  the  relation  of  beinff  rt^ht 
into  which  God  puts  this  inan  who  believes.  See  further,  on 
justified,  ch.  ii.  13. 

ts  revealed  {anroKaKvTrTerai,).  Emphasizing  the  peculiar 
sense  in  whicii  "righteousness"  is  used  here.  Righteousness 
as  an  attriliute  of  God  was  revealed  before  the  Gospel.  Rigiit- 
eousness ill  this  ecni^it  is  a  matter  of  special  revelation  througli 
the  Gospel.  The  present  tense  describes  the  Gospel  in  its  con- 
tinuous proclamation :  is  heing  revealed. 

From  faith  to  faith  (eV  irlirrewi  ek  irlirrw).  Rev.,  by  faith 
unto  faith.  According  to  the  A.  V.  the  idea  is  that  of  pro- 
gress in  faith  itself;  either  from  Old  to  Kew  Testament  faith, 
or,  in  the  individual,  from  a  lower  to  a  higher  degree  of  faith ; 
and  this  idea,  I  think,  must  be  held  here,  although  it  is  true  that 
it  is  introduced  secondarily,  since  Paul  is  dealing  principally 
with  the  truth  tiiat  righteousness  is  by  faith.  Wo  may  rightly 
say  that  the  revealed  righteousness  of  God  is  unto  failh,  in  the 
sense  of  with  a  view  to  produce  faith  ;  but  we  may  also  say 
that  failh  is  a  progressive  principle;  that  the  aim  of  God's  just- 
ifying righteousness  is  life,  and  that  the  just  lives  by  his  faith 
(Gal,  ii.  20),  and  enters  into  "more  abundant"  life  with  the 
development  of  his  faith.  Compare  2  Cor.  ii.  16  ;  iii.  18  ;  iv. 
17;  Rom.  vi.  IS;  and  the  phrase,  justification  of  Ufe,  Rom. 
7.  18. 


Oh.  L]  THB  BPISTLB  TO  THB  ROHAKS.  15 

Ths  beoinning  of  the  discussion. 

18.  For.  All  men  reqaire  this  mode  of  justification,  for  all 
men  are  sinners,  and  therefore  exposed  to  God's  wrath. 

The  wrath  of  God  (o/:)7^  ©eou).  "Not punishmerUj  but  tlt^ 
personal  emotion.     See  on  John  iii.  36. 

Ungodliness  and  unrighteousness  {aaifieiav  icaX  aZuciav). 
Irreligionsness  and  immorality.  See  on  godlineea^  2  Pet  1,  3 ; 
also  2  Pet.  ii.  13. 

Hold  {Karexpyrmv),  'if ot  jpoeeese :  compare  ver.  21.  Bev., 
correctly,  hold  down;  i.e.,  hinder  or  repress.  Compare  2 
Tiiess.  ii.  6,  7 ;  Luke  iv.  42. 

The  truth.  Divine  tmth  generally,  as  apparent  in  all  God's 
self-revelations. 

19.  That  which  may  be  known  (to  yvf^arov).  So  A.  Y. 
and  Rev.,  as  equivalent  to  lJh(U  which  is  knowable.  Bat  that 
which  is  knowable  was  not  revealed  to  the  heathen.  If  it  was, 
what  need  of  a  revelation  ?  Better,  tJidt  which  is  knoivn,  the 
universal  sense  in  the  New  Testament,  signifying  the  universal 
objective  knowledge  of  God  as  the  Creator,  which  is,  more  or 
less,  in  all  men. 

In  them.  In  their  heart  and  conscience.  The  emphasis 
should  be  on  in.  Thus  the  apparent  tautology — what  is  known 
is  manifest — disappears. 

20.  The  invisible  things  of  Him.  The  attributes  which 
constitute  Ghxl's  nature,  afterward  defined  as  ^'  His  eternal 
power  and  divinity." 

From  the  creation  (oiro).     From  the  time  of.     Bev.,  since. 

Are  clearly  seen  {KiiBoparai).  We  have  here  an  oxymoronj 
literally  a  pointedly  foolish  saying  ;  a  saying  which  is  impres- 
sive or  witty  through  sheer  contradiction  or  paradox.  Invisible 
things  are  clearly  visiMe.  See  on  Acts  v.  41.  Illustrations  are 
sometimes  furnished  by  single  words,  as  y\utcv7r^/cpo<:  bitter- 


WORD  STUDIES    IN  THE   SEW  TESTAMENT.  [L'u.  L 

sioeet  I    Spturv&eiktxt  a  hold   coward.      In    English    coiupaiL 
Shakespeare : 

"  Dore-feathered  raren,  fiend  angelioal  ; 
Be&utifut  tjnnt,  woiaih-»T«iiiiig  lamb." 

Spenser : 

"  Glad  of  aaoh  luck,  ib«  luckleas  luDk;  maid." 

Godhead  {^untj'i).  Rev.,  better,  divinity.  Godhead  ex- 
presses deiiy  (3edT)js).  ffetdnn  is  godhood,  not  godhead.  It  eig- 
nifies  the  siiin-total  of  the  divine  attributes. 

So  that  they  are  {tit  to  etvai).  Tlie  A.  V.  expresses  result; 
but  the  sense  is  ratlier  jiurpose.  The  revelation  of  God's 
power  and  divinity  is  given,  so  that,  if,  after  being  enlightened, 
they  fall  into  sin,  they  may  be  without  defence. 

Without  excuse  (anaTroXorijTow),  See  on  answer,  1  Pet. 
iii.  15.     Only  here  and  ch.  ii.  1. 

21.  Knowing — ^glorifiad  not.  "I  think  it  may  be  proved 
from  facts  ttiat  any  given  people,  down  to  the  lowest  savages, 
has  at  any  period  of  its  life  known  far  more  than  it  has  done : 
known  quite  enougli  to  bare  enabled  it  to  have  got  on  com- 
fortably, tiiriven  and  developed,  if  it  had  only  done  what  no 
man  does,  all  that  it  knew  it  ought  to  do  and  could  do" 
(Charles  Kingsley,  "The  Roman  and  the  Teuton"). 

Became  vain  (iitaTOMt^vav).  Yatn  things  (jiAToia)  was 
the  Jews'  nauie  for  idols.  Compare  Acts  iv,  15,  Their  ideas 
and  conceptions  of  God  had  no  intrinsic  value  corresponding 
with  the  truth.  "  The  understanding  was  reduced  to  work  ia 
vacuo.     It  rendered  itself  in  a  wa.y futile"  (Godet). 

Imaginations  (8(aXo7«r^ot?).  Itev.,  better,  reasonings.  See 
on  Matt.  XV.  1!) ;  Mark  vii.  21 ;  Jas.  ii.  4. 

Foolish  (airvvero?).  See  on  trvptrof  prudent.  Matt.  xi.  67, 
and  the  kindred  word  avveatt  undt-rsla7idi»j,  M^rk  xii.  33 ; 
Luke  ii.  47.  They  did  not  combine  the  facta  which  were  pat- 
ent to  their  observation. 

Heart  (KapSia).  The  heart  ia,  first,  the  physical  organ,  the 
centre  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood.     Hence,  tAe  seat  ami 


I 


CB.L]  THB  BPISTLB  TO  THB  ROMANa  17 

centre  of  phyeical  life.  In  the  former  sense  it  does  not  occar 
in  the  New  Testament.  As  denoting  tlie  vigor  and  sense  of 
physical  life,  see  Acts.  xiv.  17 ;  Jas.  v.  5 ;  Luke  xxi.  34.  It  is 
nsed  fifty-two  times  by  Panl. 

Never  used  like  "^yfl  ^^^h  ^  denote  the  individual  subject 
of  personal  life,  so  tliat  it  can  be  exchanged  with  the  personal 
pronoun  (Acts  ii.  43;  iii.  23;  Bom.  xiii.  1);  nor  like  Trvev/ia 
spiritj  to  denote  the  divinely-given  principle  of  life. 

It  is  the  central  seat  and  organ  of  the  personal  life  {'^'vxi) 
of  mto  regarded  in  and  by  himself.  Hence  it  is  commonly 
accompanied  with  the  possessive  pronouns,  my,  hU^  thy^  etc. 

Like  our  heart  it  denotes  the  seat  of  feeling  as  contrasted 
with  intelligence.  2  Cor.  ii.  4 ;  Rom.  ix.  2 ;  x.  1. ;  2  Cor.  vi. 
11 ;  Philip,  i.  7.  But  it  is  not  limited  to  this.  It  is  also  the  seat 
of  mental  action,  feeling,  thinking,  willing.     It  is  used — 

1.  Of  ifUelligencej  Bom.  i.  21 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  15 ;  iv.  6 ;  Eph. 
il8. 

2.  Of  moral  choice^  1  Cor.  vii.  37 ;  2  Cor.  ix.  7. 

3.  As  giving  impulse  a/nd  character  to  action^  Bom.  vi.  17; 
Eph.  vi.  5;  Col.  iii.  22 ;  1  Tim.  i.  5;  2  Tim.  ii.  22.  The  work 
of  the  law  is  written  on  the  heart.  Bom.  ii.  15.  The  Corinth- 
ian Church  is  inscribed  as  Christ's  epistle  on  hearts  of  flesh, 
2  Cor.  ii.  23. 

4.  Specially,  it  is  M^  seat  of  the  divine  Spiritj  Gal.  iv.  6 ; 
Bom.  V.  5  ;  2  Cor.  i.  22.  It  is  the  sphere  of  His  various  oper- 
ations, directing,  comforting,  establishing,  etc,  Philip,  iv.  7 ; 
Col.  iii.  15 ;  1  Thess.  iii.  13 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  17 ;  iii.  5.  It  is  the 
seat  of  faith,  and  the  organ  of  spiritual  praise,  Bom.  x.  9 ; 
Eph.  V.  19  ;  Col.  iii.  16. 

It  is  equivalent  to  the  inner  m^m,  Eph.  iii.  16,  17.  Its 
characteristic  is  ieing  hidden.  Bom.  ii.  28,  29;  viii.  27;  1 
Cor.  iv.  5 ;  xiv.  25. 

It  is  contrasted  with  the  face,  1  Thess.  ii.  17  ;  2  Cor.  v. 
12 ;  and  with  the  mouth,  Bom.  x.  8.* 

*  AU  stadento  of  the  psjohologioal  terms  used  bj  Paal  are  under  verj  great 

obligationt  to  the  Bev.  William  P.  Dickson.  D.D.,  Professor  of  Diyinitj  in  the 

XJnirersitj  of  Olasgow.     In  his  Baird  Lecture  for  1883,  on  **  Paurs  Use  of  the 

Terms  Flesh  and  Spirit,**  he  has  presented  in  a  most  lucid  manner  the  valuable 

Vol.  ni— 2 


18  WORD  STUDIES  IH   THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  L 

22.  Professing  (tftdtrKovra).  The  verb  is  used  of  unfounded 
aeaertioii,  Aels  xxiv,  9  ;  xxv,  19  ;  Apoc.  ii.  2. 

WisH)  they  became  fools.  Another  oxymoron;  eee  on 
ver.  20.  Compare  Horace,  inmnien^  sapieniia  raving  wia- 
dam.  Plato  uses  the  phrase  ftdraiov  ho^aaoi^lav  vaiii-gloryin<i 
ofvnadom  {"  Sophist,"  231). 

23.  Image  made  like  {ofioioifuiTi  eUoviK).  Rev.,  more  lit- 
erally, the  likeness  of  an  image.  See  on  Apoc.  xiii,  14.  Equiv- 
alent to  wk(U  was  sluiped  like  an  image.  Likeriees  indic;ates 
the  conformity  with  the  object  of  comparison  iu  appearance; 
image,  the  type  in  the  artist's  mind ;  the  typical  human  form. 
See,  further,  on  Philip,  ii.  7. 

Birds  and  beasts  and  creeping  things.  Deities  of 
human  form  prevailed  in  Greece;  those  of  the  bestial  form  in 
Egypt;  and  both  methods  of  worship  were  practised  in  Rome. 
See  on  Acta  vii.  il.  Sei-pent- worship  was  common  in  Chal- 
■  daea,  and  also  in  Egypt.  The  asp  was  sacred  throughout  the 
latter  country.  The  worship  of  Isis  was  domesticated  at 
Rome,  and  Juvenal  relates  how  the  priests  of  Isia  contrived 
that  the  silver  images  of  serpents  kept  in  her  temple  should 
move  their  lieada  to  a  suppliant  ("  Satire  "  vi.,  537).  Many  of 
the  subjects  of  paintings  in  the  tombs  of  the  kings  at  Thebes 
flhow  the  importance  which  the  serpent  was  thought  to  enjoy 
in  the  future  state.*  Dollinger  says  that  the  vestal  virgins 
were  intrusted  with  the  attendance  upon  a  holy  serpent,  and 
were  charged  with  supplying  his  table  with  meats  on  festival 
days. 

24.  Gave  them  up  {vapehtnicev).  Handed  them  over  to  the 
power  of  sin.  See  on  Matt.  iv.  12 ;  xi,  27 ;  xxvi.  2 ;  Mark  iv. 
29;  Luke  i.  2;  1  Pet.  ii.  23. 

resnlti  of  Wendl'a  itudies  in  this  field,  in  addition  to  Us  own  InTsstigatJong. 

I  do  not  know  of  any  book  in  which  the  student  wilt  And  the  resnlte  of  the 
later  German  theories  of  PaQl'B  psjcbolog;  so  olv&rl;  and  compactly  set  forth 
and  so  aoutelj  analjied.  I  liave  drawn  freely  from  hia  work  in  all  my  notes 
on  this  sobjeet. 

*  On  serpent- worship  In  Egypt,  see  Wilkinson,  "Anolent  EgyptianB,"  eeo- 
ond  seriea,  vol.  ii. 


ft 


Cb.  L]  THB  EPISTLB  to  THB  ROMAK&  19 

25.  Who  changed  {olrufe^  fjben^XXa^av).  'Rey.y/br  that  they 
exchanged.  The  double  relative  specifies  the  class  to  which 
they  belonged,  and  thereby  includes  the  reason  for  their  pun- 
ishment. He  gave  them  up  as  being  those  who,  etc.  MeniX- 
Xa{av  exchanged  (so  Bev.),  is  stronger  than  the  simple  verb  in 
ver.  23.  Godet  renders  travestied.  Compare  the  same  word 
in  ver.  26. 

Truth  of  God.    Equivalent  to  the  true  God. 

Into  a  lie  {iv  t&  ^^^evSei).  Better,  as  Bev.,  eoochanged^  etc., 
Jhr  a  lie.  lit.,  ^  lie ;  a  general  abstract  expression  for  the 
whole  body  of  false  gods.  Bengel  remarks,  ^'the  price  of 
mytholc^.*' 

Worshipped  and  served  {ice/Sda-Sffaav  xal  ikdrpiverap). 
The  former  of  worship  generally;  the  latter  of  worship 
through  special  rites  or  sacrifices.  On  the  latter  verb,  see  on 
Apoc.  xziL  3. 

IMore  than  the  Creator  (irapd).  The  preposition  indicates 
jHUsing  hy  the  Creator  altogether ;  not  merely  giving  prefer- 
ence to  the  creature.  Hence  Bev.,  rather  than.  Compare 
Luke  xviii.  14,  where  the  approved  reading  is  irap*  eKelvov 
rather  than  the  othery  implying  that  the  Pharisee  was  in  no  re- 
spect  justified. 

Blessed  {eiXoytrra^).     See  on  1  Pet  i.  3. 

26.  Vile  affections  {irdSfj  arifjUa/^).  Lit,  jnusiona  of  die- 
honor.  Bev.,  jHueione.  As  distinguished  from  iiriSvfAiai 
hietSj  in  ver.  24,  wdBri  jxissionSy  is  the  narrower  and  intenser 
word.  *Eir$!h^fAUi  is  the  larger  word,  including  the  whole 
world  of  active  lusts  and  desires,  while  the  meaning  of  ird!^ 
is  passive,  being  the  diseased  condition  out  of  which  the  lusts 
spring.  *Eirt^iuCai  are  evil  longings  ;  irdSri  tmgovemahle  affect- 
ions. Thus  it  appears  that  the  divine  punishment  was  the 
more  severe,  in  that  they  were  given  over  to  a  condition^  and 
not  merely  to  an  evil  desire.  The  two  words  occur  together, 
1  Thees.  iv.  5. 


aO  WORD  BTUDIEB  IK  THE  HEW  TESTAMENT.  ICu.  L 

Women  {^)\e^a^).  Stnctiy,  Jemalee.  This,  and  apveves 
males,  are  ueed  becaiue  only  the  diBtinction  of  eex  is  contem- 
plated. 

27.  Burned  (efexowSijaoj').  The  terms  are  terrible  in  tlieir 
intensity.  Lit.,  burned  out.  The  preposition  indicates  the 
roffe  of  tJie  hiet. 

Lust  {opf^fi).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  It  is  a 
reachi-ng  out  after  something  witli  tlie  purpose  of  appropriating 
it.  In  later  classical  Greek  it  is  the  most  general  terra  for 
erery  kind  of  desire,  as  the  appetite  for  food.  The  peculiar 
expressiveness  of  the  word  here  is  sufficiently  evident  from  the 
context. 

That  which  is  unsoemly  {rriv  iax^/ioiTvvtjv).  Primarily, 
toani  of  form,  dliijiifxtremeni.  Plato  contrasts  it  with  evtr^ij- 
ftovwi}  yracefulncsH  ("  Symposium,"  196J. 

Which  was  meet  (eSet).  Rev.,  was  due,  which  is  better, 
though  the  word  expresses  a  necessity  in  the  nature  of  the  case 
— that  which  mu^t  needs  he  as  the  consequence  of  violating  tlie 
divine  law. 

The  prevalence  of  this  horrible  vice  is  abundantly  illustrated 
in  the  classics.  See  Aristophanes,  "  Lyeistrata,"  110;  Plato, 
"Symposium,"  191;  Lucian, "  Amores,"  xviiL;  "Dialogi  Merc- 
tricii,"  v.,  2;  Juvenal,  vi.,  311  ;  Martial,  i.,  91;  vii.,  67.  See 
also  Becker's  "Charicles;"  Forsyth's  "Life  of  Cicero,"  pp. 
289,  336  ;  and  DuHinger's  "  Heathen  and  Jew,"  ii.,  273  sqq. 
Dullinger  remarks  that  in  the  whole  of  the  literature  of  the 
ante- Christian  period,  hardly  a  writer  has  decisively  condemned 
it.  In  the  Doric  states,  Crete  and  Sparta,  the  practice  was 
favored  as  a  means  of  education,  and  was  acknowledged  by 
law.  Even  Socrates  could  not  forbear  feeling  like  a  Greek  on 
this  point  {see  Plato's  "Charmides").  In  Rome,  in  the  earlier 
centuries  of  the  republic,  it  was  of  rare  ocurrence ;  but  at  the 
close  of  the  sixth  century  it  had  become  general.  Even  the 
best  of  the  emperors,  Antoninus  and  Trajan,  were  guilty. 

On  the  Apostle's  description  Bengel  remarks  that  "in  stig- 
matizing we  must  often  call  a  spade  a  spade.  The  unchaste 
usually  demand  from  others  an  absurd  modesty."     Yet  Paul's 


Cb.  L]  THB  EPI8TLB  TO  THE  ROHAK&  21 

refiervo  is  in  Btrong  contrast  with  the  freedom  of  pagan  writers 
(see  Eph.  v.  12).  Meyer  notes  that  Paal  delineates  the  female 
dishonor  in  less  concrete  traits  than  the  male. 

28.  Even  as.  Expressing  the  correlation  between  the  sin 
and  the  punishment 

They  did  not  like  to  have  God  in  their  knowledge  {ovtc 
iSotUfuurop).  Lit,  did  not  approve.  Kev.,  refused.  They  did 
not  think  Qod  worth  the  knowing.  Compare  1  Thess.  ii.  4. 
knowledge  (iinrfpwrei)  is,  literally,  ftdl  knowledge.  They  did 
not  snffer  the  mdimentary  revelation  of  nature  to  develop  into 
fnll  knowledge — "a  penetrating  and  living  knowledge  of  God" 
(Meyer).  In  Dante's  division  of  Hell,  the  section  assigned  to 
Incontinence,  or  want  of  self-control,  is  succeeded  by  that  of 
Bestiality,  or  besotted  folly,  which  comprises  infidelity  and 
heresy  in  all  their  forms — sin  which  Dante  declares  to  be  the 
most  stupid,  vile,  and  hurtful  of  follies.  Thus  the  want  of 
self-restraint  is  linked  with  the  failure  to  have  God  in  knowl- 
edge. Self  is  truly  possessed  only  in  God.  The  tendency  of 
this  is  ever  downward  toward  that  demoniac  animalism  which 
is  incarnated  in  Lucifer  at  the  apex  of  the  infernal  cone,  and 
which  is  so  powerfully  depicted  in  this  chapter.  See  "  Inferno," 
ix. 

Reprobate  mind  {aio/c^fiov  vovv).  Lit,  not  standing  the 
test.  See  on  is  triedj  Jas.  i.  12 ;  and  trialy  1  Pet.  i.  7.  There 
is  a  play  upon  the  words.  As  they  did  not  ajyprove^  God  gave 
them  up  unto  a  mind  disapproved.  This  form  of  play  upon 
words  of  similar  sound  is  perhaps  the  most  frequent  of  PauPs 
rhetorical  figures,  often  consisting  in  the  change  of  preposition 
in  a  compound,  or  in  the  addition  of  a  preposition  to  the  simple 
verb.  Thus  irepirofAi^  circumcision^  Kararofi^  concision^  Philip, 
iii.  2,  3.  ^'  Our  epistle  knovm  {yivtoaxofievr))  and  read  {avarfip- 
wrtcofUvffy^  Compare  Bom.  ii.  1 ;  1  Cor.  xi.  29-31 ;  Rom. 
xii.  3.*  Tlie  word  reprobate  is  from  re-proharej  to  reject  on  a 
second  trials  hence,  to  condemn. 

*  See  an  interesting  article  on  ''  The  Rhetoric  of  8t.  Panl/*  bj  Archdeacon 
Farrar,  Expositor,  first  series,  z.»  1  sqq. 


22  WOBD  8TDDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  ICh.  1. 

29.  Filled.  The  retributioa  was  ia  full  measare.  Compare 
Prov.  i.  31 ;  Apoc.  xviii.  6. 

Wickedness  {Trovrjpi/f).     See  on  Mark  vii.  22. 

Covetousness  {trXeove^ia).  Lit.,  the  desire  of  having  more. 
It  ie  to  be  diatiiiguished  from  tftikapyvpia,  rendered  hve  of 
money,  1  Tim.  vL  10,  and  iw  kindred  adjective  <f}t\dpyvpo^, 
which  A.  V.  renders  covetous,  Luke  xvi.  14;  2  Tim.  iii.  2; 
properly  clianged  by  Rev,  into  lovers  of  money.  The  distinct- 
ion ia  expressed  by  covet&uaneea  and  avarice.  The  one  ia  the 
desire  of  getting,  the  other  of  keeping.  Covetou&nesa  has  a 
wider  and  deeper  sense,  as  designating  the  sinful  desire  which 
goes  ont  after  things  of  time  and  senBe  of  every  form  and  kind. 
Hence  it  ia  defined  by  Paul  (Col.  iii.  5)  as  i<Iolatry,  the  worship 
of  another  object  than  Grod,  and  is  so  often  associated  with 
fleshly  sins,  as  1  Cor.  v.  11 ;  Eph.  v.  3,  5 ;  Col.  iii.  5.  liglit- 
foot  aaye:  "  Impurity  and  covetousneBB  may  be  said  to  divide 
between  them  nearly  the  wliole  domain  of  selfishness  and  vice." 
Socrates  quotes  an  anonymous  author  who  compares  the  re- 
gion of  the  desires  in  the  wicked  to  a  vessel  full  of  holes, 
and  says  that,  of  all  the  souls  in  Iladoe,  these  uninitiated  or 
leaky  persons  are  the  most  miserable,  and  that  they  carry  water 
to  a  vessel  which  is  full  of  holes  in  a  similarly  holey  colander. 
The  colander  is  the  soul  of  the  ignorant  (Plato,  "Gorgias,"  493). 
Compare,  also,  the  description  of  covetousness  and  avarice  by 
Chaucer,  "  Romaunt  of  the  Rose,"  183-246. 


"  Covettw 
That  eggeth  folk  ia  ja\ay  ft  guise 
To  Uke  aDd  yeve  (giTU)  right  noaght  agtdili 
And  great  traasoures  up  to  liine  {la;). 


And  that  is  she  that  makelh  traachoon. 
And  she  toaketb  falsa  pluadours. 


Fnll  orooked  w«re  her  hondes  (hands) 
For  Covetise  is  uver  woods  (violsntj 
To  grippen  other  tuUfea  guode." 


Ok.  L]  THB  EFIBTLE  TO  THB  ROMANa  28 

'<  Arariee 
Fall  foal  in  pointing  was  thM  Tioe. 


She  waa  like  thing  for  hanger  dead, 
That  Iftd  (led)  her  life  onel j  bj  bread. 

•  ••••• 

This  Ararioe  had  in  her  hand 

A  parse  that  honge  bj  a  band. 

And  that  she  hid  and  bond  lo  strong, 

Men  mast  abide  wonder  long, 

Oat  of  the  parse  er  (ere)  there  oome  Might, 

For  th«t  ne  commeth  in  her  thought, 

It  was  not  oertaine  her  entent 

That  fro  that  irairse  a  penj  went" 

Maliciousness  {xaidtf).     See  on  na/ugJUine88y  Jas.  i.  21. 

Full  {juaroif^).    Properly,  stuffed. 

Envy,  murder  {<f>S6vov,  ^vov).  Phthonouj  jphonou.  A 
parononuuia  or  combination  of  like-sounding  words.*  Com- 
pare Ghd.  v.  21.  Marder  is  conceived  as  a  thought  which  has 
filled  the  man.     See  1  John  iii.  15. 

Debate  (Ipiio^).  In  the  earlier  sense  of  the  word  (French, 
€UbaUrej  to  beat  down,  contend)  including  the  element  of 
strife.     So  Chaucer : 

"Tales  both  of  peace  and  of  debaiei.** 

•'  Han  of  Law's  Tale/'  4650. 

Later  usage  has  eliminated  this  element  Dr.  Eadie  Q^  Eng- 
lish Bible ")  relates  that  a  member  of  a  Scottish  Church-court 
once  warned  its  members  not  to  call  their  deliberations  ^^a  de- 
bate," since  debate  was  one  of  the  sins  condenmed  by  Paul  in 
this  passage.     Bev.,  correctly,  strife. 

Deceit  (SoXot;).     See  on  John  i.  47. 

Malignity  (leaxofil^liv;).     Malicious  disposition. 

*  Paronomasia  differs  from  the  plaj  npon  words,  in  that  the  latter  has  re- 
spect to  the  meaning  of  the  words,  while  the  former  regards  onlj  the  similar- 
it/  in  soond. 


24  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  KB»   TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  1. 

30.  Haters  of  God  (^eoerrvyew).  Rev.,  hateful  to  Goil. 
All  claEfiical  usage  is  in  favor  of  the  pasBive  sense,  but  all  the 
other  iteniB  of  the  list  are  active.  Meyer  defends  tlie  passive 
on  the  ground  that  the  tenn  is  a  summary  of  what  precedes. 
The  weight  of  authority  is  on  this  side.  The  simple  verb 
tmrfea  to  /laU,  doea  not  occur  in  the  Kew  Teatament.  XrvfT]- 
rtf;  hateful,  is  found  Tit.  iii.  3.  The  verb  is  stronger  than 
fuc^Q)  I  hate,  since  it  means  to  show  as  well  aa  to  /eel 
hatred. 

Proud  {vne(ni^>dvovf!).     Rev.,  haughty.     See  on  ^ride,  Mark 


L 


Boastars  {oKaZoptK).  Swa^erers.  Not  necessarily  imply- 
ing contempt  or  insult. 

31.  Without  understanding,  covenant*breakers  (aawe- 
TOW,  acw^irovi).  Another  paronomasia :  asynetous,  asynthe- 
tons.  This  feature  of  style  ia  largely  due  to  the  pleasure  which 
all  people,  and  especially  Orientals,  derive  from  the  assonance 
of  a  sentence.  Archdeacon  Farrar  gives  a  number  of  illustra- 
tiona:  the  Arabic  j4Jf^  ajirfA'(»isi( Abel  and  Gain) ;  ^a^w(  and 
GTudut  (David  and  Goliath).  A  Hindoo  constantly  adds  mean- 
ingleea  rhymes,  even  to  English  words,  as  button-bitten  ;  kettley- 
Mttley.  Compare  the  Prayer-book,  holy  and  wihoUy ;  giving 
and  forglmng  ;  changes  and  chances.  Shakspeare,  sorted  and 
consorted;  in  every  breath  a  death.  lie  goes  on  to  argue 
that  these  alliterations,  in  the  earliest  stages  of  language,  are 
partly  due  to  a  vagne  belief  in  the  inherent  afBnities  of  words 
("  Language  and  Languages,"  227). 

32.  Judgment  (Stxa^/Mi).     Rev.,  correctly,  ordinance. 

Commit  (■n-pdvaovrti).  Rev.,  better, /*rarfi«tf.  See  on  John 
iii.  21. 

Paul  would  have  been  familiar  with  the  abominationa  of  the 
pagan  world  from  the  beginning  of  his  life.  The  belief  in 
paganism  was  more  firmly  rooted  in  the  provinces  than  in  Italy, 
and  was  especially  vigorous  in  Tarsus,  which  was  counted  ninong 
the  three  Kappa  Kakista,  most  villainous  K's  of  antiquity — 


Ca.  11]  THE  EFISTLB  TO  THE  ROMAK&  25 

Kappadokis,  Kilikia,  and  Erete.  Religion  there  was  chiefly  of 
fUQ  Oriental  character,  marked  by  laeeivioaB  rites.  See  Farrar's 
"life  and  Work  of  Panl,"  i.,  24-34. 


CHAPTEJi  n. 

1.  O  man.  General,  bnt  etill  with  a  general  and  slightly 
reproachful  reference  to  the  Jew. 

Judgest  (jv/iiWc).     With  the  senae  of  condemmng. 

2.  The  judgment  (to  Kptfia).  Not  the  act,  bnt  the  con- 
tents of  the  jndginent. 

3.  Reckonest  (Koyi^s).  See  on  1  Pet.  v.  12.  Intimating 
a  proceee  of  reasoiiiug. 

Thou  shatt  escape.  Thou  emphatic,  opposed  to  Jewish  self- 
conceit. 

4.  Despisest  thou  («aT(w^pot««).  The  indicative  mood 
nnitee  a  declaration  with  tlie  question :  "  Do  you  despise  ?  Aye, 
you  do." 

Riches  {wXovtov).  A  favorite  word  with  Paol  to  describe 
the  quality  of  the  divine  attributee  and  gifts.  See  2  Cor.  viii. 
it ;  Eph.  i.  7,  18 ;  ii.  i,  7 ;  iii.  8,  16  ;  Philip,  iv.  19 ;  Col.  i.  27. 

Goodness  (;^/wjittotijto9).     See  on  east/.  Matt.  xi.  30. 

Forbearance  and  long-sufFering  {avoj(rfi  koX  tuucpoSvfi.ia<!). 
'Avoy^  forbearance,  strictly  a  holding  hack.  In  claBsical  Greek 
mostly  of  a  tnice  of  arms.  It  implies  something  temporary 
which  may  pass  away  under  new  conditions.  Hence  used  in 
connection  with  i\\&pagmng  by  of  sins  before  Christ  {Kom.  iii. 
25).  "  It  is  that  forbearance  or  Buspense  of  wrath,  that  truce 
with  the  sinner,  which  by  no  means  implies  that  the  wrath  will 
not  be  executed  at  the  last;  nay,  involves  that  it  certainly  will, 
unless  he  be  foimd  under  new  conditions  of  repentance  and 
obedience"  (Trench),  For  fiaKpadviila  long-suffering,  see  on 
Jae.  V.  7.     This  reliance  on  God's  tolerance  to  suspend  the  mla 


26  WORD  8TUDIB8  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  JCa  U. 

of  HU  administration  in  jonr  case  is  contempi  (deapieeet).  Com- 
pare Gal.  vi.  T. 

Not  knowing  {ayvoav).  In  tliat  thou  dost  not  know.  Tbia 
very  ignorance  is  contempt. 

Lfladeth  (a7Ei).  The  continuone  present:  it  UadtTiff  a,]\  the 
while  thou  art  deepising. 

Repentance  (jieratmiav).     See  on  Matt.  iiL  2;  xxi.  29. 

5.  Treasurestup  {S^aavpi^tK).  Accumulatest.  GlanciDg 
back  to  riches. 

For  thyself.     Poeeibly  a  tinge  of  irony. 

Wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath  {op^v  h  ^fiipa  opyrp). 
A  very  striking  image — treasuring  up  wrath  for  one's  self. 
Kev.,  better,  in  the  day,  etc.  The  sinner  stores  it  away.  Its 
forthcoming  is  withheld  by  the  forbearance  of  God,  It  will 
break  out  in  the  day  when  God's  righteous  judgment  shall  be 
revealed. 

7.  Eternal  life.     Supply  He  vnUreTuier. 

8.  Contentious  {cf  ^/3t3eiiis).  Rev.,  better, /(kT^ioMff,  Lit., 
of  faction.    See  on  Jaa.  iii.  14.    Intriguers;  partisan  agitators. 

Indignation  and  wrath  {oprfy  Koi  $v/i6^).  See  on  he  j>a- 
tieni,  Jas.  v.  7. 

9.  Tribulation  and  anguish  {SfSifrK  koI  uTeiw^wp/a).  For 
tribulation,  see  on  Matt.  xiii.  21.  Srevojfiapia  antfuisA,  which 
occurs  only  in  Paul  (viii.  35;  2  Cor.  vi.  4;  xii.  10),  literally 
means  namn/mess  of  place.  The  dominant  idea  is  constraint. 
In  Bent,  xxiii.  53,  57,  it  describes  the  confinement  of  a  siege. 
Trench  remarks:  "The  fitness  of  tliia  image  is  attested  by  the 
frequency  with  which,  on  the  other  hand,  a  state  of  joy  is  ex- 
pressed in  the  Psahns  and  elsewhere,  as  a  bringing  into  a  large 
room,"  Fs.  cxvii.  5;  2  Sam.  xxii.  20,  Aquinas  says:  leetitia  est 
laHiia,  joy  is  breadth. 

II.  Respect  of  persons  {wpfXTunroX'qfvi^la).  Only  once  ont- 
dde  of  Paul's  writings,  Jas.  ii.  1,  on  wliich  see  note. 


Ca.  II] 


THE   EPISTLE  TO   THE   ItOMANB. 


27 


12.  Without  law  {av6/ui>i).  Both  law  in  the  abstract  and 
tlie  Mosaic  law.  The  principle  laid  down  is  general,  though 
apparently  viewed  with  speeial  rflfereuce  to  the  law  of  Moses. 

In  tha  law  (ev  va/i^).  Rev.,  under  law,  i.e.,  witliin  the  sphere 
of.  No  decision  as  to  the  reference  to  the  law  of  Moses  or 
otherwise  can  be  based  on  the  presence  or  absence  of  the  article. 
N6/io<;  lata,  is  used  both  with  and  without  the  article  for  the 
Mosaic  law.  Crenier  correctly  aaye  that  "  the  article  is  usnaljy 
wanting  when  the  stress  is  laid,  not  upon  the  historical  impress 
and  outward  form  of  the  law,  but  upon  the  conception  itself ;  " 
or,  as  Bishop  Lightfoot,  "  law  considered  as  a  principle,  exempli- 
fied no  doubt  chiefly  and  signally  in  the  Mosaic  law,  bnt  very 
much  wider  than  this  in  its  application." 

Shall  be  judged  (KfuS^a-ovrai).  The  (mtitheiiB  shall periah 
suggests  a  condemnatory  judgment.  There  is  no  doubt  that 
the  simple  xpiva  is  used  in  the  New  Testament  in  the  sense  of 
condemning.  See  John  iii.  18;  2  These,  ii.  12;  Heb.  xiii.  4 
The  change  from  p&rish  to  judge  is  suggested  by  by  the  law. 
"The  Jews  alone  will  be,  strictly  speaking,  subjected  to  a  de- 
tailed inquiry  such  as  arises  from  applying  the  particular  art- 
icles of  a  code"  (Godet).  5oiA  classes  of  men  shall  be  con- 
dirmm&l;  in  both  the  i-esult  will  he  perishing,  but  the  judgment 
hy  the  law  is  confined  to  those  who  have  the  law. 

13.  Hearers  {aKpoaral).  Like  tlie  Jews,  who  heard  it  reg- 
ularly in  the  smagogues.  Only  here  in  Pan!.  Three  times  in 
James.  It  brings  out,  better  than  the  participle  01  axovovre! 
those  that  hear,  the  characteristic  feature;  those  whose  business 
18  hearing. 

14.  When  (orav).  Lit,  whenever,  supposing  a  case  which 
may  occur  at  any  time. 

The  Gentiles.  Rev.,  properly,  Oentilea.  There  is  no  art- 
icle. Not  the  Gentiles  collectively,  but  Gentiles  among  whom 
the  supposed  case  occurs. 

Which  have  not  the  law  (r^  fifi  v6fiav  i^vra).  The/i^ 
not  negatives  the  possession  of  the  law.     Rev.,  which  have  no 


28  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTiMENT.  (Cb.  II. 

Having  not  the  law  {v6fu>v  fii}  l\ovTe^).  Here  fii}  not  neg- 
atives the  posaesaion  of  the  law.  Rev.,  having  no  law.  It  is 
difficult  to  indicate  the  proper  eiiiptiasis  in  the  English  text, 
eince  the  use  of  italics  is  limited  to  words  not  in  the  original. 


15.  Which  shew  (omif?  evBeuevvvTcu).  Rev.,  better,  in 
that  tfieij  altev),  the  double  relative  epecifyiiig  the  class  to  which 
they  belong,  and  therefore  the  reason  for  what  precedes.  Shevs, 
properly,  in  th^mseliies  (ev). 

The  work  of  the  law.    The  conduct  corresponding  to  the 

hiw. 

Their  conscience  also  bearing  witness  (trvftfutprvpovirtiv 
avT&v  T%  trweth^vewt).  For  Gonaoience,  see  on  1  Pet.  iii.  16, 
The  force  of  avv  with  the  verb  is  t/terewilh;  i.e.,  with  the  pre- 
script of  the  law,  resjwctiag  the  agreement  or  disagreement  of 
the  act  with  it.     So  Rev. 

The  meanwhile  (/*£Tafi>).  Rev.  renders  with  one  an- 
other. Theii'  thoughts  one  with  another.  The  phrase  /lerafy 
aXX^Xtuv  is  variously  explained.  Some  alternately,  now  ac- 
quitting and  now  condemning.  Others,  among  themgeloea,  as 
in  internal  debate.  So  Alford,  "  thought  against  thought  in 
inner  strife."  Others  again,  accusations  or  vindications  carried 
on  between  Oentiles  ajid  Gentiles.  As  the  other  parts  of  the 
description  refer  to  the  individual  eonl  in  itself  and  not  to  re- 
lalions  with  others,  the  explanation  e.xpressed  in  Rev. — the 
mutual  relations  and  interchanges  of  the  individual  thoughts — 
seems  preferable. 

16.  My  gospel.  As  distinguished  from  false  teaching. 
Paul's  assurance  of  the  truth  of  the  Gospel  is  shown  in  liia  con- 
fident assertion  that  it  will  form  the  standard  of  judgment  in 
the  great  day. 

17.  Behold  (iSe).     But  the  correct  reading  is  el  Si  but  if. 

Thou  art  called  (eVovo/ttifi;).  Rev.,  much  better,  bearesi 
(he  name  of,  bringing  out  the  value  which  attaclied  to  the  name 
Jew,  the  theocratic  title  of  honor.     See  on  Hebrews,  Acta  vi.  1. 


k 


Ch.  H]  the  EPISTLB  to  the  ROMANS.  29 

Restest  in  (hravairavrj).  lie  v.,  better,  typon,  giving  the 
force  of  M  in  tlie  verb.  The  radical  conception  of  the  verb 
avairawo  is  relief.  See  Matt.  xi.  28.  Thou  restest  with  a 
blind  trust  in  God  as  thy  Father  and  protector  exclnsivelj. 

18.  The  things  that  are  more  excellent  (r^  hia^povra). 
This  may  be  the  meaning,  and  it  is  adopted  by  Be  v.  with  the 
proper  omission  of  mare.  Bat  it  may  also  mean  tiis  things 
which  differ  ;  in  which  case  we  shall  render ^(n^e^  instead  of 
ajrprovest.  The  sense  will  then  be :  thou  dost  test  with  nice 
discrimination  questions  of  casuistry.  Compare  Philip,  i.  10. 
The  latter  interpretation  seems  preferable,  being  borne  out  by 
the  succeeding  heing  instructed. 

Being  instructed  {xarfixovfieva^).  Systematically  through 
catechetical  and  synagoguic  instruction.  See  on  Luke  i.  4. 
This  formal  instruction  is  the  basis  of  the  critical  discrimina- 
tion. 

20.  Instructor  {iraiSeirrifv).  Bey.,  corrector.  Better,  be- 
cause emphasizing  the  element  of  discipline  or  training.  See 
on  chastise^  Luke  xxiii.  16. 

Of  babes  {vrprlmv).  The  term  used  by  the  Jews  to  desig- 
nate proselytes  or  novices.  Paul  uses  it  of  one  not  come  of 
legal  age,  Gal.  iv.  1. 

The  form — in  the  law  (jMpi^oM'iv).  Not  mere  oippeariMncej 
but  the  scheme^  the  correct  embodiment  of  the  lineaments  of 
truth  and  knowledge  in  the  law. 

21.  Thou  that  preachest  (o  tctfpwrawv).  See  on  Matt.  iv. 
17.  Stealing  is  so  gross  a  vice  that  one  may  openly  denounce 
it 

22.  Sayest  (Xiy^^v).  The  denunciation  is  not  so  pronounced 
The  Talmud  charges  the  crime  of  adultery  upon  the  three  most 
illustrious  Babbins. 

Abhorrest  (fiSeXvtra-ofievo^).  The  verb  means  originally  to 
turn  away  from  a  thing  on  acootnU  of  the  stench.  See  on 
abomination^  Matt.  xxiv.  15. 


30  WORD   STODIBS  IN   THE  SEW   TESTAMENT.  (Cii.  11 

Commit  sacrilege  {Upo<rvXet<;).  Rev.  renders  according  to 
the  etymology,  Upov  temple,  miKam  to  despoil;  hence  rob 
temples.  Some  explain,  the  pillage  of  idol  templet);  othere, 
robbing  the  Jewish  temple  by  embezzlement,  withholding  the 
temple  tribute,  etc.  The  robbery  of  temples  ae  practised  by 
the  Jews  ie  inferred  from  Acts  xix.  37.  Compare  Joeephn^. 
"  Antiq."  it,,  8,  10,  where  he  lays  down  the  law  not  to  plunder 
Gentile  temples,  nor  to  seize  treasure  etored  up  there  in  honor 
of  any  god,* 

23.  Transgression  {vapafida-em).  Trench  remarks  upon 
"  the  monmfnlly  nnraerous  group  of  words  "  which  express  the 
different  aspects  of  sin.  It  is  dfutpria  tits  tniaainff  of  a  mark  ,' 
irapaffcurt^  the  o-osrpasaing  of  a  line;  napaxo^  ike  disohedie'ice 
to  a  vmce  ;  vapdirTafia  a  falling  w/ien  one  sh/ntUl  have  stood; 
drfvoTjiia  ignorance  of  what  one  should  know  ;  ^ttij/mi  a  dim.in- 
ishiihg  of  what  should  be  rendered  in  full  measure  ;  avo/iia  or 
irapavofiia  non-obscrvance  of  law;  irXijfifiiXeia  dincorJ. 

The  primary  sense  of  the  preposition  trapd  ia  beiiide  or  by, 
with  reference  to  a  tine  or  extended  surface.  Ilciice  it  indicates 
that  wliich  is  not  on  its  true  line  but  beside  it,  either  in  the 
way  of  falling  short  or  of  going  beyond.  Thus,  in  the  sense  of 
going  beyond,  Kom.  xii.  3,  to  think  more  highly  thati  he  oitgltt 
{trap'  &  Set),  where  the  sense  of  beyond  is  fixed  by  inrepi^povetv 
"  to  think  beyond  or  over."  So  Lnke  xiii.  2.  In  the  sense  of 
falling  aAorf,  Tluicydides,  iii.,  49:  "Mitylene  came  near- snch 
peril  "  {trap^  Toaovro  nvhivov),  as  if  pai'allel  to  the  danger  bnt 
not  touching  it.  Hence  irapaffaaK  differs  from  the  Homeric 
vjrep^aala  transgression,  in  tbat  the  latter  carries  oidy  the  idea 
of  going  beyond  or  over.  A  mark  or  Hue  as  a  standard  is  tlnis 
implied.  Transgression  implies  something  to  transgress.  With 
the  law  came  in  the  possibility  of  transgressing  the  law.  "  Where 
there  is  no  law  there  ia  no  transgression"  (Rom.  iv.  15).  Hence 
Adam's  sin  is  called  a  transgresmm  (Rom,  v,  14),  because  i' 
was  the  violation  of  a  definite  command.  Pan!  habitually  uses 
the  word  and  its  kindred  vapa^dTtj^  transgreeaor,  of  the  trans- 

"  Coutemporwj   Ee»iB<r,"  1878,   and   2 


L 


Ch.  IU.]  THB  BPIBTLB  to  the  ROMANa  31 

gression  of  a  commandment  distinctly  given  (Gal.  iii.  19;  1 
Tim.  ii.  14 ;  Bom.  ii.  25,  27).  Hence  it  is  peculiarly  appropri- 
ate here  of  one  who  boasts  in  tik6  Ioad.  It  thus  difiFers  from 
cLfMifnla  sin  (see  on  sinSj  Matt.  i.  21),  in  that  one  may  sin  with- 
out being  under  express  law.  See  Bom.  v.  Sin  (afiafnia)  was 
in  the  world  untU  the  law;  i.e.,  during  the  period  prior  to  the 
law.  Death  reigned  from  Adam  to  Moses  over  those  who  had 
not  sinned  {ofiapTiitrauTaii:)  after  the  similitude  of  Adam's  trtms- 
gression  {irckpafi64T&osi).  The  sin  is  implicit,  the  transgression 
eooplicit. 

25.  Breaker  of  the  law  {wapafidrTy:).  Bev.,  transgressor. 
See  on  Jas.  ii.  11. 

0 

Thy  circumcision  is  made  uncircumcision.  ^^But  if 
any  citizen  be  found  guilty  of  any  great  or  unmentionable 
wrong,  either  in  relation  to  the  gods,  or  his  parents,  or  the 
state,  let  the  judge  deem  him  to  be  incurable,  remembering 
what  an  education  and  training  he  has  had  from  youth  upward, 
and  yet  has  not  abstained  from  the  greatest  of  crimes  "  (Plato^ 
"  Laws,"  864). 

29.  Praise.  Possibly  in  allusion  to  the  etymological  mean- 
ing of  JeWy  the  praised  one.  Compare  Qen.  xlix.  8.  The  word 
here  means  the  holy  satisfaction  of  God  as  opposed  to  Jewish 
vain-glory. 


CHAPTER  III. 

1.  Advantagd  {irepura-ov).  Lit.,  surplus.  Hence  prerogch 
tive  or  pre-eminence. 

Profit  (o)^\€*a).    Gom^paieprojiieth,  ii  25. 

2.  Chiefly  {irpSrrov).  "Rev.,  Jirst  oy  all ;  i.e.,  first  in  order. 
Paul,  however,  does  not  enumerate  further,  being  led  away  by 
another  thought. 

The  oracles  (tA  X6yui).  Diminutive.  Strictly,  6ri^ utter- 
ances. Both  in  classical  and  biblical  Greek,  of  divine  utter- 
ances.   In  classical  Greek,  of  prose  oracles.     See  Acts  viL  38  ; 


33  WORD  STtfDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TB8TAMEST,  [Cn.  OI. 

Ileb,  T.  12;  1  Pet.  iv.  11,    Not  eepeciallj  Messianic  paaaages,  but 
the  Old  Testament  scriptures  with  the  law  and  the  proiuieeg. 

3.  Did  not  believe  {y)vi'irrr}<rav).  llev.,  toei-e  vnthout  faith. 
Not,  as  some,  were  ■unfaithful,  which  is  contrary  to  New  Testa- 
ment usage.  See  Mark  xvi.  11,  16;  Lube  xxiv.  11,  41 ;  Acts 
xxviii.  24;  Rom.  iv.  20,  etc.  The  Rev.  rendering  is  preferable, 
as  bringing  out  the  paronomasia  between  the  Greek  words: 
toere  without  faith  ;  their  want  of  faith  ;  the  faithfulneaa  oi 
God. 

Faith  of  God.  Better,  as  TXa7.,faithfulnes8  ;  the  good  faith 
of  God;  His  fidelity  to  His  promiseB.  For  this  sense  see  on 
Matt,  xxiii.  23.  Compare  Tit.  ii.  10,  and  see  on  faithful,  1 
John  i.  9;  Apoc.  i.  5;  iii.  14.  Compare  1  Cor.  i.  9;  x.  13  ;  2 
Cor.  i.  18. 

Make  without  effect  (learapy^iret).  See  on  Luke  xiii.  7. 
The  word  occma  twenty-five  times  in  Paul,  and  is  variously 
rendered  in  A.  V.  make  void,  deetroy,  loo»e,  bring  to  nougfu, 
fail,  vanish  away,  put  away,  put  doton,  abolish,  cease.  The 
radical  meaning  is  to  make  inert  or  idle.  Dr.  Morison  acutely 
observes  that  it  negatives  the  idea  of  agency  or  o/feratton, 
rather  than  of  result  or  effect.  It  is  ratiier  to  make  inefflcietit 
than  to  laake  without  effect.  So  in  Luke  xiii.  7,  why  should 
the  tree  be  allowed  to  make  the  ground  idlef  1  Cor,  xiii.  8, 
propliecies  siiaWfail,  or  have  no  more  work  to  do.  2  Tim.  1. 10, 
Christ  abolished  de&t]i.  Tiiere  is  no  more  work  for  it.  Rom. 
vi.  6,  the  body  of  sin  is  rendered  inactive.  Rom.  iii.  31,  Do 
we  deprive  the  law  of  its  work — render  it  a  dead  letter) 

4.  God  forbid  {fj,i}  yivoiro).  Lit.,  mag  it  not  have  come  to 
pass.  Used  by  Paul  fourteen  times.  It  introduces  the  rebut- 
tal of  an  inference  drawn  from  Paul's  arguments  by  an  op- 
ponent. Lnther  renders  das  segfeme  that  be  far.  Wye,  fer 
be  it.  It  corresponds  to  the  Hebrew  chaliiah  profane,  wliich 
in  the  Septuagint  is  sometimes  rendered  by  it,  sometimes  by 
fiTjSafi^  hg  no  means,  sometimes  by  fit)  etij  may  it  not  he.  and 
again  by  IXcm?  Ood  be  merciful  to  •us  (see  on  Matt.  xvi.  22). 
It  indicates  a  feeling  of  strong  aversion;  "Away  with  the 
thought." 


L 


Cb.  m.]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  BOMANa  33 

Let  God  be  true  (ytpitrSfo  6  Oeo^  akfiSi^).  Rev.,  better, 
^^  let  God  be  found  true ; "  thas  giving  the  force  of  ylvoiAcu  to 
become.  See  on  vhMj  I  am^  John  viii.  58.  The  phrase  is  ased 
with  reference  to  men's  apprehension.  Let  God  turn  o'iU  to  be 
or  be  found  to  behj  His  creatai*es. 

Be  justified.  Acknowledged  righteous.  The  figure  is 
foi*ensic.     God's  justice  is  put  on  trial. 

Overcome  (i/i/o^crf/f).  Rev.,  prevail.  Gain  the  case.  The 
word  occurs  only  three  times  outside  of  John's  writings. 

When  thou  art  judged  {iv  r^  Kplvea^l  a-e).  Rev.,  when 
thou  comeet  into  jtuiffTnent.* 

5.  Commend  {awlarrrjinp).  Only  twice  outside  of  Paul's 
writings,  Luke  ix.  32 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  5,  both  in  tlie  physical  sense. 
Lit.,  to  jplace  togetfier.  Hence  of  setting  one  person  with  an- 
other by  way  of  introducing  or  presenting  him,  and  hence  to 
commend.  Also  to  put  together  with  a  view  of  showing,  prov- 
ing, or  establishing.  Expositors  render  here  difiFerently :  com- 
mendj  estoMishy prove.  Commend  is  the  prevailing  sense  in  the 
New  Testament,  though  in  some  instances  the  two  ideas  blend, 
as  Rom.  v.  8;  2  Cor.  vii.  11 ;  Gal.  ii.  18.  See  Rom.  xvi.  1 ; 
2  Cor.  iv.  2 ;  vi.  4 ;  x.  18. 

Who  taketh  vengeance  (o  hri^pcuv  rifv  ofjy^v).  Rev., 
much  better,  who  visiteth  with  wrath.  Lit.,  bringeth  the  a/nger 
to  bear.  The  force  of  the  article  it  is  difficult  to  render.  It 
may  be  the  wrath,  definitely  conceived  as  judicial,  or,  more 
probably,  as  in  Matt.  iii.  7,  referring  to  something  recognized 
— the  wrath  to  come,  the  well-understood  meed  of  unrighteous- 
ness.    See  on  Rom.  xii.  19. 

As  a  man  (icark  avSporn-ov).  Rev.,  after  the  numner  of 
men  /  Le.,  I  use  a  mode  of  speech  drawn  from  human  affairs. 

*  Perowne  trazuiUtes  the  Hebrew  AoUrelj,  whsn  thou  judged.  So  Hengsten- 
berg  and  Alexander.  The  Vulgate  takes  it  as  passive.  Bat  eren  the  passire 
is  used  in  a  middle  sense  in  the  New  Testament,  as  Matt.  t.  40  ;  1  Cor.  tI.  1, 
6  ;  and  in  the  Septnagint  this  use  is  frequent,  with  or  without  a  judicial  ref- 
erence. Oen.  xxYi.  21 ;  Judg.  xzi  22;  Job  iz.  8 ;  ziii  19 ;  Isa.  zliU.  26, 
etc. 

Vol.  UL— 8 


34  WORD  BTuoma  m  the  new  testament.       [Ch.  in. 

The  phrase  is  thrown  in  apologetically,  under  a  sense  that  the 
mode  of  Bpoech  is  unworthy  uf  the  siibject.  Morison  aptlj 
paraplirasee:  "When  I  aek  the  question,  'Is  God  unjust  who 
inflictetli  wrath!'  I  aui  deeply  coiiscinus  that  I  am  using  lan- 
guage which  is  intrinsically  improper  when  applied  to  God. 
But  in  condescension  to  human  weakness  I  transfer  to  Him 
language  whicli  it  is  customary  for  men  to  employ  when  refer- 
ring to  human  relationships."  Compare  1  Cor.  ix.  8 ;  Rom.  vi. 
19. 

7.  Lie  (^revo'/iaTt).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  The 
expression  carries  us  back  to  ver.  i,  and  is  general  for  moral 
Jit/se/wod,  unfaithfulness  to  the  claims  of  conscience  and  of 
God,  especially  with  reference  to  the  proffer  of  salvation 
through  Christ. 

9.  Are  we  better  {Trpoe^ofi^Sa}.  Rev.,  are  loe  in  worse 
case  Uian  they  t  Render,  with  the  American  Revisers,  arc  wc  Vn 
better  cane  than  tlicij,  i.e.,  have  we  any  advantage  ?  The  Rev, 
takes  the  verb  as  passive — are  we  surpassed/  which  would  re- 
quire the  succeeding  verses  to  show  that  the  Gentiles  are  not 
better  than  the  Jews ;  whereas  they  show  that  the  Jews  are 
not  better  than  the  Gentiles.  Besides,  nothing  in  the  context 
suggests  such  a  question.*  Paul  has  been  showing  that  the 
Old  Testament  privileges,  though  giving  to  the  Jews  a  certain 
superiority  to  the  Gentiles,  did  not  give  them  any  advantages 
in  escaping  the  divine  condemnation.  After  sucli  showing  it 
was  natural  that  the  question  should  be  renewed:  Do  the  Jews 
have  any  advantage? 

*  Tbe  renderiDg  adopted  Is  objeoMd  to  on  the  gronnd  that  the  verb  Is  not 
used  in  this  sense  in  Ibe  middle  rniee.  But  the  middle  ii  lometime*  osed  iii 
Uie  Ktlve  Benie.  and  msj  have  been  preferred  here  beoanse  Paul  speaks  of  a 
BDperiaritj  which  tbe  Jews  o1aimad/i>r  lhmi»eti>et,  Tbe  margioal  rendering 
in  Bev.,  "  Do  we  put  forward  au/thlng  in  excuse,"  maiutwned  hj  Hejer  aniJ 
Horiaon,  would  require  an  object  for  the  Verb,  whloh  is  not  used  absolulelj. 
Thisis ahowD bj  tbeqnoUtions given  bj  Morison ;  Thuo^dldeB,  iii.,  d8 ;  tv.,  B7 ; 
8opho<iles,  "  Antigone,"  60.  He  urges  the  very  lame  plea  that  there  is  nothing 
in  tbe  nature  of  the  word  to  render  its  absolute  use  an  d  pn[>ri  improbability, 
and  infera  auch  use  from  that  of  the  kindred  wp«S<EAAofui.  The  stadent 
should  by  all  means  eiamiQe  his  very  full  disonssion  in  hU  monograph  on 
this  ohapter,  which  is,  literally,  a  stupelidous  pleae  of  exegeaia. 


L 


Oh.  m.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMANS.  35 

We  have  before  proved  {vpofrricurdfieSa).  The  reference 
is  not  to  logical  proof,  but  to  forensic  accusation.  The  simple 
verb  means  to  charge  as  being  the  cause  (alria)  of  some  evil : 
hence  to  aocusCy  impeach.  Bev.,  correctly,  toe  before  laid  to 
the  charge. 

11.  Understandeth  {awwv).    See  onfocUahj  ch.  i.  21. 

Seeketh  after  {iKlirtT&v).  Lit.,  seeketh  otU.  See  on  1  Pet 
i.  10. 

12.  They  are  together  become  unprofitable  (2|«a  ^TCP^^ 
wSffo-av).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  Together  carries 
forward  the  aU.  The  Hebrew  of  the  Psalm  means  have  he- 
4x>7n6  corrupt.  The  Greek  word  is  to  become  neelesa.  Compare 
John  XV.  6. 

Good  (^^pi/oTOTiTTa).  Only  in  Paul's  writings.  The  radical 
idea  of  the  word  is  jyroJUablenese,  Compare  have  become  un- 
profitable. Hence  it  passes  readily  into  the  meaning  of  whole- 
eomeness.  See  on  Matt.  xi.  30.  It  is  opposed  by  Paul  to  inrorofjL' 
ia  ahruptneeSy  severity  (Rom.  xi.  22).  It  is  rendered  kindness 
in  Eph.  ii.  7 ;  Col.  iii.  12 ;  GaL  v.  22.  Paul,  and  he  only,  also 
nses  aryaScoavvrf  for  goodness.  The  distinction  as  drawn  out  by 
Jerome  is  that  aryaSfDa-vvrf  represents  a  sterner  virtue,  showing 
itself  in  a  zeal  for  truth  which  rebukes,  corrects,  and  chastises, 
as  Christ  when  He  purged  the  temple.  X/^i/erron^  is  more 
gentle,  gracious,  and  kindly.  Bishop  Lightfoot  defines  it  as  a 
kindly  disposition  to  one's  neighbor,  not  necessarily  taking  a 
practical  form,  while  arfoJitiHrvpff  energizes  the  'xp^frrimfi. 

13.  Open  sepulchre  (r<£^9  avetp^ixho^).  Lit.,  a  sepulchre 
opened  or  standing  open.  Some  explain  the  figure  by  the 
noisome  exhalations  from  a  tomb.  Others  refer  it  to  a  pit 
standing  open  and  ready  to  devour,  comparing  Jer.  v.  16,  where 
the  quiver  of  the  Chaldaeans  is  called  an  open  sepulchre.  So 
Meyer  and  Morison.  Godet  compares  the  phrase  used  of  a 
bnital  man  :  ^'  it  seems  as  if  he  would  like  to  eat  you."  Com- 
pare Dante's  vision  of  the  lion: 

'*  With  head  uplifted  and  with  rarenoiu  hunger, 
So  that  it  seemed  the  air  was  afraid  of  him. " 

*♦  Inferno."  L,  47. 


36  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE   NEW    TESTAMENT.  (Cb.  UL 

Have  used  deceit  (tSoXiouirav).  Hebrew,  t/tey  smoothed 
(Ji£ir  tonffuee.  Guile  is  contrasted  with  violence  in  the  previous 
clause.  Wye,  lait/i  their  tongues  they  did  guilingly.  The  im- 
perfect tense  denotes  j>er8everance  in  their  hypocritical  profes- 
sions. 

16.  Destruction  (oi/in-^i/i/Mi).  A  dashing  to  pieces.  Only 
here.  The  kindred  verb  awrplffat  to  break  in  pieces,  shiver,  is 
frequent.     See  Mark  v.  4 ;  xiv,  3  ;  Apoc.  ii.  27,  etc 

19.  We  know.  Often  in  Paul,  of  a  thing  generally  con- 
ceded. 

Saith— Bpeaketh  (X^i — XaXeZ).  See  on  Matt  xxviii.  18. 
Tlie  former  contemplates  the  mAstanee,  the  latter  the  empress- 
ion  of  the  law. 

May  be  stopped  (<j>fuvf^).  hit.,Jenced  up.  The  effect  of 
overwhelming  evidence  upon  an  accused  party  in  court. 

May  become  guilty  before  God  {inroSiKot  yivrfrat  t^ 
Se^).     liev.,  hroug/U  under  the  judgment  of  God. 

'TTToSwfo?  under  Judgment,  occurs  only  here.  In  classical 
Greek  it  signifies  brought  to  trial  or  llaMe  to  he  tried.  So 
Plato,  "  Laws,"  846,  of  a  magistrate  imposing  unjust  penalties. 
"Let  him  be  liahle  to  pay  double  to  the  injured  party."  Id., 
879,  "  The  freeman  who  conspired  witli  the  slave  shall  be  liahle 
to  be  made  a  slave."  The  rendering  hriiugbt  under  Judgment 
regards  God  as  the  Judge;  but  He  is  rather  to  be  regarded  as 
the  injured  party.  Not  God's  Judgments,  but  His  rights  are 
referred  to.  The  better  rendering  is  liable  to  pay  penalty  to 
Ood.* 

20.  Works  of  the  law.  Not  the  Mosaic  law  in  its  ritual  or 
ceremonial  aspect;  but  the  law  in  a  deeper  and  more  general 
sense,  as  written  both  in  the  decalogue  and  in  the  hearts  of 
the  Gentiles,  and  embracing  the  moral  deeds  of  both  Gentiles 
and  Jews.  Tlie  Mosaic  law  may  indeed  be  regarded  as  the 
primary  reference,  but  as  representing  a  universal  legislation 
and  including  all  the  rest.     The  moral  revelation,  which  is  the 

*  B««  Horlson'g  tang  >nil  >cnte  diaoiuaion. 


Cb.  ni]  THE  BPI8TLE  TO  THE  ROMANa  37 

authoritative  instruction  of  God,  may  be  viewed  either  inde- 
finitely and  generally  as  the  revelation  of  God  to  men;  or 
anthoritatively,  as  to  the  duty  incumbent  on  man  as  man ;  or 
with  reference  to  the  instruction  as  to  the  duty  incumbent  on 
men  as  sinful  men  under  a  dispensation  of  mercy ;  or  as  in- 
struction as  to  the  duty  of  Jews  as  Jews.  Yer.  20  relates 
to  the  instruction  regarding  the  duty  incumbent  on  men  as 
men.  ''It  is  the  law  of  commandments  which  enjoins  those 
outer  acts  and  inner  choices  and  states  which  lie  at  the  basis 
and  constitute  the  essence  of  all  true  religion.  In  the  back- 
ground or  focal  point  of  these  commandments  he  sees  the  deca- 
logue, or  duologue^  which  is  often  designated  '  the  moral  law ' 
by  way  of  pre-eminence"  (Morison,  from  whom  also  the  sub- 
stance of  this  note  is  taken).  By  the  phrase  works  of  the  law 
is  meant  the  deeds  prescribed  by  the  law. 

Flesh  {<rdp^.  Equivalent  to  man.  It  is  often  used  in  the 
sense  of  a  living  creature — man  or  beast.  Compare  1  Pet.  i. 
24 ;  Matt.  xxiv.  22 ;  Luke  iii.  6.  Generally  with  a  suggestion 
of  weakness,  frailty,  mortality ;  Septuagint,  Jer.  xvii.  5 ;  Ps. 
Ixxvii.  39 ;  Eph.  vi.  12.  The  word  here  has  no  doctrinal  bear- 
ing. 

Be  justified  (SucauoSijirerai).  For  the  kindred  adjective 
BIkou)^  righteovSy  see  on  i.  17. 

1.  Classical  usage.  The  primitive  meaning  is  to  make  right. 
This  may  take  place  absolutely  or  relatively.  The  person  or 
thing  may  be  made  right  in  itself,  or  with  reference  to  drcum- 
stances  or  to  the  minds  of  those  who  have  to  do  with  them.  Ap- 
plied to  things  or  acts,  as  distinguished  from  persons,  it  signi- 
fies to  make  right  in  one^s  judgment.  Thus  Thucydides,  ii.,  6, 
7.  ''The  Athenians ^'t^^ it  right  to  retaliate  on  the  Lacedae- 
monians." Herodotus,  i.,  89,  Croesus  says  to  Cyrus :  "  I  think 
it  right  to  shew  thee  whatever  I  may  see  to  thy  advantage." 

A  different  shade  of  meaning  is  to  judge  to  he  the  case.  So 
TInicydides,  iv.,  122:  "The  truth  concerning  the  revolt  was 
rather  as  the  Athenians  judged  the  case  to  be."  Again,  it  oc- 
curs simply  in  the  sense  to  judge.  Thucydides,  v.,  26:  "If 
anyone  agree  that  the  interval  of  the  truce  should  be  excluded, 


38  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Cb.  IIL 

be  will  not  judge  correctly."  In  both  these  latter  cases  the  ety- 
molc^ical  idea  o£  right  ie  merged,  and  the  judicial  element  pre- 
dominates. 

In  eccleeiasticul  usage,  to  judge  to  be  rigfU  or  to  decide  upon 
in  ecclesiastical  councils. 

Applied  to  peimiDs,  the  meaning  is  predominantly  jndielal. 
though  Aristotle  f'Nichomachaean  Ethics,"  v.,  9)  uses  it  in  the 
eenee  of  to  treat  one  rightly.  There  is  no  reliable  instance  of 
the  sense  (0  mate  i~ight  intrinsii:aUy  ;  bnt  it  means  to  make 
one  right  in  some  extrinsic  or  relative  manner.  Tims  Aescli}- 
lus,  "  Agamemnon,"  390-393 :  Paris,  auhjected  to  thejadgineitt 
of  men,  tested  ^iKauo^tttC)  is  compared  to  bad  brass  which 
turns  black  when  subjected  to  friction.  Thus  tested  or  judged 
lie  stands  in  right  relation  to  men's  judgments.  He  is  shown 
in  the  true  baseness  of  his  character. 

Thus  the  verb  acquires  the  meaning  of  ootidemn  •  ad- 
judge to  be  bad.  Thncydides,  iii.,  40,:  Cleon  says  to  the 
Athenians,  "If  you  do  not  deal  with  the  Mitylenaeans  as  I 
advise,  you  will  cojidemn  yourselves."  From  tbis  readily  arises 
the  sense  oipufiish  ;  since  the  punishment  of  a  guilly  mun  is 
a  setting  him  in  right  relation  to  the  political  or  moral  system 
which  his  conduct  has  infringed.  Thus  Ilerodotus,  i,,  100: 
"  Deioces  the  Mede,  if  he  heard  of  any  act  of  oppression,  sent 
for  tlie  guilty  party  m\A punished \\\vn  according  to  hia  offence." 
Compare  Plato,  "  Laws,"  xi.,  934.  Plato  uses  htKoiat-r^pta  to 
denote  places  of  punishment  or  houses  of  correction  ("  Phaedrus," 
249).  According  to  Cicero,  htxaioto  was  used  by  the  Sicilians 
oi  capital  punishment :  "'EStuctuiuSijirai',  that  is,  as  tlie  Sicil- 
ians say,  they  were  visited  witli  punishment  and  executed" 
("Against  Verres,"  v.,  57). 

To  sum  up  the  classical  usage,  the  word  lias  two  main  infer- 
ences: \,  to  persons  ;  %,  t^}  things ':iT  oats.  In  both  the  judicial 
element  is  dominant.  The  primary  sense,  to  make  right,  takes 
on  the  conventional  meanings  to  judge  a  thing  to  he  right,  to 
judge,  to  right  a  person,  to  treat  rightly,  to  condemn,  punish, 
put  to  death, 

2.  JVew  Testament  usage.  This  is  not  identical  with  the  class- 
ical usage.     In  the  New  Testament  the  word  is  used  of  persons 


Cu.  Ill]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE   ROMANS, 

only.  Ill  Halt.  si.  19 ;  Lnke  vii.  33,  of  a  quality,  Wisdom,  but 
the  quality  is  personified.  It  occiira  thirty-Dine  times  in  the 
New  Testament ;  *  twenty-seven  in  Paul ;  eight  in  the  Sy nop- 
tifitfl  and  Acts ;  three  in  Jamee ;  one  in  the  Apocalypse. 

A  study  of  the  Pauline  passages  shows  that  it  is  used  by 
Paul  according  to  the  sense  which  attaches  to  the  adjective 
SiKouK,  representing  a  state  of  the  subject  relatvoeit/  to  God. 
The  verb  therefore  indicates  the  act  or  procegg  6y  which  a 
man  ia  brought  into  a  right  state  as  related  to  Ood.  In  the 
A,  V,  confusion  is  likely  to  arise  from  the  variations  in 
translation,  righteousness,  just,  Justifier,  Justify.  See  Rom, 
iii.  24,  26,  28,  30 ;  iv.  2 ;  v.  1,  9 ;  Gal.  ii.  16 ;  iii.  8,  11,  24 ; 
Til.  iii.  7. 

The  word  is  not,  however,  to  be  constnied  as  indicating  a 
mere  legal  transaction  or  adjustment  between  God  and  man, 
though  it  preserves  the  idea  of  relativity,  in  that  God  is  the 
absolute  standard  by  which  the  new  condition  is  estimated, 
whether  we  regard  God's  view  of  the  justified  man,  or  the 
man's  moral  condition  when  justified.  The  element  of  charac- 
ter must  not  only  not  be  eliminated  from  it ;  it  must  be  fore- 
most in  it.  Justification  is  more  than  pardon.  Pardon  is  an 
act  which  frees  the  offender  from  the  penalty  of  the  law,  ad- 
jnetB  his  outward  relation  to  the  law,  but  does  not  necessarily 
effect  any  change  in  liim  personally.  It  is  necessary  to  justifi- 
cation, but  not  identical  with  it.  Justification  aims  directly 
at  character.  It  contemplates  making  the  man  htmadf  right ; 
that  the  now  and  right  relation  to  God  in  which  faith  places 
him  shall  have  its  natural  and  legitimate  issue  in  personal 
Tightness.  The  phrase /ojVA  is  counUd  for  righteoitsnest,  does 
not  mean  that  faith  is  a  substitute  for  righteousness,  but  that 
faith  is  righteousness;  righteousness  In  the  germ  indeed,  but 
still  bond  Jide  righteousness.  The  act  of  faith  inaugurates  a 
righteous  life  and  a  righteous  character.  The  man  is  not 
made  inherently  holy  in  himself,  because  his  righteousness  is 
derived  from  God ;  neither  is  he  merely  declared  righteous  by 


*  Not  Id  Apoo.  xxil.  11,  where,  for  iMBiHHm  Ut  him  be  juttijled,  tlte  tru* 
reidiog  is  timaioairv  iniaivi/tm  let  Aim  do  righUoaltuti. 


i 


40  WORD   STUDIES   IN   THE   NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Cu.  Ill 

a  legal  fiction  without  reference  to  tiis  personal  character ;  hut 
the  justifying  decree,  tlie  declaration  of  God  which  pronoiiiices 
him  righteous,  ie  literally  tnie  to  the  fact  in  that  he  ia  in  real, 
sympathetic  relation  with  the  eternal  eource  and  norm  of  holi- 
nese,  and  with  the  divine  personal  inspiration  of  character. 
Faith  contains  all  tlie  possibilities  of  personal  hoJinees-  It 
unites  man  to  the  holy  God,  and  through  this  union  he  be- 
comes a  partaker  of  the  divine  nature,  and  escapes  the  corrup- 
tion that  is  in  the  world  through  lust  {2  Pet.  i.  4).  The  intent 
of  justification  is  expressly  declared  by  Paul  to  be  conformity 
to  Christ's  imago  (Rom.  viii.  29,  30).  Justification  which  does 
not  actually  remove  the  wrong  condition  in  man  wliich  is 
at  the  root  of  his  enmity  to  God,  is  no  jnstification.  In 
the  absence  of  this,  a  legal  declaration  that  the  man  is  right 
is  a  fiction.  The  declaration  of  righteonsness  must  have  its 
real  and  substantial  basis  in  tlie  man's  actual  moi-al  condi- 
tion. 

Hence  justification  is  called  justification  of  life  (Rom.  v.  18); 
it  is  linked  with  the  saving  operation  of  tlie  life  of  the  risen 
Christ  (Bom.  iv.  25 ;  v.  10) ;  those  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus 
"walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit"  (Rom.  viii.  1); 
they  exhibit  patience,  approval,  hope,  love  (Rom.  v,  4,  5). 
Justification  means  the  presentation  of  the  self  to  God  as  a  liv- 
ing sacrifice ;  non- conformity  to  the  world  ;  spiritual  renewal ; 
right  self -estimate— all  that  range  of  right  practice  and  feeling 
which  is  portrayed  in  the  twelfth  chapter  of  this  Epistle.  See, 
farther,  on  ch.  iv.  5. 

Knowledge  (err^yfciKrK).  Clear  and  exact  knowledge.  Al- 
ways of  a  knowledge  which  powerfully  influences  the  form  of 
the  religious  life,  and  hence  containing  more  of  the  element  of 
personal  sympathy  than  the  simple  Tvwtrts  knowledge,  which 
may  be  concerned  with  the  intellect  alone  without  affecting  the 
character.  See  Rom.  i.  28;  x.  2;  Eph.  iv.  13.  Also  Philip,  i. 
8,  where  it  is  associated  with  the  abounding  of  love;  Col.  iii. 
10 ;  Phileni.  6,  etc.  Hence  the  knowledge  of  sin  here  is  not 
mere  perception,  but  an  acquaintance  with  Bin  which  works 
toward  repentance,  faith,  and  holy  character. 


Cb,  IU.]  THB  epistle  to  the  ROMANa  41 

21.  Now  {vwl).  Logical,  not  temporal.  In  this  state  of  the 
case.  Expressing  the  contrast  between  two  relations — depend^ 
ence  on  the  law  and  non-dependence  on  the  law. 

Without  the  law.  In  a  sphere  different  from  that  in  which 
the  law  says  "  Do  this  and  live." 

Is  manifested  {ire^Mvipomu).  Rev.,  haih  been  manifesteclj 
rendering  the  perfect  tense  more  strictly.  Hath  been  mani- 
fested and  now  lies  open  to  view.  See  on  John  xxi.  1,  and  on 
revelationj  Apoc.  i.  1.  The  word  implies  a  previous  hiding. 
See  Mark  iv.  22  ;  Col.  i.  26,  27. 

Being  witnessed  (jiaprvpovfiivf)).  Borne  witness  to;  o^ 
tested.  The  present  participle  indicates  that  this  testimony  is 
now  being  borne  by  the  Old  Testament  to  the  new  dispensa- 
tion. 

22.  Faith  of  Jesus  Christ.    A  common  form  for  ^^  faith  in 

Christ." 

Difference  (SuurroXi^.  Only  by  Paul  here,  z.  12 ;  1  Cor. 
ziv.  7.     Better,  as  Rev.,  distinction, 

23.  Have  sinned  {jfi^iapTov).  Aorist  tense :  sinnedj  looking 
back  to  a  thing  definitely  past — the  historic  occurrence  of  sin. 

And  come  short  {vtrrepovprai).  Ilev.,  ftall  short.  The 
present  tense.  The  A.  Y.  leaves  it  uncertain  whether  the  pres- 
ent or  the  perfect  have  come  is  intended.  They  sinned,  and 
therefore  they  are  lacking.  See  on  Luke  xv.  14.  The  word  is 
not  merely  equivalent  to  they  are  wanting  in^  but  implies  want 
under  the  aspect  of  shortcoming. 

The  glory  of  God  {rfy:  S6^  rov  9€ov).  Interpretations 
vary  greatly.  The  glory  of  personal  righteousness ;  that  right- 
eousness which  God  judges  to  be  glory ;  the  image  of  God  in 
man ;  the  glorying  or  boasting  of  righteousness  before  Qod ; 
the  approbation  of  God ;  the  state  of  future  glory. 

The  dominant  meanings  of  So^a  in  classical  Greek  are  notion^ 
opinion^  conjecture^  repute.  See  on  Apoc.  i.  6.  In  biblical 
usage :  1.  Hecognition^  honor,  Philip,  i.  11 ;  1  Pet.  i.  7.  It  is 
joined  with  nfi^  honor ^  1  Tim.  i.  17 ;  Heb.  ii.  7,  9 ;  2  Pet  i.  17. 


42  WORD  STUDIES   IN   THB   NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch,  UL 

Opposed  to  oTifLia  dishonor,  1  Cor.  xi.  14,  15 ;  xv.  43 ;  2  Cor. 
vi.  8.  With  fijTcw  to  seek,  1  These,  ii.  6;  Johu  v.  44;  vii.  18. 
With  Xofi^diw  to  receive,  John  v,  41,  44.  With  SiSmfu  to  give, 
Luke  svii.  18  ;  John  ix.  24.  In  the  aBcriptive  phrase  glory  be 
to,  Luko  'i.  14,  and  ascriptions  in  the  Epistles.  Compare  Luke 
xiv.  10.  2.  The  glorious  compearance  which  attracts  the  eye. 
Malt.  iv.  8 ;  Luke  iv.  6 ;  xii.  27.  Hence  parallel  with  eucwv 
image;  fujp^^q  form  ;  oftoimfia  likeness  ;  elBo^  ajfpearance,j!g- 
ure,  Rom.  i.  23 ;  Pa,  xvii.  15  ;  Num.  xii.  8. 

27is  glory  of  God  is  used  of  the  aggregate  of  the  divine  at- 
tributes and  coincides  with  His  self-revelation,  Exod.  xxxiii.  23 ; 
compare  irpoaairovface,  ver,  23.  Hence  the  idea  is  prominent 
in  the  redemptive  revelation  (Isa.  Ix.  3  ;  Rom.  vi.  4  ;  v.  2).  It 
expresses  the  form  in  which  God  reveals  Himself  in  the  econ- 
omy of  salvation  (Rom.  ix.  23 ;  1  Tim.  i.  11 ;  Eph.  i.  12).  It  is 
the  means  hy  which  tiie  redemptive  work  is  carried  on ;  for 
instance,  in  calling,  2  Pet.  i.  3 ;  in  rai»i7ig  up  Christ  a/nd  be- 
lievers v>ith  Him  to  newness  of  life,  liom.  vi.  4 ;  in  imparting 
^rength  to  believers,  Eph.  iii.  16;  Col.  i.  11;  as  the  goal  of 
Christian  hope,  Kom.  v.  2 ;  viii.  18,  21 ;  Tit.  ii.  13.  It  appears 
prominently  in  the  work  of  Christ — the  outraying  of  the  Fa- 
ther's glory  {Weh.  i.  3),  especially  in  John.     See  i.  14;  ii.  11,  etc 

The  sense  of  the  phrase  here  is :  they  are  coming  short  of 
the  honor  or  approbation  which  God  bestows.  The  point  under 
discussion  is  the  want  of  righteousness.  Unbelievers,  or  mere 
legalists,  do  not  approve  themselves  before  God  by  the  Hght- 
eouanesB  which  is  of  the  law.  They  come  short  of  the  approba- 
tion which  is  extended  only  to  those  who  are  justified  by  faith.* 

24.  Being  justified.  The  fact  that  they  are  justified  iu  tliis 
extraordinary  way  shows  that  they  must  have  sinned. 

Freely  {^pehv).  Gratuitously.  Compare  Matt.  x.  8;  John 
XV.  25;  2  Cor.  xi.  7;  Apoc.  xxi.  6. 

Grace  (j^a^trt).     See  on  Luke  i.  30. 

Redemption  {a.iroKvrpanT€<o<i).  From  wTrdKurpoa  to  redeem 
hy  jKiying  the  Xinpov  price.     Mostly  in  Paul.     See  Luke  xxL 

■8o  MsysT,  Shedd,  Beet,  Da  Wette,  AUord. 


Cn.  UI.] 


THE   EPISTLE  TO   THE  ROUANS. 


43 


28 ;  Ileb.  ix.  15 ;  xi.  35.  The  distinction  must  be  carefully 
maintained  between  thia  word  and  Xvrpov  ransom.  The  Vul- 
gate, by  translating  both  redemptio,  confounds  the  work  of 
Christ  with  ita  resuU.  ClmBt's  death  is  nowhere  styled  airo- 
Xvrpwcri?  redempti&n.  His  death  is  the  Xvrpov  ranaoin,  figura- 
tively, not  literally,  in  the  sense  of  a  compensation ;  the  medium 
of  the  redemption,  Answering  to  the  fact  that  Christ  gave 
Himself  for  us. 

25.  Set  forth  (irpotSero).  Publicly,  openly  (wpi) ;  correlated 
with  to  decla/re.  He  brought  Ilim  forth  and  put  Iliin  before 
tlie  public,  Eengel,  "  placed  before  the  eyes  of  all;"  unlike 
the  ark  of  the  covenant  which  was  veiled  and  approached  only 
by  the  high-priest.  The  word  is  used  by  Herodotus  of  expo«' 
intf  corpses  (v.,  8) ;  by  Thucydidea  of  exposing  the  bones  of  the 
dead  (ii.,  3i),  Compare  the  ekew-bread,  the  loaves  of  tAe  set- 
Unffforth  (t^  TTpoSfffeoK).  See  on  Mark  ii.  26,  Paul  refers 
not  to  preaching,  but  to  the  work  of  atonement  itself,  in  which 
God'e  righteousness  is  displayed.  Some  render  purposed  or 
determine,  as  Horn.  1. 13 ;  £ph.  i.  9,  and  according  to  the  usual 
meaning  of  irpo^aK purpose,  in  t!ie  New  Testament.  But  the 
meaning  adopted  here  is  Sxed  by  to  declare. 

Propitiation  (tXcumjpiov).  This  word  is  most  important, 
since  it  is  the  key  to  the  conception  of  Olirist's  atoning  work. 

In  the  New  Testament  it  occurs  only  here  and  Heb.  ix.  5; 
and  must  be  studied  in  connection  with  the  following  kindred 
words:  iKdvKOfLOi  which  occurs  in  the  Kew  Testament  only 
Luke  sriiL  13,  God  be  Tnervifal.,  and  Heb.  ii.  17,  to  make  reofm~ 
ciliation.  'iKcuTfiot  twice,  1  John  ii.  2;  iv.  10;  in  both  cases 
rendered  prcpUiation.  The  compound  i^ikdtrKOfiat,  which  is 
not  fonnd  in  the  New  Testament,  but  is  frequent  in  the  Septua- 
gint  and  is  rendered  purge,  cleanse,  reconcile,  make  atonement. 

Sepiuoffint  iiaat/e.  These  words  mostly  represent  the  Hebrew 
verb  kaphar  to  cover  or  conceal,  and  its  dei-ivatives.  With 
only  seven  exceptions,  out  of  about  sixty  or  seventy  paseagea 
in  the  Old  Testament,  where  the  Hebrew  is  translated  \ty atone 
or  ai<mement,  the  Sep tuagint  employs  some  part  or  derivative 
ca    iXAtTKO/uu  or  e^iXaaicopai.      'Duur/M^  or  i^CKaafiM  is  the 


44  WORD  8TCDIBS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  in 

iiBiial  Septiiftgint  tranelation  for  kippurim  covering  for  itiji,  A. 
y .,  atonement.  Thus  giti-offerinffs  of  aionemerii  /  (iiy  of  atone- 
ment ;  ram  of  the  atouement.  See  Exod,  xxix.  36 ;  xxx,  10 ; 
Lev.  xxiii.  27;  Num.  v.  8,  etc.  They  are  also  need  for  chai- 
iatfi  ain-offeriiiQ,  Ezek.  xXiv.  27;  xlv.  19;  and  ior  selichalt  for- 
giveness.    Vs.  cxsix.  4;  Dan.  ix.  9. 

These  woi-ds  are  always  used  absolutely,  without  auythirig  to 
mark  the  offence  or  the  person  propitiated. 

'IXdaKOfuu,  which  is  comparatively  rare,  occurs  as  a  transla- 
tion of  kipher  lo  cover  sin,  Ps.  Ixiv.  3;  Ixxvii.  38;  Ixxviii. 
9 ;  A.  v.,  purge  away,  forgive,  pardon.  Of  salach,  to  hear 
away  as  a  burden,  2  Kings  v.  13 ;  Pb.  xxiv.  11 :  A.  V.,  forgive, 
pardon.  It  is  used  with  the  accusative  (direct  objective)  case, 
marking  the  sin,  or  with  the  dative  (indirect  objective),  as  he 
cwicUiated  to  our  sins. 

'E^iXaaxofuu  mostly  represents  kipker  to  cover,  and  is  more 
common  than  the  simple  verh.  Thus,  purge  the  altar,  Ezek. 
xliii.  26;  cleanse  the  sanctuary,  Ezek.  xlv.  20;  reconcile  the 
house,  Dan.  ix.  24.  It  is  found  with  the  accusative  case  of 
that  which  is  cleansed;  witli  the  preposition  irepi concerning, 
as  "for  your  sin,"  Exod.  xxxii,  30  ;  with  the  preposition  inrip 
on  beha/f  of,  A.  Y.,for,  Ezek.  xlv.  17  ;  ahsohitely,  to  make  an 
atonemerU,  I^ev.  xvi.  17;  with  the  preposition  airo  from,  as 
"  cleansed /rowi  the  blood,"  Num.  xxxv.  33.  There  are  but  two 
instances  of  the  accusative  of  the  person  propitiated  :  appease 
AiTM,  Gen.  xxxii.  20;  pray  before  (propitiate)  the  Zord,  Zech, 
vii.  2. 

'I\a<rr^piov,  A.  V.,  propitiation,  is  almost  always  used  in  the 
Old  Testairient  of  the  mercy-seat  or  golden  cover  of  the  ark, 
and  this  is  its  meaning  in  Heb.  ix.  5,  t!ie  only  other  passage  of 
the  New  Testament  in  which  it  is  found.  In  Ezek.  xliii.  14, 
17,  20,  it  means  a  ledge  round  a  large  altar,  and  is  rendered 
settl^e  in  A.  V. ;  Rev.,  ledge,  in  margin. 

This  term  has  been  intdiily  pressed  into  the  sense  of  e.rpia- 
tory  sacrljlce.  In  the  case  of  the  kindred  verbs,  the  dominant 
Old-Testament  sense  is  not  propitiation  in  the  sense  of  some- 
thing offered  to  placate  or  appease  anger;  bnt  atonement  or 
reconciliation,  iiiTO\i^\  i\\Q  covering,  aaA  bo  getting  rid  of  the 


k 


Cit  IIL) 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


sin  which  Btands  between  God  and  man.  The  thrnst  of  the 
idea  ia  upon  ths  sin  or  uncleanneaa,  not  upon  the  offended  party. 
Ilenco  the  frequent  interchange  with  ar/ui^  to  sanctify,  and 
KoSapi^  to  cleaiise.  See  Ezek.  xliii.  26,  where  e^CKatrovrai. 
shall  purge,  awA  Ko^ptovaiv  shall  purify,  &re  nsed  coijrdinately. 
See  also  Exod.  xxx.  10,  of  ttie  altar  of  incense:  "  Aaron  shall 
fnake  an  tUoneineni  (e^iXAfferat)  upon  the  liorns  of  it — with 
the  blood  of  the  Bin-offering  of  atonement"  {KuSapia^fiov purifi- 
cation). Compare  Lev.  xvi.  20,  The  Hebrew  terms  are  also 
uned  coordinately. 

Oar  tranalatora  frequently  render  the  verb  kc^har  by  recon- 
cile. Lev.  vi.  30 ;  xvi.  20 ;  Ezek.  xlv,  20.  Ia  Lev.  viii.  15, 
Moses  put  blood  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar  and  cleansed  {ixaS- 
dpurt)  the  altar,  and  sanctijled  {fulaaev)  it,  to  make  reconcUi- 
atinn  (tov  i^tXtia-aa^at)  upon  it  Compare  Ezek.  xlv.  15,  17; 
Dan.  ix.  24. 

The  verb  and  its  derivatives  occur  where  the  ordinary  idea 
of  expiation  is  excluded.  As  applied  to  an  altar  or  to  the 
walls  of  a  house  {Lev.  xiv.  4S-53j,  this  idea  conid  have  no 
force,  because  these  inanimate  things,  though  ceremonially  un- 
clean, could  have  no  sin  to  be  expiated,  Moses,  when  he  went 
up  to  make  atonement  for  the  idolatry  at  Sinai,  offered  no  sac- 
rifice, but  only  intercession.  See  also  the  case  of  Korah,  Num. 
xvi.  46  ;  the  cleansing  of  leprosy  and  of  mothers  after  child- 
birth, Lev.  xiv,  1-20;  xii.  7;  xv.  30;  the  reformation  of 
Josiah,  2  Chron.  xxxiv. ;  the  fasting  and  confession  of  Ezra, 
Ezra  X.  1-15  ;  the  offering  of  the  Israelite  army  after  the  de- 
feat of  Midian.  They  brought  bracelets,  rings,  etc.,  to  make  an 
atonement  {e^iXatraaSai)  before  the  Lord ;  not  expiatory,  but  a 
memorial.  Num.  xxxi.  50-54.  The  Passover  was  in  no  sense 
expiatory  ;  but  Paul  says,  "  Christ  our  Passover  was  sacrificed 
for  ns ;  therefore  purge  out  (eKKa^part)  the  old  leaven.  Let 
us  keep  the  feast  with  sincerity  and  tnUh  ;"  1  Cor.  v.  7,  8. 

In  the  Old  Testament  the  idea  of  sacrifice  as  in  itself  a  pro- 
pitiation continually  ret^edes  before  that  of  the  personal  char- 
acter lying  back  of  sacrifice,  and  which  alone  gives  virtue  to  it. 
See  1  Sam.  xv.  22 ;  Fs.  xl.  6-10  ;  1.  8-14,  23  ;  li.  16,  17 ;  Isa. 
i.  11-18;  Jer.  vii.  21-23;  Amos  v.  21-24;  Mic,  vi,  6-8.     Thia 


46  WORD  STDDLES  IN  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Cii.  IIL 

idea  does  not  recede  in  tbe  Old  Testament  to  be  re-emphaBized 
in  the  New.  On  the  contrary,  tbe  New  Testament  emp)iaaizes 
the  recession,  and  laye  tbe  strese  upon  tbe  cleansing  and  life- 
giving  effect  of  tlie  sacrifice  of  Christ.  See  Jobn  i.  29;  Col.  i. 
20-22 ;  Heb.  i.\.  14 ;  x.  19-21 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  24 ;  1  John  i.  7 ;  iv. 
10-13. 

Tlie  true  meaning  of  the  offering  of  Christ  concentrates, 
therefore,  not  npon  divine  justice,  bat  upon  kuinan  character  ; 
not  upon  tbe  remission  of  penalty  for  a  consideration,  but 
npon  tlie  deliverance  from  penalty  tbrongli  moral  transform- 
ation; not  upon  satisfying  divine  justice,  but  upon  bring- 
ing estranged  man  into  harmony  with  God.  As  Canon  Weet- 
cott  remarks :  "  The  scripture  conception  of  iKaaKcaSai  is  not 
tliat  of  appeasing  one  who  is  angry  with  a  personal  feeling 
against  tbe  offender,  but  of  altering  tbe  character  of  that  which, 
from  without,  occasions  a  necessary  alienation,  and  interposes 
an  inevitable  obstacle  to  feUowsliip"  (Commentary  on  St, 
John's  Epistles,  p.  85). 

In  the  light  of  this  conception  we  are  brought  back  to  that 
rendering  of  iKa/rrripiov  which  prevails  in  the  Septuagint,  and 
which  it  has  in  the  only  other  New-Testament  passage  where 
it  occurs  (Ileb.  is.  5) — mercy-seat ;  a  rendering  maintained  by 
a  lai^e  number  of  tbe  earlier  expositors,  and  by  some  of  tbe 
ablest  of  the  moderns.  That  it  is  the  sole  instance  of  its  occur- 
rence in  this  sense  is  a  fact  which  has  its  parallel  in  tbe  terms 
J-'assowr,  Dooi,  Rock,  A-men,  Day-sjrrintj.  and  others,  applied 
to  Clirist.  To  say  that  the  metaphor  is  awkward  counts  for 
nothing  in  the  light  of  other  metaphors  of  Paul.  To  say  that 
the  concealment  of  the  ark  is  inconsistent  with  set  forth  is  to 
adduce  the  strongest  argument  in  favor  of  this  rendering.  The 
contrast  with  set  forth  falls  in  perfectly  with  the  general  con- 
ception. That  mercy-seat  which  was  veiled,  and  which  the 
Jew  could  approach  oniy  once  a  year,  and  then  tiirongh  the 
medium  of  the  Iligh-Priest,  is  now  brought  out  where  all  can 
draw  nigh  and  experience  its  reconciling  power  (Heb.  x.  19, 22 ; 
compare  Heb.  tx.  8).  "The  word  became  flesh  and  dwelt 
among  us.  We  beheld  His  glory.  We  saw  and  handled" 
(John  i.  14  ;  1  John  i  1-3).     The  mercy-seat  was  the  meeting- 


k 


Cu.  ILL) 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  TBK  ROMANS. 


place  of  God  and  man  (Exod.  xxv,  17-22 ;  Lev.  xvi.  2  ;  Nnm 
Tii.  89) ;  the  place  of  mediation  and  manifestation.  Tliroiigli 
Christ,  the  antitype  of  the  mercy-seat,  the  Mediator,  man  liaB 
access  to  the  Father  (Eph.  ii.  18),  As  the  golden  surface 
covered  the  tables  of  the  law,  so  Christ  stands  over  the  law, 
vindicating  it  as  holy  and  just  and  good,  and  therewith  vindi- 
cating the  divine  claim  to  obedience  and  holiness.  As  the 
blood  was  annnally  sprinkled  on  the  golden  cover  by  the  Uigh- 
Priest,  so  Christ  is  set  forth  "in  His  blood,"  not  ehed  to  ap- 
pease God's  wrath,  to  satisfy  God's  justice,  nor  to  compensate  for 
man's  disobedience,  but  as  the  highest  expression  of  divine  love 
for  man,  taking  common  part  with  humanity  even  unto  death, 
that  it  might  reconcile  it  throngh  faith  and  self- surrender  to  God. 

Through  faith.  Connect  with  propiti-ation  (mercy-seat). 
The  sacrifiee  of  Christ  becomes  effective  through  the  faith 
which  appropriates  it.  ^Reconciliation  implies  two  parties. 
"  No  propitiation  reaches  the  mark  that  does  not,  on  its  way, 
reconcile  or  bring  into  faith,  the  subject  for  whom  it  is  made. 
There  is  no  God-welcome  prepared  which  does  not  open  the 
guilty  heart  to  welcome  God"  (Bushnell). 

In  His  blood.  Constnie  with  set  forth,  and  render  as  Hev,, 
hy  Ilis  blood ;  i.e.y  in  that  He  caased  Ilim  to  shed  His  blood. 

To  declare  His  righteousness  (tit  evSei^iv  r^  hticaioavvT}v 
airrov).  Lit.,  for  a  shewing,  etc.  Rev.,  to  shew.  For  practical 
proof  or  demonstration.  Kot,  as  so  often  explained,  to  shew 
God's  righteous  indignation  against  sin  by  wreaking  its  penalty 
on  the  innocent  Christ.  The  slteicing  of  the  cross  is  primarily 
the  shewing  of  God's  love  and  yearning  to  be  at  one  with  man 
(John  iii,  14-17).  The  righteousness  of  God  here  is  not  Hia 
"judicial"  or  "punitive"  righteousness,  but  His  righteous 
character,  revealing  its  antagonism  to  sin  in  its  effort  to  save 
man  from  bis  sin,  and  put  forward  as  a  grouJid  of  mercy,  not 
as  an  obstacle  to  mercy. 

For  the  remission  of  sins  that  are  past  (Sii,  r^v  trdpea-iv 
Tosv  irpoyeyovoTfav  anapTT}itdriov).  Rev.,  correctly,  lecause  of 
tfie  passing  over  of  the  sins  done  aforetime.  Passing  over^ 
jtraetermission,  differs  from  remission  (a^crt;).     In  remission 


48  WORD  STUDIES   IS   THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  (Co.  IIL 

guilt  and  puniehuient  are  sent  away  ;  in  praetermission  tlieji' 
are  whollj  or  partially  undealt  with.  Compare  Acta  xiv.  16; 
xvii,  30.  'AfidpTi}/ia  gin,  is  the  separate  and  particular  deed  of 
disobedience,  wliile  afiapTia  includes  sin   in  the  abstract — sin 

regarded  9,i  sinftdness.  Sins  done  aforetime  are  tbe  collective 
sins  of  the  world  before  Christ. 

Through  the  forbearance  of  God  (iv  t^  qi-oxS  '''''•'  ^^oO). 
Rev.,  in  the  forbearance.  Construe  with  t/ie jxiesmg  hy.  The 
word  avox*)  foThea?-ance,  fiom  ave-)(a>  to  hold  up^  occurs  in 
the  New  Testament  only  here  and  Rom  ii.  4.  It  is  not  found 
in  the  Septuagint  proper,  and  is  not  frequent  in  classical 
Greek,  where  it  is  used  of  a  holding  back  or  stojyping  of  hos- 
tilities; a  truce;  in  later  Greek,  ojwrmts«'on. 

The  passage  has  given  much  trouble  to  expositors,  largely,  I 
think,  through  their  insisting  on  the  sense  of  forhearajice  with 
reference  to  sins — the  toleratio'i  or  refraining  from  punish- 
nkwii  o/"*/*!*  done  aforetime.  But  it  is  a  fair  construction  of 
the  term  to  apply  it,  in  its  primary  sense  of  holding  hack,  to 
the  divine  method  of  dealing  with  gin.  It  cannot  be  said  that 
God  passed  over  the  sins  of  the  world  before  Christ  without 
penalty,  for  that  is  plainly  contradicted  by  Rom.  i.  18-32  ;  but 
He  did  pass  them  over  in  the  sense  that  He  did  not  apply,  but 
held  hack  the  redeeming  agency  of  God  manifest  in  the  flesh 
until  the  "fulness  of  time."  The  sacrifices  were  a  homage 
rendered  to  God's  righteousness,  but  they  did  not  touch  sin 
with  the  power  and  depth  which  attached  to  Christ's  sacriflce. 
Ko  demonstration  of  God's  righteousness  and  consequent  hatred 
of  sin,  could  be  given  equal  to  that  of  the  life  and  death  of 
Jesus.  Hence  Paul,  as  I  take  it,  says :  God  set  forth  Christ  as 
the  world's  mercy-seat,  for  the  showing  forth  of  His  righleous- 
ness,  because  previously  lie  had  given  no  such  manifestation  of 
Uis  righteousness,  but  had  held  it  back,  passing  over,  with  the 
temporary  institution  of  sacrifices,  the  sin  at  the  roots  of  which 
He  finally  struck  in  the  sacrifice  of  Christ. 

26.  At  this  time  {iv  roi  vvv  icaipw).  Lit.,  in  the  noio  season. 
Rev.,  at  this  present  season.  See  on  Matt.  xii.  1.  The  con- 
trast is  with  ihepast,  not  with  the  future. 


Ch.  UL]  the  epistle  to  the  ROMANa  49 

Just  and  the  justifier  {BUaiov  koX  Bi/uuouvra).  The  sense 
•and  yety  often  imported  into  koX  andy  is  pnrely  gratuitous.  It 
is  introduced  on  dogmatic  grounds,  and  implies  a  problem  in 
the  divine  nature  itself,  namely,  to  bring  God's  essential  justice 
into  consistency  witli  His  merciful  restoration  of  the  sinner. 
On  the  contrary,  the  words  are  coordinate — righteovs  and  mak- 
ing believers  righteous.  It  is  of  the  essence  of  divine  right- 
eousness to  bring  men  into  perfect  sympathy  with  itself.  Paul's 
object  is  not  to  show  fiow  God  is  vindicated^  but  how  man  is 
mad^  right  with  the  righteovs  Ood.  Theology  may  safely 
leave  God  to  take  care  for  the  adjustment  of  the  different  sides 
of  His  own  character.  The  very  highest  and  strongest  reason 
why  God  should  make  men  right  lies  in  His  own  righteousness. 
Because  He  is  righteous  He  must  hate  sin,  and  the  antagonism 
ean  be  removed  only  by  removing  iSi'Q  sin,  not  by  compounding 
it. 

Him  which  beh'eveth  in  Jesus  {jov  Ik  wUrrecixs ' Itfaov). 
Lit.,  him  which  is  0/  faith  in  Jesus.  See  on  ver.  22.  Some 
texts  omit  0/  Jesus.  The  expression  ^'  of  faith  "  indicates  the 
distinguishing  peculiarity  of  the  justified  as  derived  from  faith 
in  Christ.  For  the  force  of  Ik  oiU  of  see  on  Luke  xvi.  31 ; 
John  viii.  23  ;  xii.  49 ;  1  John  v.  19. 

27.  Boasting  {icaiyri^i,^.  Rev.,  gloryvng.  Only  once  out- 
side of  Paul's  writings,  Jas.  iv.  16.  See  on  rejoicethy  Jas.  ii. 
13.  Kot  ground  oi  boasting,  which  would  be  KavxfffM,  as  Bom. 
iv.  2 ;  2  Cor.  i.  14 ;  Philip,  i.  26.  The  reference  is  to  the 
glorying  of  the  Jew  (ch.  ii.  17),  proclaiming  his  own  goodness 
and  the  merit  of  his  ceremonial  observances. 

It  is  excluded  (i^eteXeCaSff).  A  peculiarly  vivid  use  of  the 
aorist  tense.  It  was  excluded  by  the  coming  in  of  the  revela- 
tion of  righteousness  by  faith. 

By  what  law  ?  (S*A  wolov  vofjtov).  Lit.,  hy  what  kind  of 
a  lawf  Rev.,  by  what  m^anner  of  lawf  What  is  the  nature 
of  the  excluding  law  ? 

Of  works  ?  {t&v  ip^fov).    Lit,  the  works,  of  which  the  Jew 

makes  so  much.    Is  it  a  law  that  enjoins  these  works  f    Nay, 

Vol.  IU 


50  WORD  STCDIBS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IV: 

bot  a  law  which  enjoins  faith.  Paul  does  not  Giippose  tioo  laws 
and  give  the  preference  to  one.  There  is  but  one  divine  law 
of  ejectment,  the  quality  of  which  is  such  that,  instead  of  en- 
joining the  Jews'  works,  it  enjoins  faith.  The  old  and  tlie 
new  forms  of  the  religious  life  are  brought  under  the  one  con- 
ception of  law, 

30.  By  faith — through  faith  (ex — Sta).  Some  make  the  two 
prepositions  equivalent.  The  differeuce  may  be  explained 
from  the  fact  that  the  real  Jew  has  already  a  germinating  faith 
from  the  completion  of  which  justification  arises  ae  fruit  from 
a  tree.  So  Wordsworth  :  "  The  Jews  are  justified  out  of  {ek) 
the  faith  which  their  father  Abraham  had,  and  which  they  are 
supposed  to  have  in  him.  Tbe  Gentiles  must  enter  that  door 
anil  pass  through  it  in  order  to  be  justified."  Compare  Eph, 
ii.  17. 

31.  Make  void  {KaTapyov/ifv).  Rev.,  iruiie  of  none  effeet. 
See  on  ch.  iii,  3. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

1.  What  shal  I  we  say  ?  (rt  ipovfiev).  See  ch.  iv.  1 ;  vi  1 ;  vii. 
7;  viii.  31 ;  ix.  14,  30.  The  phrase  anticipates  an  objection  or 
proposes  an  inference.  It  is  used  by  Paul  only,  and  by  bim 
only  in  this  Epistle  and  in  its  argumentative  portions.  It  is  not 
found  in  tbe  last  five  chapters,  which  are  hortatory. 

Our  Father.     The  beet  texts  read  it ptrrrdTopa  forefather. 

Hath  found.  Westcott  and  Yinri  omit.  Then  the  reading 
would  be  "  what  ehail  we  say  of  .\braliam,"  etc.  Eound  signi- 
fies, attained  by  his  own  efforts  apart  from  grace. 

As  pertaining  to  the  flesh  (ncar^  irdpKa).  Construe  with 
found.  The  question  is.  Was  Abraham  justified  by  anything 
which  pertained  to  the  fiesb  !  Some  construe  with  Abraham,' 
our  father  hujnanly  speaking. 

3.  For.  Supply,  Abraham  founti,  nothing  according  to  the 
flesh  ;  for,  if  he  did,  he  has  something  to  boast  of. 


Ch.  IV.]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  BOMANa  51 

By  works  {i(  ipymv).  Lit,  out  of  works.  In  speaking  of 
the  relation  of  works  to  justification,  Paul  never  uses  Sid  by  or 
ihroitgk^  but  ix  out  of ;  works  being  regarded  by  the  Jew  as 
the  meritorious  source  of  salvation. 

3.  The  Scripture  (ij  ypa<f>^).  The  scripture  ^mm^o^^.  Set 
•on  John  iL  22 ;  and  foot-note  on  John  v.  47. 

It  was  counted  for  righteousness  {iKoylaSff  ek  hi,iuuwr- 
wqv).  For  the  phrase  Xo^Oiea^iu  el^  to  reckon  untOj  compare 
ch,  ii.  26 ;  ix.  8,  where  ek  is  rendered ybr.  The  verb  is  also  used 
with  «9  as.  So  ch.  viii.  36  ;  1  Cor.  iv.  1.  So  in  Sept.,  cfe,  Ps. 
Ivi.  31 ;  Isa.  xxix.  17 ;  xxxii.  15 ;  xl.  17 :  <09,  Oen.  xxxi.  15 ; 
Job  xli.  20 ;  Ps.  xliii.  22 ;  Isa.  v.  28 ;  xxix.  16.  The  phrases 
ikoylo'Sff  ek  and  ik.  <09  are  thus  shown  to  be  substantially 
equivalent.     See  further  on  ver.  5. 

4.  The  reward  (o  fiiaSo<s).     See  on  2  Pet.  ii.  13. 

Not  of  grace  but  of  debt  (ou  Kari^  x^^^  ^^^  '^'''^  o^/Xi^- 
jm).  Lit,  according  to  grace,  etc.  Not  grace  but  debt  is  the 
regulative  standard  according  to  which  his  compensation  is 
awarded.  The  workman  for  hire  represents  the  legal  method 
of  salvation ;  he  who  does  not  work  for  hire,  the  gospel  method ; 
wages  cannot  be  tendered  as  a  gift.  Grace  is  out  of  the  quest- 
ion when  wages  is  in  question. 

5.  Believeth  on  Him  {irwreiovri  hrX  rov).  The  verb^ur- 
T6UC0  to  believe  is  used  in  the  New  Testament  as  follows : 

1.  Transitvodt/^  with  the  accusative  and  dative:  to  entrust 
something  to  one,  Luke  xvi.  11 ;  John  ii.  24.  In  the  passive, 
to  be  entrusted  toith  something^  Rom.  iii.  2 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  17 ;  Oal. 
ii.  7.  With  the  simple  accusative,  to  believe  a  thingj  John  xL 
26  ;  1  John  iv.  16. 

2.  With  the  vnfinUme^  Acts  xv.  11. 

3.  With  6ti  thatj  Matt  ix.  28 ;  Mark  xi.  24 ;  Jas.  ii.  19.  Es- 
pecially frequent  in  John :  iv.  21 ;  xi.  27,  42 ;  xiiL  19 ;  xiv.  10, 
11 ;  xvi.  27,  30,  etc. 

4.  With  the  simple  dative^  meaning  to  believe  a  person  or 
thing,  that  they  are  true  or  speak  the  truth,  John  iL  22 ;  iv. 
21 ;  V.  46.     See  on  John  i.  12 ;  ii.  22,  23 ;  viiL  31 ;  x.  37. 


52  WORD   STITDIES  IN   THE   NEW    TESTAMENT.  [Ca.  IV. 

5.  With  the preposit/on  ev  in.  Not  freqiieut,  and  qiiestiuiieii 
in  some  of  tlie  passages  cited  for  ilhiBtratiou.  In  John  iii.  15, 
hi  avrp  in  Him  is  probably  to  be  conetrued  with  liave  et^nwi 
life.  The  forrmila  occurs  nowhere  else  in  John.  In  Mark  i.  15 
we  find  triaTevere  ev  t^  eiiaiyyeTUiji  believe  in  the  ffospel.  Tlie 
kindred  noun  irienK  faUA,  occurs  in  this  combination.  Thus 
Gal.  iii.  26.  though  some  join  in  Christ  Jeius  wirh  som.  St-e 
also  Epb.  i.  15  ;  Col.  i.  4 ;  1  Tim.  iii.  13  ;  2  Tim.  iii.  15  ;  liom. 
iii.  25.  This  preposition  indicates  the  sphere  in  whioh  faith 
moves,  rather  than  the  object  to  which  it  is  directed,  though 
instances  occur  in  the  Septuagint  where  it  plainly  indicates  tlie 
direction  of  faith,  Pa.  Ixxvit.  22;  Jer.  j.V\.  6. 

6.  With  the  prepoaition  hrL  upon,  on  to,  unto. 

a.  With  the  accusative,  Horn.  iv.  5;  Acts  ix.  42;  xi.  17; 
xvi.  31 ;  xxii.  19.  The  preposition  carries  the  idea  of 
mental  dlrectwn  with  a  view  to  resting  upon,  which  lat- 
ter idea  is  conveyed  by  the  same  preposition. 

J.  With  the  dative,  1  Tim.  i.  16  ;  Luke  xxiv.  25  ;  compare 
Horn.  ix.  33  ;  X.  11 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  6.  The  dative  expresses 
absolute  superposition.  Christ  as  the  object  of  faith,  is 
the  hasia  on  which  faith  lests, 

7.  With  the  preposition  ets  into.  Matt,  xviii.  6 ;  John  ii.  11 ; 
Acts  xix.  4;  Koin.  x.  14;  Gal.  ii.  16;  Philip,  i.  29,  etc.  The 
preposition  conveys  the  idea  oi  tJie  ahsoluie  iranxference  of  trust 
from  one^a  self  to  another.  Literally  the  phrase  joe&as  to  believe 
into.     See  on  Jolin  i.  12 ;  ii.  23  ;  ix.  35  ;  xii.  44. 

ts  counted  for  righteousness  (Xoyl^erat  cw  Swatoo-uinji'). 
Rev.,  is  reckoned.  See  on  ver.  3.  The  preposition  et?  has  the 
force  of  as,  not  the  telic  meaning  with  a  view  to,  or  in  order 
that  Ite  may  be  (righteous) ;  nor  strictly,  i*i  tlie  place  of  righte- 
oasnettE.  Faith  is  not  a  substitute  for  righteousness,  since 
righteousness  is  involved  in  faith.  When  s  man  is  reckoned 
righteous  through  faith,  it  is  not  a  legal  fiction.  lie  is  not  in- 
deed a  perfect  man,  but  God  does  not  reckon  something  which 
has  no  real  existence.  Faith  is  the  germ  of  righteousness,  of  life 
in  God.  God  recognizes  no  true  life  apart  from  holiness,  and 
"he  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  life."     He  is  not  merely 


Co.  IV.]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  BOMANa  53 

regarded  in  the  law^s  eye  as  living.  God  accepts  the  germ,  not 
in  place  of  the  fruit,  but  as  corUaining  the  fruit.  ^^  Abraham 
believed  God.  .  .  .  No  soul  comes  into  such  a  relation  of 
trust  without  having  God's  investment  upon  it ;  and  whatever 
there  may  be  in  God's  righteousness — love,  truth,  sacrifice — will 
be  rightfully  imputed  or  counted  to  be  in  it,  because,  being 
united  to  Ilim,  it  will  have  them  coming  over  derivatively 
from  Him"  (Bushnell).  The  idea  of  logical  sequence  is  in- 
herent in  Xoy{^€Tcu  is  reckoned — the  sequence  of  character  upon 
faith.  Where  there  is  faith  there  is,  logically,  righteousness, 
and  the  righteousness  is  from  faith  unto  faith  (ch.  i.  17). 
Nevertheless,  in  the  highest  development  of  the  righteous- 
ness of  faith,  it  will  remain  true  that  the  man  is  justified, 
not  by  the  works  of  righteousness,  which  are  the  fruit  of  faith, 
but  by  the  faith  which,  in  making  him  a  partaker  of  the 
life  and  righteousness  of  God,  generates  and  inspires  the 
works. 

Observe  that  the  hdiever^e  own  faiik  is  reckoned  as  right- 
eousness. ^^  In  no  passage  in  Paul's  writings  or  in  other  parts 
of  the  New  Testament,  where  the  phrase  to  reckon  for  or 
the  verb  to  reckon  alone  is  used,  is  there  a  declaration  that 
anything  belonging  to  one  person  is  imputed,  accounted,  or 
reckoned  to  another,  or  a  formal  statement  that  Christ's  right- 
eousness is  imputed  to  believers "  (President  Dwight,  "  Notes 
on  Meyer  "). 

6.  Describeth  the  blessedness  (Aiye^  rov  fiOKopiafAov). 
MatcapiCfio^  does  not  mean  blessedness^  but  tJie  declaration 
of  blessedness,  the  congratiUation.  So  Plato:  "The  man  of 
understanding  will  not  suffer  himself  to  be  dazzled  by  the  con- 
gratuUUion  (juuea^ia/iov)  of  the  multitude  ("Republic,"  ix., 
591).  Compare  Gal.  iv.  15  (Rev.),  and  see  note  there.  Rev., 
correcilv J  pronounceth  blessing. 

7.  Iniquities  (cwofjUai),    Lit.,  lawlessnesses. 

Are  forgiven  {cul>i3rf<rav).  Lit.,  v^ere  forgiven.  See  on 
Matt.  vi.  12 ;  Jas.  v.  15 ;  1  John  i.  9.  Also  on  remission,  Luke 
111.  3. 


54  WORD  STDDIBS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IV. 

11.  Ths  sign — a  seal  (aijfteiov — trtfiparyiBa).  Siffn  refers  to 
the  material  token;  seal  to  its  religious  import.  Compare  1 
Cor.  ix.  2  ;  Gen.  xvii.  11.     See  on  tt)  seal,  Apoc.  xxii.  10, 

That  he  might  be  {eh  to  etvai  avr'ov).  Not  so  that  he  }e- 
came,  but  expressing  the  divinely  appointed  aim  of  his  receiv- 
ing the  sign. 

12.  Father  of  circumcision.  Of  circumcieed  pereonB. 
The  abstract  term  is  used  for  the  concrete.     See  on  xi.  7. 

Who  not  only  are— but  who  also  walk.  Apparently  Paul 
speaks  of  two  classes,  but  really  of  but  one,  desigtiated  by  two 
different  attributes.  Tiie  awkwardness  arises  from  the  article 
T0«,  erroneously  repeated  with  aroi\oii<TW  walk,  which  latter 
word  expresses  an  added  characteristic,  not  another  class. 
Paul  means  that  Abraham  received  a  seal,  etc.,  that  he  might 
be  the  father  of  circnmcision  to  those  who  not  only  are  circum- 
cised, but  who  add  to  this  outward  eign  the  faith  which  Abra- 
ham exhibited. 

Walk  (oTot;^oi«ric).     See  on  elemenie,  2  Pet.  iii.  10. 

13.  Heir  of  the  world  (kXij/joi^/m)!' Koir/ioi;).  Seeondivid^ 
hy  lot.  Acts  xiii.  19 ;  and  inheritaiuje,  1  Pet.  1.  4.  "  Paul  here 
takes  the  Jewish  conception  of  the  universal  dominion  of  the 
Messianic  theocracy  prefigured  by  the  inheritance  of  Canaan, 
divests  it  of  its  Judaistic  element,  and  raises  it  to  a  christologi- 
cat  truth."  Compare  Matt.  xix.  28,  29;  Luke  xxii.  30.  The  idea 
underlies  the  phrases  kingdom  of  God,  Gangdom,  of  Ileaven. 

16.  Sure  (ffe^aiap).  Stable,  valid,  something  realized,  the 
opposite  of  Iliads  of  none  effect,  ver.  14. 

17.  A  father  of  many  nations.  See  Gen.  xvii.  5.  Orig- 
inslly  his  name  was  Ahram,  exalted  faUter  ;  afterward  Abra- 
haTn,  father  of  a  midiiiude. 

Have  I  made  {t&9«ko).  Appointed  or  constituted.  For  a 
similar  eeuse  see  Matt.  xxiv.  51 ;  John  xv.  16,  and  note;  Acts 
xiii.  47;  1  Tim.  ii.  7.  The  verb  shows  that  the  paternity  was 
the  result  of  a  special  arrangement.  It  would  not  be  used  to 
denote  the  mere  physical  connection  between  father  and  son. 


k 


Ch.  IV.]  THB  BPISTLE  to  THB  ROMANa  55 

Who  quickeneth  the  dead.  This  attribute  of  Grod  is 
selected  with  special  reference  to  the  circnmstances  of  Abraham 
as  described  in  vv.  18,  21.  As  a  formal  attribute  of  God  it  oc- 
curs 1  Sam.  ii.  6 ;  John  v.  21 ;  2  Cor.  i.  9 ;  1  Tim.  vi  13. 

Calleth  {KcCKouvTosi).  The  verb  is  used  in  the  following 
senses: 

1.  To  give  a  fiamej  with  6vofAa  name,  Matt.  i.  21,  22,  25 ; 
Lnke  i.  13,  31 ;  without  Svo^uij  Luke  i.  59,  60.  To  salute  by  a 
name.  Matt,  xxiii.  9 ;  xxii.  43,  45. 

2.  Passive.  To  hear  a  name  or  title  among  m^n,  Luke  i.  35 ; 
xxii.  25 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  9.  To  he  ctchnowledged  or  to  pass  as. 
Matt  V.  9,  19 ;  Jas.  ii.  23. 

3.  To  inmte.  Matt.  xxii.  3,  9 ;  John  ii.  2 ;  1  Cor.  x.  27. 
To  summon,  Matt  iv.  21 ;  Acts  iv.  18 ;  xxiv.  2.  To  call  out 
from.  Matt.  ii.  15 ;  Heb.  xi.  8 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  9. 

4.  To  appoint.  Select  for  an  office.  Gal.  i.  15;  Heb.  v.  4; 
to  salvation,  Kom.  ix.  11 ;  viii.  30. 

5.  Of  Ood^s  creaii/oe  decree.  To  call  forth  from  nothing, 
Isa.  xli.  4 ;  2  Kings  viii.  1. 

In  this  last  sense  some  explain  the  word  here ;  but  it  can 
scarcely  be  said  that  God  creates  things  that  are  not  as  actually 
existing.  Others  explain,  Ood*s  disposing  decree.  He  disposes 
of  things  that  are  not  as  though  existing.*  The  simplest  ex- 
planation appears  to  be  to  give  icaKelif  the  sense  of  namsth, 
speaketh  of  Compare  ch.  ix.  7 ;  Acts  vii.  5.  The  seed  of 
Abraham  '^  which  were  at  present  in  the  category  of  things 
which  were  not,  and  the  nations  which  should  spring  physically 
or  spiritually  from  him,  God  spoke  of  as  having  an  existence, 
which  word  Abraham  believed"  (Alford).  Li  this  case  there 
may  properly  be  added  the  idea  of  the  summ^ms  to  the  high 
destiny  ordained  for  Abraham's  seed. 

19.  Being  not  weak  in  faith  he  considered  not  (fii^  oir^ey- 
170*09  T$  iriarei,  oi  /carevoffaev).     The  best  texts  omit  ov  not  be- 

*  It  is  doabifnl  whether  jcoAcZr  ever  means  to  dStpam  cf.  The  panages 
eited  bj  Sohaff  in  Lange,  Ps.  1.  1 ;  Isa.  zl.  26  ;  zIt.  8,  do  not  appear  to  be  in 
point  The  calling  of  the  earth  in  Ps.  1.  is  rather  snmmoning  it  as  a  witness. 
In  the  other  two  passages  the  phrase  is  nsed  of  calling  hj  name. 


H  over  to  < 


56  WORD  STUDIES  IN    THE  NEW   TESTAMEXT,  ICn.  IV 

fore  considered.  According  to  tliis  the  rendering  is  as  Hev., 
Ke  considered,  etc.  Being  not  weak  or  loeakened  (Kcv.)  is  an 
aGcompanying  circumstance  to  lie  considered.  He  cuiiBidered 
ftU  tbese  unfavoralile  circiimBtances  witliuut  a  weakening  of 
faitli.  The  preposition  xara  in  Kareporjaev  considered,  ia  iuten- 
eive — aUeniively.     He  fixed  his  eye  upon  the  ohstacles. 

Dead  {vevfKpwfUvov).  The  participle  is  passive,  slain.  Used 
here  iijperbolically.     Hence,  Rev.,  as  good  as  dead. 

20.  Staggered  {StaepiSii).  Jtev.,  better,  wavered.  See  on 
Acts  xi.  12;  Jas.  L  6;  u.  4.  The  word  implies  a  mental 
Btniggle. 

Promise  {iwayy€)Uav).     See  on  Acts  i,  4, 

Was  strong  (evi&tmafiatSri).  Passive  voice.  Lit.,  was 
strengthened,  or  endued  witii  strength,     IJev.,  waxed  strong. 

2\.  Being  fully  persuaded  {tTX-Qpo^pTjBeK).  Eev.,  more 
accurately,  yuWy  assural.  See  on  most  surely  believed,  Luke  i, 
1,  The  primary  idea  is,  beiugJiUdd  with  a  thooglit  or  convict- 
ion. 

Able  (Bwarm).  The  sense  is  stronger:  mighty/  compare 
Luke  L  49;  xxiv.  19;  Acta  xviii,  24;  2  Cor.  x.  4;  Apoc.  vi. 
15. 

24.  It  shall  be  reckoned  {/i^XXei  Xoy{^etr3ai).  Not  the  fut- 
ure of  tiie  verb  to  reckon,  but  /leXXat  to  intend  points  to  God's 
definite  purpose.     See  on  Acts  sxvii.  2;  2  Pet.  i.  12. 

Who  believe.     Since  we  are  those  who  believe. 

25.  Was  delivered  (vrapeSo5ij),  See  on  Matt.  iv.  12;  1 
Pet.  ii.  23.  Used  of  casting  into  prison  or  delivering  to  just- 
ice. Matt,  iv,  12;  x.  17,  19,  21,  Frequently  of  the  betrayal 
of  Christ,  Matt,  x.  4;  xvii.  22;  John  vi.  64,  71.  Of  commit, 
ting  a  trust.  Matt.  xxv.  14,  20,  22.  Of  committing  tradition, 
doctrine,  or  precept,  Mark  vii,  13  ;  1  Cor.  xi.  2  ;  xv.  3 ;  Iloni, 
vi.  17 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  21.  Of  Christ's  yielding  up  Ilis  spirit,  John 
six.  30.  Of  the  surrender  of  Christ  and  His  followers  to 
death,  Eom.  viii.  32;  2  Cor.  iv.  11;  Gal.  ii.  20.  Of  giving 
over  to  evil,  Bom.  i.  26,  28 ;  1   Cor.  v.  5 ;    Eph.  iv.  19. 


Cu.  v.]  THE  BPISTLB  TO  THE  ROMAN&  57 

Raised  again  for  our  justification.  ^^But  if  the  whole 
matter  of  the  justification  depends  on  what  He  has  suffered  for 
our  offences,  we  shall  as  certainly  be  justified  or  have  our  ac- 
count made  even,  if  He  does  not  rise,  as  if  He  does.  Doubt- 
less the  rising  has  an  immense  significance,  when  the  justification 
is  conceived  to  be  the  renewing  of  our  moral  nature  in  righte- 
ousness ;  for  it  is  only  by  the  rising  that  His  incarnate  life  and 
glory  aie  fully  discovered,  and  the  righteousness  of  God  de- 
clared in  His  person  in  its  true  moral  power.  But  in  the  other 
view  of  justification  there  is  plainly  enough  nothing  depending, 
as  far  as  that  is  concerned,  on  His  resurrection "  (Bushnell). 
Compare  ch.  vi  4r-13. 


CHAPTER  r. 

1.  We  have  [ixpiiev).  The  true  reading  is  ix^fAep  let  U8 
ha/ve  ;  but  it  is  difficult  if  not  impossible  to  explain  it.  Godet 
says  :  ^^  Ko  exegete  has  been  able  satisfactorily  to  account  for 
this  imperative  suddenly  occurring  in  the  midst  of  a  didactic 
development.'^  Some  explain  as  a  concessive  subjunctive,  we 
may  ha^e;  but  the  use  of  this  in  independent  sentences  is 
doubtful.  Others  give  the  deliberative  sense,  shaU  we  have; 
but  this  occurs  only  in  doubtful  questions,  as  Rom.  vi.  i.  A 
similar  instance  is  found  Heb.  xii.  28.  ^^  Let  us  have  grace," 
where  the  indicative  might  naturally  be  expected.*  Compare 
also  the  disputed  reading,  let  us  hear,  1  Cor.  xv.  49,  and  see 
note  there. 

Peace  (elpi^vriv).  Not  contentment^  satisfaction,  guiet,  see 
Philip,  iv.  7 ;  but  the  state  of  reconciliation  as  opposed  to  en- 
mity (ver.  10). 

With  God  {irpo^).    See  on  vnth  God,  John  i.  1. 

*  The  reading  txoiiw  tM  haM  is  defended  on  the  groand  that  trmnBorihera 
often  Bnbstitated  the  long  for  the  short  o  ;  and  also  that  if  the  reading  were 
fx«M«y»  that  form  woald  have  been  retained ;  which  may  be  the  case,  though 
KoarxAi^^ba  (ver.  2)  proves  nothing,  since  it  majr  mean  either  IM  r^joke  or  lA 
uirefciee. 


58  WOBD  STUDIES   IH  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  ICa.  V. 

2.  Access  (irpoaarfcayiiv).  Uaed  only  hy  Paul.  Compare 
Epb.  ii.  18 ;  iii.  12.  Lit.,  the  ad  ofhringing  to.  Hence  Bome 
insiflt  on  the  transitive  sense,  introduction.  Compare  1  Pet.  iii. 
18 ;  Epli.  ii,  13.  T!ie  transitive  sense  predominates  in  classical 
Greek,  bnt  tliere  are  undoubted  instances  of  the  intransitive 
sense  in  later  Greek,  and  some  illustrations  are  cited  from 
Xenophon,  thougb  their  meaning  is  disputed.* 

Into  this  grace.  Grace  is  conceived  as  a  field  into  wbich 
we  are  brought.  Compare  Gal.  i.  6 ;  v.  4 ;  1  Pet.  v.  12.  The 
state  of  justification  which  is  preeminently  a  matter  of  grace. 

In  hope  {iir  ekwihi).     Lit.,  on  ths  grou7id  of  hope. 

3.  Tribulations.  Sharp  contrast  of  glory  and  tribulation. 
Tribidationa  baa  the  article ;  the  tribulations  attaching  to  the 
condition  of  believers.     Rev,,  our  tribulations. 

Patience  (utto/iov^j').     See  on  2  Pet.  i,  6 ;  Jas.  v.  7. 

4.  Experience  (^oKt^iJi'),  Wrong.  The  word  means  either 
tk^  process  of  trial,  proving,  as  2  Cor,  viii,  2,  or  the  result  of 
trial,  approvedfiess,  Philip,  ii.  22.  Here  it  can  only  be  the 
latter :  tried  integrity,  a  state  of  mind  wliich  has  stood  the  test, 
'£\-ie  process  has  already  been  expressed  by  IribidatiGn.  Rev. 
Tei\d&t& prohaiion,  which  might  be  defended  on  the  ground  of 
English  classical  usage.     Thna  Shakspeare: 

"  And  of  the  truth  herein 
This  preBpiil  objacl  mado  probatiim." 


Jeremy  Taylor :  "  When  by  miracle  God  dispensed  great 
gifts  to  the  laity,  lie  gave  probation  that  lie  intended  that  all 
should  prophecy  and  preach." 

But  probation  has  come  to  be  understood,  almost  universally, 
of  t\\e  process  of  trial.  The  more  accurate  rendering  is  proof 
or  approval. 

5.  Maketh  not  ashamed  (ov  xaTiuir^^tWt).  Mostly  in  Paul ; 
elsewhere  only  in  Luke  xiii.  17;  1  Pet.  ii,  6;  iii,  16.     Rev,, 

"  See  CVemer'B  Lexicon  under  irfaaBr/tiyii,  «nd  coropara  Liddell  and  Sootl. 


Ch.  v.]  THB  BPIBTLB  to  THB  ROMANa  69 

jnUteth  not  to  shame^  thus  giving  better  the  strong  sense  of  the 
word,  to  disgrace  or  diskanor. 

Is  shed  abroad  {hcictxyTo*).  Rev.  renders  the  perfect 
tense ;  hath  been  shed  abroad.  Lit.,  poured  ovL  Compare 
Tit.  iii.  6  ;  Acts  ii.  33  ;  z.  45.     See  on  Jade  11. 

6.  For  the  ungodly  {yirlp  iurefi&v).  It  is  mach  disputed 
whether  virip  on  behalf  of  is  ever  equivalent  to  airrl  vnstead 
of.  The  classical  writers  fnmish  instances  where  the  meanings 
seem  to  be  interchanged.  Thus  Xenophon :  ^^  Seuthes  asked, 
Wouldst  thou,  Episthenes,  die^br  this  one  {imip  tovtov)?" 
Seuthes  asked  the  boy  if  he  should  smite  him  (Episthenes)  in- 
9tead  of  him  {our  itceipov).  So  Irenaeus :  '^  Christ  gave  His 
life  for  {(rrrip)  our  lives,  and  His  flesh  for  {airrl)  our  flesh.^ 
Plato,  "  Gorgias,"  615,  "  If  you  will  not  answer  for  yourself,  I 
must  answer  for  you  (xnrip  aov).^  In  the  New  Testament 
Philemon  13  is  cited ;  virip  aov,  A.  Y.,  in  thy  stead ;  Rev., 
in  thy  hehalf  So  1  Cor.  xv.  29,  "  baptized  for  the  dead  (xnrkp 
T&v  v€/cp&vy^  The  meaning  of  this  passage,  however,  is  so  un- 
certain that  it  cannot  fairly  be  cited  in  evidence.  The  preposi- 
tion may  have  a  local  meaning,  over  the  dead.*  None  of  these 
passages  can  be  regarded  as  decisive.  The  most  that  can  be 
said  is  that  trrrip  borders  on  the  meaning  of  &vtL  Instead  of 
is  urged  largely  on  dogmatic  grounds.  In  the  great  major- 
ity of  passages  the  sense  is  clearly^br  the  sake  of,  on  behalf  of. 
The  true  explanation  seems  to  be  that,  in  the  passages  prin- 
cipally in  question,  those,  namely,  relating  to  Christ's  death,  as 
here,  Gal.  iii.  13 ;  Bom.  xiv.  15 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  18,  {nrip  character- 
izes the  more  indefinite  and  general  proposition — Christ  died 
on  behalf  of — ^leaving  the  peculiar  sense  of  in  behalf  of  unde- 
termined,  and  to  be  settled  by  other  passages.  The  meaning 
instead  of  may  be  included  in  it,  but  only  inferentially.f     Go- 

*Mejer,  however,  denies  the  New  Testament  nse  of  iiw4p  in  the  local 

f  Meyer's  obsenrations  are  forcible  ;  that  while  Paul  sometimes  exchanges 
i^4p  for  T9pi  foTy  eoncemimj^  he  never  oses  h,¥ri  instead  of  it ;  that  with  Mp 
as  well  as  with  Tcp(  he  does  not  invariabljr  nse  the  genitive  of  the  person,  bnt 
sometimes  the  genitive  of  the  thing  (as  o^topriMr  «tn«),  in  which  case  it  woold 
be  impossible  to  explain  by  instead  of  (Rom.  viii  8  ;  1  Ck>r.  xv.  8). 


; 


CO  WORD   STUDIES  IS  THE   HEW   TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  V. 

dot  says:  "The  preposition  can  signify  on\j  in  behalf  of .  It 
refers  to  tbe  end.  Dot  at  ail  to  the  'm,od^  of  the  work  of  redciii[>- 
tion." 

Unsodly.  The  radical  idea  of  tbe  word  is,  want  of  rever- 
ence or  of  piety. 

1.  Righteous — good  (Stwai'ov — ar/aAov).  The  diatinctioii 
is :  SUaioi  ia  simply  right  orjuet ;  doing  all  that  law  or  justice 
requires ;  oya-So?  is  h&tievolent,  kind,  generous.  The  righicoits 
man  does  what  he  ought,  and  gives  to  every  one  his  due.  Tlie 
giiod  man  "  does  ae  much  as  ever  he  can,  and  proves  liis  moral 
quality  by  promoting  tbe  well-being  of  him  with  whom  he  has 
to  do."  '^70^?  always  includes  a  corresponding  beneficent 
relation  of  tbe  subject  of  it  to  another  subject;  an  establish- 
ment of  a  communion  and  excliange  of  life ;  while  Si'xaio;  only 
expresses  a  relation  to  the  purely  objective  hiinf  right.  Eengel 
says:  "£iieaio<;.  indefinitely,  implies  an  innocent  man  ;  0070.909 
one  perfect  in  all  that  jnety  demands;  excellent,  lionomhle, 
princely,  blessed  ;  for  example,  the  father  of  his  country." 

Therefore,  awording  to  Paiil,  though  one  would  hardly  die 
for  the  Tnerely  upri^lU  or  strictly  Just  man  who  commands  re- 
sped,  be  might  possibly  die  fur  tbe  noble,  henejicent  man.  who 
calls  out  affection.  The  article  ia  omitted  with  righteous,  and 
supplied  with  good^the  good  man,  pointing  to  such  a  case  as  a 
rare  and  special  exception. 

3.  Commendeth.  See  on  iii.  5.  Note  the  present  tense. 
God  continuously  establishes  His  love  in  that  the  death  of 
Christ  remains  as  its  most  striking  manifestation. 

His  love  {iavTov).  Rev.,  more  literally,  Ifis  own.  Not  in 
contrast  with  human  love,  but  as  demonstrated  by  Christ's  aet 
of  love. 

9.  Wrath  (t^  offpri).  Rev.,  better,  "the  wrath  of  God." 
the  article  specifying.     See  on  ch.  xii.  19, 

10.  Enemies  (e^fS/rol).  The  word  may  ho  used  either  in  an 
active  sense,  hating  God,  or  passively,  hated  of  Ood.  The 
context  favors  the  latter  sense ;  not,  however,  with  the  conven- 
tional meaning  of  hated,  denoting  tbe  revengeful,  passionate 


Cft.  v.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMAN&  61 

feeling  of  human  enmity,  but  simply  tiie  essential  antagonism 
of  the  divine  nature  to  sin.  Neither  the  active  nor  the  passive 
meaning  needs  to  be  pressed.  The  term  represents  the  mutual 
estrangement  and  opposition  which  must  accompany  sin  on 
man's  part,  and  which  requires  reconciliation. 

We  were  reconciled  to  God  {KaraXKayrffAev  r^  Oe£).  The 
verb  means  primarily  to  excliange  ;  and  hence  to  change  the 
relation  of  hostile  parties  into  a  relation  of  peace ;  to  reconcile. 
It  is  used  of  both  mutual  and  one-sided  enmity.  In  the  former 
case,  the  context  must  show  on  which  side  is  the  active  enmity. 

In  the  Christian  sense,  the  chcmge  in  the  relation  of  Ood  a/nd 
TTuin  effected  through  Christ  This  involves,  1.  A  movement 
of  God  toward  man  with  a  view  to  break  down  man's  hostility, 
to  commend  Gk>d's  love  and  holiness  to  him,  and  to  convince 
him  of  the  enormity  and  the  consequence  of  sin.  It  is  God 
who  initiates  this  movement  in  the  person  and  work  of  Jesus 
Christ.  See  vv.  6,  8 ;  2  Cor.  v.  18,  19 ;  Eph.  i.  6 ;  1  John  iv. 
19.  Hence  the  passive  form  of  the  verb  here:  we  were  made 
suhjects  of  God's  reconciling  act.  2.  A  corresponding  move- 
ment on  man's  part  toward  God;  yielding  to  the  appeal  of 
Christ's  self-sacrificing  love,  laying  aside  his  enmity,  renounc- 
ing his  sin,  and  turning  to  God  in  faith  and  obedience.  3.  A 
consequent  change  of  character  in  man ;  the  covering,  forgiving, 
cleansing  of  his  sin ;  a  thorough  revolution  in  all  his  disposi- 
tions and  principles.  4.  A  corresponding  change  of  relation 
on  God's  part,  that  being  removed  which  alone  rendered  Him 
hostile  to  man,  so  that  God  can  now  receive  him  into  fellow- 
ship and  let  loose  upon  him  all  His  fatherly  love  and  grace,  1 
John  i.  3, 7.  Thus  there  is  complete  reconciliation.  See,  further, 
on  ch.  iii.  25,  26. 

11.  We  also  joy  (^ol  icavx^fiepoi).  Lit.,  hU  also  glorying. 
The  participle  corresponds  with  that  in  ver.  10,  being  reconciled. 
We  shall  be  saved,  not  only  as  being  reconciled,  but  a^  also 
rejoicing ;  the  certainty  of  the  salvation  being  based,  not  only 
upon  the  reconciliation,  but  also  upon  the  corresponding  joy. 

We  have  now  received  the  atonement  {vvv  rtfv  KaraXKor 
^v  iKafiofiev).    Now^  in  contrast  with  future  glory. 


62  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  \. 

Atonement,  llev.,  properly,  reconcUiaiiony  the  noun  being 
etjmologieally  akin  to  tlie  verb  to  reconcUe.  Atonemeid  at  the 
time  of  the  A.  V.  signified  Teconoiliation^  at-one-merU,  the 
making  two  estranged  parties  at  one.     Su  Shakspeare : 


L  of  the  fi 


Fuller:  "Hia  first  essay  succeeded  so  well,  Hoses  would  ad- 
venture on  a  second  design  to  alone  two  Israelites  at  variance.'^ 
The  word  at  present  carries  the  idea  of  satisfaction  rather  than 
of  reconcUiaiion,  and  is  therefore  inappropriate  here.  The  ar- 
ticle points  to  the  reconciliation  in  ver.  10.  See  on  ch.  iii.  2i- 
26. 

12.  Wherefore  as.  As  {atrn-ep)  begins  the  first  member  of 
a  comparison.  The  second  member  is  not  expreaaed,  but  ia 
checked  by  the  illustration  introduced  in  w.  13,  14,  and  the 
apostle,  in  his  flow  of  thought,  drops  the  construction  with 
which  he  started,  and  brings  in  the  main  tenor  of  what  ia  want- 
ing by  "Adam  who  ia  the  type,"  etc.  (ver.  14). 

Entered  into.    As  a  principle  till  then  external  to  tlio  world. 

Passed  upon  (StJjXSew  i<f)').  Lit.,  came  thrmighout  upon. 
Tiie  prepoaition  &td  denotes  spreading,  propagation,  as  eh  into 
denoted  entrance. 

For  that  (e^'  ^).     On  the  ground  of  the  fact  that. 

13.  Until  the  law.    In  the  period  between  Adam  and  Moses. 

Is  not  imputed  {ovk  eXXoTtiTm).     Put  to  account  so  as  to 
bring  penalty.     From  \070f  on  accoutU  or  reckoning.     Only 
here  and  Piiilem.  18. 
' '  Figure  (rviro!).     See  on  1  Pet.  v.  3. 

15.  Of  one  (toO  hiosi).  Rev.,  correctly,  the  one — Adam.  So 
the  many. 

Much  more.  Some  explain  of  tie  guality  of  the  canse 
and  effect :  that  as  tbe  fall  of  Adam  caused  vast  evil,  the  work 
of  the  far  greater  Christ  shall  miioA  more  cause  great  results  of 


Ch.  v.]  THB  BPISTLB  to  THB  ROMANS.  6S 

good.  This  is  trne ;  bat  the  argnment  seems  to  turn  rather  on 
the  question  of  oertmniy.  ^^  The  character  of  God  is  snch,  from 
a  christian  point  of  view,  that  the  comparison  gives  a  mnch 
more  certain  basis  for  belief,  in  what  is  gained  through  the 
second  Adam,  than  in  the  certainties  of  sin  and  death  through 
the  first  Adam  "  (Schaff  and  Kiddle). 

16.  That  sinned  {aiJLaprrqacano^).  The  better  supported 
reading.  Some  MSS.  and  versions  read  ofutfynifiuro^  trans* 
gressian. 

Of  one.  Some  explain,  one  manj  from  the  preceding  (one) 
that  sinned.    Others,  one  trespass,  from  ver.  17. 

The  judgment  (tcpifLa).  Judicial  sentence.  Compare  1 
Cor.  vi.  7 ;  xL  29.     See  on  2  Pet  ii.  3. 

Condemnation  {Kardxpifjui).  See  on  shall  be  damnedj  Mark 
xvi.  16.     A  condemnatory  sentence. 

Justification  (daeaie^fia).  Not  the  subjective  state  of  justi- 
fication, but  a  righteous  act  or  deed.  Apoc.  xix.  8 ;  see  on 
ver.  18. 

The  word  is  sometimes  rendered  ordinance j  Heb.  ix.  1,  10 ; 
an  ajppointment  of  God  having  the  force  of  law.  So  Bom.  i. 
32,  where  Kev.  gives  ordinance  iovjvdginent,  and  ii.  26,  ordin- 
ances for  righteousness. 

17.  Reigned.  The  emphatic  point  of  the  comparison. 
The  effect  of  the  second  Adam  cannot  fall  behind  that  of  the 
first    If  death  reigned,  there  must  be  a  reign  of  life. 

They  which  receive  {pi  Xafjkfidvotrre;).  Not  hdievingly 
€u>cepty  but  simply  the  recipients. 

Abundance  of  grace.  Note  the  articles,  the  abundance  of 
the  grace. 

18.  The  ofFence  of  one  {ho^  irapamTtDfiurosi).  Bev.,  cor- 
rectly, one  trespass. 

The  righteousness  of  one  (hh^  BucauifUMrosi).  See  on  ver 
16.     Rev.,  correctly,  one  act  of  righteousness. 

19.  Disobedience  (irapoKorls;).  Only  here,  2  Cor.  x.  6; 
Heb.  ix.  2.    The  kindred  verb  wapatcovcif  to  neglect^  Rev.,  refuse^ 


64  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  ICa.  V 

occare  Matt,  xviii.  17.  From  vapii  aside,  amiss,  and  oKova  to 
/tear,  Bometimca  witli  the  accompanying  sense  of  heeding,  aud 
eo  nearly  =  obey.  Jlaptuco^  is  therefore,  primarily,  a  failing 
to  hear  or  hearing  amiss.  Eengel  remarks  that  the  word  very 
appositely  points  out  the  first  step  iu  Adam's  fall — carelessness, 
as  the  beginning  of  a  city's  capture  is  the  roraisaneBS  of  the 
guards. 

Were  made  {KartirrdAiiiTav).  See  on  Jas.  iii.  6.  Used  else- 
where by  Paul  only  at  Tit.  i.  5,  in  the  sense  of  to  appoint  to 
office  ov  position.  This  ia  its  most  frequent  use  in  the  New 
Testament,  See  Matt.  xxiv.  25;  Acts  vi.  3;  vii.  10;  Ileb.  v. 
*,  etc.  The  primary  meaning  being  to  set  down,  it  is  used  in 
classical  Greek  of  bringing  to  a  place,  as  a  ship  to  the  land,  or 
a  man  to  a  place  or  person  ;  hence  to  bring  before  a  magistrate 
(Acts  xvii.  15).  From  this  comes  the  meaning  to  set  down  as, 
i.e.,  to  declare  or  show  to  be,'  or  to  constitute,  •make  to  be.  So  2 
Pet.  i.  8 ;  Jas.  iv.  4;  iii.  6.  The  exact  meaning  in  this  pas- 
sage is  disputed.  The  following  are  the  principal  explanations: 
1.  Set  down  in  a  declarative  sense ;  declared  to  be.  2.  Placed 
in  the  category  of  sinners  because  of  a  vital  connection  with 
the  first  transgressor.  3.  Became  sinners;  were  made.  This 
last  harmonizes  with  sinned  in  ver,  12.  The  disobedience  of 
Adam  is  tliiis  declared  to  have  been  the  occasion  of  the  death 
of  all,  because  it  ia  the  occasion  of  their  sin  ;  but  the  precise 
nature  of  this  relation  is  not  e.\.piained." 

Obedience  (waKo^?),  Note  the  play  on  the  vKitA^ parah- 
06,  hypokoe,  disobedience,  obedience.  'TiroKoff  obedience,  is 
also  derived  from  axova  to  hear  (see  on  disobedience)  and  vvo 
beneath,  the  idea  being  submission  to  what  one  hears. 

20.  Tlie  law  entered  {vapftaij'KSev).  Rev.,  literally,  cam<! 
in  beside,  giving  the  force  of  -n-apd  beside.  Very  significant. 
Now  that  the  parallel  between  Adam  and  Christ  is  closed,  the 
question  arises  as  to  the  position  and  office  of  the  law.  Ifow 
did  it  stand  related  to  Adam  and  Christ?     Paul  replies  that  it 

*  Sm  President  Dirigbt'i  nute  in  (b«  Atnerioui  Mejer.  Hii  utiole  in  tha 
•'New  EngUiidot,"  1867,  I  htva  not  Mao. 


\ 


Co.  VL]  THB  BPI8TLB  TO  THB  BOMAK&  65 

•came  in  cUangside  of  the  Bin.  ^^  It  was  taken  up  into  the  diyine 
plan  or  arrangement,  and  made  an  occasion  for  the  abounding 
of  grace  in  the  opening  of  tlie  new  waj  to  justification  and 
life  "  (Dwight). 

Might  abound  {irKeovdajf).  Not  primarily  of  the  greater 
conaciovsness  and  achwwledg^nent  of  sin,  but  of  tlie  increase 
of  actual  transgression.  The  other  thought,  however,  may  be 
iucluded.     See  ch.  vii.  7,  8,  9,  11. 

Did  much  more  abound  (yirepeireplaa-evaev).  lit j<abaunded 
4>ver  and  above.  Only  here  and  2  Cor.  vii.  4.  Compare  inrep- 
enXeopoae  abounded  exceedingly y  1  Tim.  i.  14 ;  {nrefyirepunrm 
beyond  measure,  Mark  vii.  37 ;  vTrepav^dve^  growefih  exceed- 
ingly, 2  Thess.  i.  3. 

21.  Unto  death  {h  r^  ^avdrtp).  Wrong.  In  death,  as 
Rev.  As  the  sphere  or  dominion  of  death's  tyranny.  Com- 
pare ver.  14,  ^Meath  reigned.^^  Some,  however,  explain  the 
preposition  as  instrumental,  hy  death.  How  much  is  lost  by 
the  inaccurate  rendering  of  the  prepositions.  EUicott  remarks 
that  there  are  few  points  more  characteristic  of  the  apostle's 
style  than  his  varied  but  accurate  use  of  prepositions,  especially 
of  two  or  more  in  the  same  or  in  iinmediately  contiguous 
clauses.     See  Rom.  iii.  22  ;  Eph.  iv.  6  ;  Col.  i.  16. 

Through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  '^And  now — so  this 
last  word  seems  to  say — Adam  has  passed  away ;  Christ  alone 
remains  "  (Godet). 


CHAPTER  VI. 

1.  What  shall  we  say  then  ?  '^  A  transition-expression  and 
a  debater's  phrase  "  (Morison).  The  use  of  this  phrase  points 
to  Paul's  training  in  the  Rabbinical  schools,  where  questions 
were  propounded  and  the  students  encouraged  to  debate,  objec- 
tions being  suddenly  interposed  and  answered. 

Shall  we  continue  {iirifjUptofiev).   The  verb  means  primarily 
lo  remain  or  abide  at  or  toith,  as  1  Cor.  xvi.  8 ;  Philip,  i.  24 ; 
Vol.  m.— 5 


06  WORD   STDDIBS   IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMKKT.  [Ch.  VL 

and  secondarily,  to  ptrsemere,  as  Kom.  xl  23 ;  Col.  i.  23.     So 
beller  here,^>CT'*is(, 

3.  Know  ye  not  (oTiweiTe).  The  expreflBion  is  atronger: 
are  ye  igtwrunt.  So  Rev.  Tlie  indicative  mood  presnppoees 
an  acquaintance  with  the  moraJ  nature  of  baptism,  and  a  eonee- 
qiient  absurdity  in  the  idea  of  persisting  in  sin. 

So  many  as  {oa-oi).  Rev,,  aU,  we  who.  Put  differently 
froin  we  that  {olrive^,  ver.  2)  as  not  charoiierisinff  but  deaigjuU- 
ing  all  collectively. 

Baptized  into  {elt).  8ee  on  Matt,  xxviii.  19.  Tiie  preposi- 
tion denotes  inward  union,  participaiion  ^  not  in  order  to 
bring  about  the  union,  for  that  haa  been  effected.  Compare 
1  Cor.  sii.  12,  13,  27. 

Into  His  death.  As  He  died  to  (■in,  so  we  die  to  sin,  jnst 
as  if  we  were  literally  mejnbers  of  Ilia  body.  Godet  gives  an 
anecdote  related  by  a  missionary  who  was  questioning  a  con- 
verted Becliuana  on  Col.  iii.  3.  The  convert  said;  "Soon  I 
shall  be  dead,  and  they  will  bury  me  in  my  field.  My  flocks 
will  come  to  pasture  above  me.  But  I  shall  no  longer  hear 
tbem,  and  I  shall  not  come  forth  from  my  tomb  to  take  them 
and  carry  them  with  me  to  the  sepulchre.  They  will  be  strange 
to  me,  as  I  to  them.  Such  is  the  image  of  my  life  in  the 
midst  of  the  world  since  I  believed  in  Christ." 

4.  We  are  buried  with  {o-irverdjrrjfi^).  Rev.,  more  accu- 
rately, we-re  bnried.  T/ierefore,  as  a  natural  consequence  of 
death.  There  is  probably  an  allusion  to  the  immersion  of  bap- 
tism.    Compare  Col.  iii.  3. 

Into  death.  Through  l/ie  baptism  into  death  referred  to 
in  ver.  3.  Both  A.  V.  and  Rev.  omit  the  article,  which  is  im- 
portant for  the  avoidance  of  the  error  buried  into  death. 

Glory  {&ff»j«).  The  glorious  collective  perfection  of  God. 
See  on  iii.  23.  Here  the  element  oi  power  is  emphasised,  which 
is  closely  related  to  the  idea  of  divine  glory.  See  Col.  i.  11. 
All  the  perfections  of  God  contribute  to  the  resurrection  of 
Christ — righteonsness,  mercy,  visdom,  holiness. 


Oa.  VL]  THE  EPISTLB  TO  THE  ROMANS.  67 

We  might  walk  {irepiirar^iofAep).  Lit,  walk  aloutj  im- 
plying hahUual  condact.  See  on  John  xi.  9;  1  Joiin  L  6; 
3  John  4 ;  Luke  xi.  44. 

In  newness  of  life  {h  KaivArtfTi  (<an^).  A  stronger  express- 
ion than  new  life.  It  gives  more  prominence  to  the  main 
idea,  nevmea^^  than  woald  be  given  by  the  adjective.  Thns 
1  Tim.  vi  17,  uncertcmUy  of  riohee;  not  unoertatn  richesj  as 
A.  V. 

5.  We  have  been  planted  together  {avfuf>vTo$  yeyopafjtev). 
Rev.  gives  more  accaratelj  the  meaning  of  both  words.  Sv/ju' 
^vToi  is  not  planted^  which  woald  be  formed  from  ^vrevto  to 
jplantj  while  this  word  is  compoanded  with  avv  together^  and 
^wo  to  grow.  Feyovafup  is  have  become^  denoting  process^  in^ 
stead  of  the  simple  ehcu  to  he.  Hence  Bev.,  have  become  imiiedy 
have  grown  together ;  an  intmuUe  and  progreesvoe  nnion  ;  oo- 
aleecenoe.  Note  the  mixture  of  metaphors,  wcUking  and  grow* 
ing. 

We  shall  be  also  (dXX^  koX  ia-ofieSa).  It  is  impossible  to 
reproduce  this  graphic  and  condensed  phrase  accurately  in  Eng- 
lish. It  contains  an  adversative  particle  aXKd  hut  Morison 
paraphrases :  ^'  If  we  were  united  with  Him  in  the  likeness  of 
His  death  (that  will  not  be  the  full  extent  of  the  union),  hiU 
we  shall  be  also  united,"  etc.  For  similar  instances  see  1  Cor. 
iv.  15 ;  Col.  ii.  6. 

6.  Old  man  (o  iraXcuo^  av!^p<oiro^).  Only  in  Paul,  and  only 
three  times;  here,  Eph.  iv.  22;  Col.  iiL  9.  Compare  John  iiL 
3  ;  Tit.  iii.  5.  The  old,  unrenewed  self.  Paul  views  the  Christ- 
ian before  his  union  with  Christ,  as,  figuratively,  another  per- 
son.    Somewhat  in  the  same  way  he  regards  himself  in  ch.  vii. 

The  body  of  sin  (to  a-&fjui  rrj^  afiaprliv;).  S&fui  in  earlier 
classical  usage  signifies  a  corpse.  So  always  in  Homer  and 
often  in  later  Greek.  So  in  the  New  Testament,  Matt.  vi.  25 ; 
Mark  v.  29  ;  xiv.  8 ;  xv.  43.  It  is  used  of  men  as  slaves^  Apoc. 
xviii.  13.  Also  in  classical  Oreek  of  the  eumrtotal.  So  Plato: 
TO  Tov  /coafiov  a&fjLa  the  sum-total  ofihevxyrld  ("Timaeus,''  31). 

The  meaning  is  tinged  in  some  cases  by  the  fact  of  the  vital 


(J8  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  VL 

onion  of  the  body  witli  the  immaterial  nature,  as  being  ani- 
mated by  the  ^rv^  soul,  the  principle  of  individual  life.  Thus 
Matt.  vi.  25,  where  tlie  two  are  conceived  as  forming  one  or- 
ganism, 80  that  the  material  ministriea  which  are  predicated  of 
the  one  are  predicated  of  the  other,  and  the  meanings  of  the 
two  merge  into  one  another. 

In  PanI  it  can  scarcely  be  said  to  be  used  of  a  dead  body, 
except  in  a  figurative  sense,  as  Rom.  viii.  10,  or  by  inferern^e, 
2  Cor.  V.  8.  Commonly  of  a  living  body.  It  occurs  with  V'lOC^ 
soul,  only  1  Thess.  v.  23,  and  there  its  distinction  from  ^w^ij 
rather  than  its  union  with  it  is  implied.  So  in  Matt.  x.  28, 
tliough  even  there  the  distinction  includes  the  two  as  one  per- 
sonality.    It  is  used  by  Paul : 

1.  Of  the  livitu/  human  body,  Horn.  iv.  19;  1  Cor.  vL  13; 
ix.  27  ;  xii.  12-26. 

2.  Of  the  Church  as  the  body  of  Christ,  Rom.  xii.  5  ;  1  Cor. 
xii.  27 ;  Eph.  i.  23  ;  Col.  i.  18,  etc.  Xdpk  fie^h  never  in  this 
sense. 

3.  Of  plants  and  heavenly  bodies,  1  Cor.  xv,  37,  40. 

4.  Oft/is  glorified  body  of  Christ,  Philip,  iii.  21. 

5.  Of  the  spiritual  body  of  risen  believers,  1  Cor.  xv.  44. 

It  is  distinguished  from  aap^  Jlesh,  as  not  being  limited  to 
the  organism  of  an  earthly,  living  body,  1  Cor.  xv.  37,  38,  It 
is  the  material  organism  apart  from  any  definite  matter.  It  is 
however  sometimes  used  as  practically  synonymous  with  <ra^f, 
1  Cor.  vii.  16,  17;  Eph.  v.  28,  31 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  10,  11.  Compare 
1  Cor.  v.-  3  with  Col.  ii.  5.  An  ethical  conception  attac^hes  to 
it.  It  is  alternated  with  itAXt}  members,  and  the  two  are  associ- 
ated with  sin  (Uom.  i.  24;  vi.  6  ;  vii.  5,  24  ;  viii.  13  :  Col.  iii. 
5),  and  with  sanctificatiou  (Kom.  xii.  1 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  19  sq. ;  com- 
pare 1  ThesE.  iv.  4;  v.  23).  It  is  represented  as  mortal,  Rom. 
viii.  11 ;  2  Cor.  x.  10;  and  aa  capable  of  life,  1  Cor.  xiii.  3  ;  3 
Cor.  iv.  10, 

Id  common  with  /leXiti  members,  it  is  tite  instrument  of  feel- 
ing and  willing  rather  than  tro/jf,  because  the  object  in  such 
cases  is  to  designate  tlie  body  not  dffinitely  as  earthly,  bnt  (jen- 
erally  as  organic,  Rom.  vi.  12,  13,  19;  2  Cor,  v.  10,  Hence, 
wherever  it  is  viewed  with  reference  to  sin  or  sanctiflcation,  it 


Ch.  VL]  rHB  BPISTLB  TO  THE  ROMAN&  Gl> 

is  the  oatward  organ  for  the  execution  of  the  good  or  bad  re- 
solves of  the  will. 

The  phrase  body  of  sm  denotes  the  body  belonging  to,  or 
ruled  bjy  the  power  of  sin,  in  which  the  members  are  instru- 
ments of  unrighteousness  (ver.  13).  Not  the  body  as  containing 
the  principle  of  evil  in  our  humanity,  since  Paul  does  not  re- 
gard sin  as  inherent  in,  and  inseparable  from,  the  body  (see  ver. 
13 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  10-12 ;  vii.  1.  Compare  Matt  xv.  19),  nor  as 
precisely  identical  with  the  old  man,  an  organism  or  system  of 
evil  dispositions,  which  does  not  harmonize  with  vv.  12,  13, 
where  Paul  uses  body  in  the  strict  sense.  ^^  Sin  is  conceived  as 
the  master,  to  whom  the  body  as  slave  belongs  and  is  obedient 
to  execute  its  will.  As  the  slave  must  perform  his  definite 
functions,  not  because  he  in  himsdf  can  perform  no  others,  but 
because  of  his  cbctuaRy  subsistent  relationship  of  service  he  may 
perform  no  others,  while  of  himself  he  might  belong  as  well  to 
another  master  and  render  other  services ;  so  the  earthly  v&iui 
body  belongs  not  of  iisdf  to  the  afiaprla  sin^  but  may  just  as 
well  belong  to  the  Lord  (1  Cor.  vi.  13),  and  doubtless  it  is  de 
facto  enslaved  to  sin,  so  long  as  a  redemption  from  this  state 
has  not  set  in  by  virtue  of  the  divine  Spirit''  (Bom.  vii.  24: 
Dickson). 

Destroyed.    See  on  iii.  3. 

He  that  is  dead  (o  airoSavi>v).  Bev.,  literally,  he  thai  hath 
died.  In  a  physical  sense.  Death  and  its  consequences  are 
used  as  the  general  illustration  of  the  spiritual  truth.  It  is  a 
habit  of  Paul  to  throw  in  such  general  illustrations.  See 
vii.  2. 

7.  Is  freed  {SeBuealfonu).  Lit.,  as  Kev.,  is  justified;  Le., 
acquitted^  absolved;  just  as  the  dead  person  sins  no  more,  being 
released  from  sin  as  from  a  legal  claim.  '^  As  a  man  that  is 
dead  is  acquitted  and  released  from  bondage  among  men,  so  a 
man  that  has  died  to  sin  is  acquitted  from  the  guilt  of  sin  and 
released  from  its  bondage  "  ( Alford). 

8.  We  be  dead  (awel^dpofiev).  The  aorist  Hev.,  correctly, 
toe  died.     The  death  is  viewed  as  an  eventy  not  as  a  state. 


70  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ctt  VX 

Wa  believe  {■jrurrevofiev).  Doi/natio  belief  rather  than 
intst,  tlioiigh  tho  Utter  is  not  excludm.1. 

Shall  live  with  (o-yvi^/Jcro/iei'),  PartietpatJon  of  the  be- 
liever's Banctified  life  with  the  life  of  Cliriet  ratlier  than  parti- 
cipation in  future  glory,  wiiich  ia  not  the  point  emphasized. 
Compare  ver.  11. 

10.  In  that  He  died  (8  yip  airiAeoKv).  Lit.,  what  he  died; 
the  death  which  he  died.  Compare  ain  a  gin,  1  John  v.  16; 
the  life  which  Ilioe,  literally,  what  Hive,  Gal.  ii.  20. 

Once  (e^TTaf).  More  literally,  as  Rev.,  in  margin,  once 
for  all.     Compare  Heh.  vii.  27;  i.t.  12;  x.  10. 

12.  Reign  (ySaa-iXevfroi).  The  antithesis  implied  is  not  be- 
tween reigning  and  existing,  bnE  between  reigning  and  being 
deposed. 

Body.     Literal,  thus  according  with  jnembers,  ver.  13. 

13.  Yield  {irapia-rdveTe).  Pnt  at  the  service  of;  render. 
Rev.,  present.  Compare  Lnke  ii.  22 ;  Acts  is.  41 ;  Rom.  siL 
1.     Sec  on  Acts  i.  3. 

Members  {fU\t]).  Physical;  thongh  some  include  mental 
faculties.  Compare  Col.  iii.  5,  where  members  is  expounded  by 
fornication,  unclsamiess,  etc.,  the  physical  being  a  symbol  of 
the  moral,  of  which  it  is  the  instrument. 

Instruments  (^o;r\a).  The  word  is  need  from  the  earliest 
times  of  tools  or  instruments  generally.  In  Homer  of  a  ship's 
tackle,  smith's  tools,  iinplements  of  war,  ai^d  in  the  last  sense 
more  especially  in  later  Greek.  In  the  New  Testament  dis- 
tinctly of  instruments  of  war  {John  xviiL  3;  3  Cor,  vi.  7;  x. 
4)  Here  probably  with  the  same  meaning,  the  conception 
beiiiff  tliat  of  ain  and  righteousness  as  i-espectively  rulers  of  op- 
posing sovereignties  (compare  reign,  ver.  12,  and  have  dominion, 
ver.  14),  and  enlisting  men  in  their  armies.  Hence  the  exhort- 
ation is,  do  not  offer  your  members  as  weapons  with  which  the 
rule  of  nnrighteousness  may  be  maintained,  but  offer  them  to 
God  iu  the  service  of  righteousness. 

Of  unrighteousness  (aSiKlcK).     See  on  2  Pet.  ii.  13. 


r 


Ch.  YLI  the  epistle  to  the  ROMANS.  71 

Yield  {irapaoTTfa'aTe).  Kev.,  j^resent.  The  same  word  as 
before,  but  in  a  different  tense.  The  present  tense,  hejnreaeni- 
ing,  denotes  the  daily  habits  the  giving  of  the  hand,  the  tongue, 
etc.,  to  the  service  of  sin  as  temptation  appeals  to  each.  Here 
the  aorist,  as  in  xii.  1,  denotes  an  act  of  self-devotion  once  for 
all. 

As  those  that  are  alive  (&^  (jSyro?).  The  best  texts  read 
wrel  as  if  alive.  This  brings  oat  more  clearly  the  figurative 
character  of  the  exhortation.* 

From  the  dead  {iic  vexp&v).  Note  the  preposition  oitt  of. 
See  on  Luke  xvi.  31. 

16.  Servants  {SovTuw^).  Every  man  must  choose  between 
two  ethical  principles.  Whichever  one  he  chooses  is  mastery 
and  he  is  its  hond-servwrU.    Compare  Matt,  vi  24 ;  viL  18. 

Sin  unto  death — obedience  unto  righteousness.    The 

antithesis  is  not  direct — sin  unto  death,  obedience  xmijoUfe;  but 
obedience  is  the  true  antithesis  of  sin,  since  sin  is  disobedience, 
and  righteousness  is  life. 

17.  That  ye  were.  The  peculiar  form  of  expression  is  ex- 
plained in  two  ways ;  either  making  the  thanksgiving  bear  only 
on  the  second  proposition,  ye  obeyed,  etc,  and  regarding  the 
first  as  inserted  by  way  of  contrast  or  background  to  the  salut- 
ary moral  change :  or,  emphasizing  were  ;  ye  were  the  servants 
of  sin,  but  are  so  no  more.  Bev.  adopts  the  former,  and  in* 
serts  whereas. 

From  the  heart.    See  on  i.  21. 

Form  of  doctrine  (rihrov  &Sa;^).  Bev.,  form  of  teaching. 
For  Tuirov,  see  on  1  Pet.  v.  3.  The  Pauline  type  of  teach- 
ing as  contrasted  with  the  Judaistic  forms  of  Christianity. 
Compare  my  gospel,  ii.  16 ;  xvi.  25.  Others  explain  as  the 
ideal  or  pattern  presented  by  the  gospel.  Farm  of  teaching, 
however,  seems  to  point  to  a  special  and  precisely  defined  type 
of  christian  instruction. 


*  inrti  is  found  In  Ki  A,  B,  G.    It  does  not  ooonr  elsewhere  in  PaoL    Patriae 
ic  testimonjr  is  in  favor  of  its. 


I  atic 


72  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  (Ca  VL 

Was  delivered  unto  you  {ek  ov  iraptSoSifTe).  But  ilne 
rendering  is  impossible.  Eender,  ae  Rev.,  wftereunto  ye  were 
delivered.  Foi'  the  verb,  see  on  iv.  25.  They  had  been  handed 
over  to  the  educative  power  of  this  form  of  teaching. 

19.  After  the  manner  of  men  {av^patirivov).  Lit,,  wrxit  « 
huvian,  popular/i/.  He  fieems  to  have  felt  that  the  figiireg  of 
flervice,  bondage,  etc.,  were  unworthy  of  the  euhjecl,  and  apol- 
ogizee  for  his  use  of  the  image  of  the  elave-mart  to  enforce 
such  a  high  spiritual  truth,  on  the  ground  of  their  imperfect 
epiritual  comprehension.     Compare  2  Cor.  ii.  C  ;  1  Cor.  iii.  1,  2. 

To  iniquity  unto  iniquity  {t^  avofda  eU  -rrfv  avoiuav).  In- 
iquity issuing  in  an  abiding  iniquitous  state.  Lit.,  lawlesatiesi. 
It  is  used  by  John  as  the  definition  of  sin,  1  John  iii.  4. 

Holiness  (aritaafiov).  Rev.,  sanctificaiwn.  For  the  kindred 
adjective  Syioi  hi/ly,  see  on  minis.  Acta  xxvi.  10.  'Ayut<Tft6<t  is 
used  in  the  New  Testament  both  of  aj>roee^—t]ie  inauguration 
and  maintenance  of  the  life  of  fellowship  with  God,  and  of  lA^ 
resultant  state  of  sanctification.  See  1  TIicbb.  iv,  3,  7 ;  2  Thees. 
ii.  13 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  15  ;  1  Pet.  i,  2 ;  Ileb.  xii.  14.  It  is  difficult 
to  determine  which  is  meant  here.  The  passages  in  Theesa- 
lonians,  Timothy,  and  Ilebrews,  are  cited  by  interpreters  on 
hotli  sides.  As  in  ver.  22  it  appears  that  sanctification  con- 
templates a  further  result  (everlasting  life),  it  is  j)erhaps  bettei 
to  understand  it  as  the procem.  Yield  your  members  to  righte- 
ousness in  order  to  carry  on  the  progressive  work  of  sanctifica' 
i\on^  jferfecting  holiness  (1  Cor.  vii.  1). 

20.  Free  from  righteousness  {ikev^pot  -ry  Sueiuoa-wj}). 
An  ambiguous  translation.  Better,  Rev,,  _//■««  in  regard  of 
rigfiteousnt-ss.  Dlsengatjed  (Morison),  practically  independent 
of  its  demands,  having  offered  their  service  to  the  opposing 
power.     They  could  not  serve  two  masters. 

21.  Fruit.     See  on  i.  13. 

Had  ye  (c(;^cTe).  Imperfect  tense,  denoting  contianance. 
"What  fruit  were  yc  having  during  your  service  of  sin  I 

In  the  things  whereof  {e<f  oU).  Some  change  the  punctu- 
ation, and  read   "What  fruit  had  ye  at  that  timef    Things 


Ch.  Vn.  j  THE  SPISTLB  TO  THB  ROMAXa  73^ 

whereof  ye  are  now  ashamed."  But  the  majority  of  the  best 
texts  reject  this,  and  besides,  the  question  is  of  having  fruit, 
not  of  the  qualUy  of  the  fruit 

23.  Wages  (o^yus).  From  in^v  cooked  meaty  and  later, 
^enerdMyjprovisuma.  At  Athens  especially  ^A.  Hence  in^v 
lov  is  primarily  provisi^on-money^  and  is  used  of  supplies  for 
an  army,  see  1  Cor.  ix.  7.  The  figure  of  ver.  13  is  carried  out: 
Sin,  as  a  lord  to  whom  they  tender  weapons  and  who  pays 
wages. 

Death.  ^^  Sin  pays  its  serfs  by  punishing  them.  Its  wages 
is  death,  and  the  death  for  which  its  counters  are  available  is 
the  destruction  of  the  weal  of  the  soul "  (Morison). 

Gift  {xdpuTfjLa).  Eev.,  rightly, j^red  gift  (compare  ch.  r.  IS). 
In  sharp  contrast  with  wages. 


CHAPTER  TIL 

1.  Brethren.  All  Christians,  not  only  Jews  but  GentOes 
who  are  assumed  to  be  acquainted  with  the  Old  Testament 

2.  That  hath  a  husband  iymav^poi).  lit.,  v/nder  or  eiibject 
to  a  husband.  The  illustration  is  selected  to  bring  forward  the 
union  with  Christ  after  the  release  from  the  law,  as  analogous 
to  a  new  marriage  (ver.  4). 

Is  loosed  (/canj/xyifrat).  Rev.,  discharged.  See  on  liL  8. 
Lit.,  she  has  heen  hroughJb  to  naught  as  respects  the  Icno  of  the 
husband. 

The  law  of  the  husband.  Her  legal  connection  with  him. 
She  dies  to  that  law  with  the  husband's  death.  There  is  an 
apparent  awkwardness  in  carrying  out  the  figure.  The  law,  in 
vv.  1,  2,  is  represented  by  the  husband  who  rules  {hath  domin^ 
ion).  On  the  death  of  the  husband  the  woman  is  released.  In 
ver.  4,  the  wife  (figuratively)  dies.  '^  Ye  are  become  dead  to  the 
law  that  ye  should  be  married  to  another."  But  as  the  law  is 
previously  represented  by  the  husba/nd^  and  the  woman  is  re* 


T4 


WORD  BTCDIRS  IN  THB  NEW  TESTABJENT.        tCa.  v:r 


leased  by  the  husband's  death,  so,  to  make  the  Qgiire  consistunC, 
the  law  should  be  represented  as  dyuig  in  order  to  efFect  the 
believer's  release.  Tbe  awkwardness  is  relieved  by  taking  as 
the  midale  term  of  comparison  the  idea  of  dead  in  a  man-iaf/6 
retaiion.  When  the  husband  dies  the  wife  dies  {ia  brought  to 
^touffht)  so  far  as  tho  marriage  relation  is  concerned.  The  hus- 
band J9  represented  as  tlie  party  wbo  dies  because  the  figure  of 
a  second  marriage  is  uitrodiieed  with  its  application  to  believeia 
(ver.  i).  Believers  are  made  dead  to  the  law  as  the  wife  la 
maritaUy  dead — killed  in  respect  of  the  marriage  relation  by 
Iier  husband's  death, 

3.  She  shall  be  called  ixptf'^'^^^^-    ^^  ^^  ^'^^  ^'-  ^^■ 

4.  Are  become  dead  (e5avoT<A3»jTe).  Rev.,  more  accu- 
rately, ye  were  made  dead,  put  to  death  ;  because  this  ethical 
death  is  fellowship  with  Christ's  death,  which  was  hy  violence. 

Who  was  raised.  An  important  addition,  because  it  refers 
to  t/is  newnesa  of  life  which  issues  from  tbe  rising  with  Christ. 
Seech,  vi.  3,11,13.22. 

Bring  forth  fruit.  The  figure  of  marriage  is  continned,  but 
tlie  reference  is  not  to  bo  pressed.  The  real  point  of  analogy 
is  the  termination  of  relations  to  the  old  state. 

5.  In  the  flesh  (^i*  rp  aapxC).  Xdp^  JUsIl,  ocaan  in  tbe 
classics  in  the  physical  sense  only.  Homer  commonly  uses  it 
in  the  plural  as  denoting  all  the  fiesh  or  muscles  of  the  body. 
Later  the  singular  occurs  in  the  same  sense.  Paul's  use  of  this 
and  other  psychological  terms  must  be  determined  largely  by 
the  Old- Testament  usage  as  it  appears  in  the  Septuagint.* 

*  It  ii  beoDmiiig  inoreislngl;  nkiiireBt  hoir  oeaeBsarj  is  s  tboroa^ib  &c- 
qaalnlauce  villi  tbe  lauguage  of  the  8«ptu>gint  to  a  clear  nnderstanding  ol 
Paul's  writings,  and  Indeed  of  New-Testament  Greek  in  general.  The  want 
of  an  adequate  apparatiui  la  this  braaeh  of  etod;  oonstantlj  makes  itself  felt 
\>y  tlie  critical  student  of  the  Mew  Tastameat.  Tbe  recent  death  of  Edwin 
Hatch,  of  Oxford,  who  was  engaged  upon  a  new  Concordance  to  the  Septiia- 
gint,  is  a  serious  loss  to  New-Testament  scbolarsblp.  Tbe  student  mar  proflt- 
ablj  consult  that  scbolar's  "  Kwavs  in  BlbliOMl  Greek"  (1889J.  See  ilso  1«« 
lutaresting  articles  by  Archdeacon  Farrar,  "Expositor,"  first  serieg,  i.,  16, 
104 -,  and.  with  special  raferencs  to  Paul's  use  of  psycho  logical  terms.  Pro 
fesBor  DickKin's  >'  Panl'a  Use  of  the  Terms  Flesh  and  Spirit." 


Ch.  YIL]  the  BnPISTLB  TO  THE  BOlCANa  75 

1.  In  the  physical  sense.  The  literal  flesh.  In  the  Septaa- 
gint  rh  Kpiafteah  (plural)  is  used  where  the  reference  is  to  the 
parts  of  animals  slain,  and  at  cdp/ce^  Jlesh  (plural)  where  the 
reference  is  to  flesh  as  the  covering  of  the  living  body.  Hence 
Paul  uses  xpia  in  Eom.  xiv.  21 ;  1  Cor.  viii.  13,  of  die  flesh  of 
sacrificed  animals.  Compare  also  the  adjective  adpiuvo^  Jleshyj 
2  Cor.  iii.  3 ;  and  Ezek.  xi.  19 ;  xxxvi.  26,  Sept 

2.  Kindred.  Denoting  natural  or  physical  relationship,  Bom. 
i.  3;  ix.  3-8;  xi.  14;  Gal.  iv.  23,  29;  1  Cor.  x.  18;  Philem. 
16.  This  usage  forms  a  transition  to  the  following  sense:  the 
vahde  human  body.  Flesh  is  the  medium  in  and  through  which 
the  natural  relationship  of  man  manifests  itself*  Kindred  is 
conceived  as  based  on  community  of  bodily  substance.  There- 
fore: 

3.  ITie  body  itself.  The  whole  being  designated  by  the  part, 
as  being  its  main  substance  and  characteristic,  1  Cor.  vi.  16 ; 
vii.  28 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  11 ;  viL  5 ;  x.  8 ;  xii.  7.  Eom.  ii.  28 ;  Gal. 
vi.  13,  etc.  Paul  follows  the  Septuagint  in  sometimes  using 
a-Afui  hodyy  and  sometimes  adp^  fleshy  in  this  sense,  so  that  the 
terms  occasionally  seem  to  be  practically  synonymous.  Thus 
1  Cor.  vi.  16,  17,  where  the  phrase  one  body  is  illustrated  and 
confirmed  by  one  flesh.  See  Gen  ii.  24 ;  Eph.  v.  28,  31,  where 
the  two  are  apparently  interchanged.  Compare  2  Cor.  iv.  10, 
11;  1  Cor.  V.  3,  and  Col.  ii.  5.  Sdp^»  however,  differs  from 
a&fui  in  that  it  can  only  signify  the  organism  of  an  earthly, 
living  being  consisting  of  flesh  and  bones,  and  cannot  denote 
^*  either  an  earthly  organism  that  is  not  living,  or  a  living  or- 
ganism that  is  not  earthly"  (Wendt,  in  Dickson).  S&fia  is  not 
thus  limited.  Thus  it  may  denote  the  organism  of  the  plant 
(1  Cor.  XV.  37,  38)  or  the  celestial  bodies  (ver.  40).  Hence  the 
two  conceptions  are  related  as  general  and  special :  a&fia  hodyj 
being  the  material  organism  apart  from  any  definite  matter  (not 
from  any  sort  of  matter),  adp^  fleshy  the  definite,  earthly,  ani- 
mal organism.  The  two  are  synonymous  when  a&fia  is  used, 
from  the  context,  of  an  earthly,  animal  body.  Compare  Philip, 
i.  22 ;  2  Cor.  v.  1-8. 

S&fia  hody^  and  not  adp^  fl^esh^  is  used  when  the  reference 
is  to  a  metaphorical  organism,  as  the  church.  Bom.  xiL  4 


76  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         tCu.  VIL 

aqq.;  1  Cor.  x.  16;  xii.  12-27;  Eph.  i.  23;  ii.  16  ;  Col.  i.  18, 
etc. 

The  ffopf  18  described  aa  mortal  (2  Cor.  iv.  11) ;  subjeci  to 
tnjirmity  (Gal.  iv.  13;  2  Cor.  xii.  7);  locally  limited  (Col.  ii. 
15) ;  an  object  of  fostering  care  (Epli.  v.  29V 

4.  Livimj  beinys  generally^  including  iheir  mental  nai/ure, 
and  with  a  correlated  notion  of  weakness  and  j>erishableness. 
TliuB  the  phrase  iroo-a  <rapf  allJtesA  (Gen.  vi.  12 ;  Isa.  xlix.  26 ; 
Ixvi,  23).  This  accessory  notion  of  weakness  stands  in  contrast 
with  God,  In  Paul  tho  phrase  aU  fiegh  is  cited  from  the  Old 
Testament  (Rom.  iii.  20;  Gal.  ii.  16)  and  is  used  independ- 
ently (1  Cor.  i.  29).  In  all  these  instances  hefore  Gad  is  added. 
So  in  Gal.  i.  16,  flesh  and  blood  implies  a  contrast  of  human 
with  divine  wisdom.  Compare  1  Cor,  xv,  50;  Epli.  vi.  12. 
Tiiig  leads  up  to 

5.  Man  "  either  as  a  creature  in  his  natural  state  apart  from 
Christ,  or  the  creatureli/  side  or  a-'>pect  if  the  man  in  Christ" 
Hence  it  is  correlated  with  avBiMyirot  tnan,  1  Cor.  iii.  3  ;  Rom. 
vi.  19 ;  2  Cor.  v.  17.  Compare  \lom.  vi.  6 ;  Eph.  iv.  22  ;  Col. 
iii,  9 ;  Gal.  v.  24.  Thus  the  flesh  would  seem  to  be  interchange- 
able with  the  old  Tnan. 

It  lias  affectionH  and  hists  (Gal.  v.  24);  wiUings  (Eph.  ii.  3  ; 
Rom.  viii.  6,  7) ;  a  mind  {Co\.  ii.  18);  a  body  (Col.  ii.  11). 

It  is  in  sharp  contrast  with  irvevfia  spirit  (Gal,  iii.  3,  19 ;  v. 
16,  17,  19-24;  vi,  8;  Rom.  viii.  4).  The  flesh  and  the  spirit 
are  thus  antagonistic.  Sap^ flesh,  is  the  human  nature  without 
the  divine  Spirit ;  the  state  of  the  creature  before  or  in  contrast 
with  his  reception  of  the  divine  element  whereby  he  becomes 
a  new  creature  in  Christ :  the  whole  being  of  man  as  it  exists 
and  acts  apart  from  tlie  influence  of  tho  Spirit.  It  properly 
characterizes,  therefore,  not  merely  the  lower  forms  of  sensual 
gratification,  bnt  all — the  highest  developments  of  the  life 
estranged  from  God,  whether  physical,  intellectual,  or  aesthetic. 

It  mast  be  carefully  noted  : 

1,  Thrd  Paid  does  not  identify  flesh  and  sin.  Compare 
Jlesh  of  sin,  Rom,  viii.  3.  See  Rom.  vii.  17,  18 ;  2  Cor.  vii.  1 ; 
Gal.  ii.  20. 

2.  That  Paul  does  not  identify  adp^  loith  the  material  hodij 


CiL  VIL]  THE  EPISTIiE  TO  THB  ROMANa  77 

nor  associate  sin  exclusively  and  predoininanUy  with  the  body. 
The  flesh  is  the  flesh  of  die  living  man  animated  by  the  sovl 
{y^vxn)  ^  ito  principle  of  life,  and  is  distinctly  used  as  coord- 
inate with  avBponrof;  man.  As  in  the  Old  Testament,  *Mt 
embraces  in  an  emphatic  manner  the  nature  of  man,  mental 
and  corporeal,  with  its  internal  distinctions."  The  spirit  as 
well  as  the  flesh  is  capable  of  defilement  (2  Cor.  vii.  1 ;  com- 
pare 1  Cor.  vii.  34).  Christian  life  is  to  be  transformed  by  the 
renewing  of  the  mind  (Rom.  xii.  2 ;  compare  Eph.  iv.  23). 

3.  Thai  Pavl  does  not  identify  the  material  side  of  man 
with  evil.  The  flesh  is  not  the  native  seat  and  source  of  sin. 
It  is  only  its  organ,  and  the  seat  of  sin's  manifestation.  Matter 
is  not  essentially  evil.  The  logical  consequence  of  this  would 
be  that  no  service  of  God  is  possible  while  the  material  organ- 
ism remains.  See  Kom.  xii.  1.  The  flesh  is  not  necessarily 
sinful  in  itself ;  but  as  it  has  existed  from  the  time  of  the  in- 
troduction of  sin  through  Adam,  it  is  recognized  by  Paul  as 
tainted  with  sin.  Jesns  appeared  vn  the  fleshy  and  yet  was  sin- 
less (2  Cor.  V.  21). 

The  motions  of  sins  (t^  traSiifiaTa  r&v  ofAafm&v).  Motions 
was  used  in  earlier  English  for  emotions  or  imptdses.  Thus 
Bacon :  ^^  He  that  standeth  at  a  stay  where  others  rise,  can 
hardly  avoid  mx)tions  of  envy  "('*  Essay "  xiv.).  The  word  is 
nearly  synonymous  with  irdSo^  jpassion  (ch.  i.,  26,  note).  From 
irdSeiv  to  svffer  ;  a  feeling  which  the  mind  undergoes,  a  paw^ 
iouy  desire.     Bev.,  sinf id  passions  :  which  led  to  sins. 

Did  work  (ivrfpyelro).  Rev.,  torotcght.  See  2  Cor.  i.  6;  iv. 
12 ;  Eph.  iii.  20 ;  Gal.  v.  6 ;  Philip,  ii.  13 ;  Col.  i.  29.  Compare 
Mark  vi.  14,  and  see  ompovyer^  John  i.  12. 

6.  We  are  delivered  {Karnffy^Stf/iev).  Rev.,  have  been  dis* 
cha/rgedj  as  the  woman,  ver.  2.     See  on  ch.  iii.  8. 

We  were  held.     Lit.,  held  down.    See  on  ch.  i.  18. 

7.  I  had  not  known  {oIk  iyva^v).  Rev.,  correctly,  I  did  not 
know.  See  on  John  ii.  24.  The  /refers  to  Paul  himself.  He 
speaks  in  the  first  person,  declaring  concerning  himself  what  is 
meant  to  apply  to  every  man  placed  under  the  Mosaic  law,  as 


78 


WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW   TESTAMENT. 


[Ch.  VU. 


reapecte  his  relation  to  that  law,  before  and  after  tlie  revolu- 
tion in  his  inner  life  brought  about  through  his  connection 
with  that  law.  His  personal  experience  is  not  excluded,  but 
repreeenta  the  universal  experience.* 


Lust  {firiSvfiiai/).     Rev, 
8,  Sin.     Personified. 


coveting.     See  on  Mark  iv.  19. 


Occasion  {aipopfj.}]p).  Emphatic,  expressing  the  relation  of 
the  law  to  sin.  The  law  is  not  sin,  but  sin  found  occaawn  in 
the  law.  Used  only  by  Paul.  See  2  Cor.  v.  12 ;  Gal  v.  13  ;  1 
Tim.  V,  14.  The  verb  atf)opfuia>  means  to  make  a  start  from  a 
place.  'Aipop/*^  ia  therefore  primarily  a  starting-point^  a  hose 
of  operatione.  The  Lacedaemonians  agreed  that  Peloponnesus 
would  be  atpopfiijp  ucapijp  a  good  base  of  operations  (Tliucydidea, 
i.,  90).  Thus,  the  origin,  cause,  occasion,  or  pretext  of  a  thing; 
the  means  with  which  one  begins.  Generally,  resources,  as 
meaiiB  of  war,  capital  in  bustnesB.  Here  the  law  is  represented 
as  fumishing  sin  with  the  material  or  ground  of  assault, 
"  the  fulcrum  for  the  energy  of  the  evil  principle."  Sin  took 
the  law  as  a  baee  of  operations. 

Wrought  {KOTeipyda-aTo).     The  compound  verb  with  xard 

doim  throitgh  always  eigTiifies  the  bringing  to  pass  or  accomp- 
lishment. See  cb.  ii.  9  ;  1  Cor.  v.  3;  2  Cor.  vii.  10.  It  is  used 
both  of  evil  and  good.  See  especially  vv.  15,  17,  18,  20.  "  To 
man  everything  forbidden  appears  as  a  desirable  blessing;  but 
yet,  as  it  is  forbidden,  he  feels  that  lits  freedom  is  limited,  and 
now  liis  lust  rages  more  violently,  like  the  waves  against  the 
dyke"(Tlioluck). 

Dead.    Not  active, 

9.  1  was  alive — once  {l\^wv  ■n-or^.  Referring  to  the  time  of 
childlike  innocence  previous  to  the  stimulus  imparted  to  the  in- 
active principle  of  sin  by  the  coming  of  the  law  ;  when  the 
moral  self-determination  with  respect  to  the  law  had  not  taken 
place,  and  the  sin -principle  was  therefoi'e  practically  dead. 


L  •?( 


*  For  other  expluiatiotie,  tee  SchalTa  Laiif;e  o 


ilbU 


Ch.  VII.]  the  epistle  to  the  ROMANS.  79 

The  commandment  (^in-oX^).  The  specific  injunction 
*^  thoa  shalt  not  covet."     See  on  Jas.  ii.  8 ;  John  xiii.  34. 

Revived  (avi^i^ev).  Not  came  to  life,  but  li/oed  again. 
See  Luke  xv.  24,  32.  The  power  of  sin  is  ori-ginaUy  and  in  iU 
nature  living ;  but  before  the  coming  of  the  commandment  its 
life  is  not  expressed.  When  the  commandment  comes,  it  be- 
comes alive  again.  It  lies  dormant,  like  the  beast  at  the  door 
(Glen.  iv.  7),  until  the  law  stirs  it  up. 

The  tendency  of  prohibitory  law  to  provoke  the  will  to  re- 
sistance is  frequently  recognized  in  the  classics.  Thus  Horace : 
*'  The  human  race,  presumptuous  to  endure  all  things,  rushes 
on  through  forbidden  wickedness"  (Ode,  i.,  3,  25).  Ovid: 
^^The  permitted  is  unpleasing;  the  forbidden  consumes  us 
fiercely"  ("  Amores,"  ii.,  19,  3).  "We  strive  against  the  for- 
bidden and  ever  desire  what  is  denied  "  (Id.,  iii.,  4,  17).  Se- 
neca: "Parricides  began  with  the  law,  and  the  punishment 
showed  them  the  crime"  ("De  Clementia,"  i.,  23).  Cato,  in  his 
speech  on  the  Oppian  law,  says :  "  It  is  safer  that  a  wicked 
man  should  even  never  be  accused  than  that  he  should  be  ac- 
quitted ;  and  luxury,  if  it  had  never  been  meddled  with,  would 
be  more  tolerable  than  it  will  be  now,  like  a  wild  beast,  irritated 
by  having  been  chained  and  then  let  loose"  (Livy,  xxxiv.,  4). 

,5  I  found  to  be  unto  death.  The  A.  Y.  omits  the  significant 
avrrj  this.  JTiis  very  commandment,  the  aim  of  which  was 
life^  I  found  unto  death.  Meyer  remarks :  "  It  has  tragic  em- 
phasis." So  Rev.,  this  I  found.  The  surprise  at  such  an  un- 
expected result  is  expressed  by  I  founds  literally,  was  fotmd 

11.  Deceived  {i^rprdTqaev).  Rev.,  beguiled.  Only  in  Paul. 
Compare  2  Cor.  xi.  3 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  3. 

12.  Holy,  just,  good.  Boh/  as  God's  revelation  of  Himself; 
Ji^  (Rev.,  righteous)  in  its  requirements,  which  correspond  to 
God's  holiness ;  goodj  salutary,  because  of  its  end. 

13.  Exceeding  {/eaS*  inrepfioXifv).  An  adverbial  phrase. 
Lit.,  according  to  excess.  The  noun  inrepfioXi]  means  a  casting 
legend.     The  English  hyperbole  is  a  transcription. 


80  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Co.  VIL 

14.  We  know  {oiBaft^.  Denoting  something  generally 
conceded. 

Spiritual  {irvevfuniKo^).     The  expreasion  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

Carnal  (adpiciini^).  Lit.,  ina{/e  of  fi&ih.  A  very  etrong  ex- 
presaioL.  "  Tiiis  nnspiritual,  materiat,  phenomenal  nature  "  so 
dominates  the  unrenewed  man  that  he  is  described  a&conaitting 
ofjUah.     Others  read  aapxiKov  fiaving  the  iiature  ofjtesk. 

Sold  under  sin.  As  a  slave.  The  prepositiou  inro  ujider, 
with  the  accusative,  iaiplies  direction ;  so  as  (o  be  under  the 
power  of. 

15.  ]  do  [Karepyd^ofiat).  See  OD  ver.  8.  Accomplish,  achieve. 
Uere  appropriately  used  of  carrying  out  another's  will.  I  do 
not  perceive  ihe  outcojtte  of  my  sinful  life. 

I  allow  not  {oil  yivtoa-Kot).  AUmo  is  used  by  A.  V.  in  theear- 
lier  English  sense  of  a^pprove.  Compare  Luke  xi.  48 ;  liom.  xiv. 
22 ;  1  These,  ii.  4.  Shakapcare :  "  Thou  shalt  hold  the  opinion 
of  Pythagoras  as  I  will  cJlow  of  thy  wits  "  ("  Twelfth  Night," 
iv.,  3).  But  the  meaning  of  'jivanjKeo  is  not  aj^rove,  but  recog- 
nise, come  to  know, perceime.  Ileuce  Rev.,  Ticnow  not.  Paul 
says:  "What  I  carry  out  I  do  not  recognize  in  its  true  nature, 
as  a  slave  who  igiiorantly  performs  his  master's  behest  without 
knowing  its  tendency  or  result." 

I  would  {Bi\to).  See  on  Matt.  i.  19.  Rather  desire  than 
vnll  in  the  sense  of  full  determination,  aa  is  shown  hy  I  consent 
(ver.  16),  and  /  delight  in  (ver.  22). 

Do  I  not  {iTpdffffta).     See  on  John  iii.  21.     Rev.,  correctly, 

practise :  the  daily  doing  which  issues  in  acGomplishment  {icar- 
epyd^ofiai). 

Do  I  (voUi).  Seeon  John  iii.  31.  More  nearly  akin  to  Karep- 
fd^opai  I  accomplish,  realise.  "  When  I  have  acted  (Trpatra-o)) 
I  tind  myself  face  to  face  with  a  result  which  my  moral  instinct 
condemns  "  (Godett.  I  do  not  practise  what  1  would,  and  the 
outcome  is  what  I  hate. 


Ch.  Vn.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMANa  81 

16.  I  consent  {a-vft^fyrffjn).  Lit,  speak  toffether  with  ;  concur 
withj  since  the  law  also  does  not  desire  what  I  do.  Only  here 
in  the  New  Testament. 

Good  {koXo^).  See  on  John  x.  11,  32 ;  Matt  xxvi.  ].0 ;  Jas. 
ii.  7.     Morally  excelleut 

17.  Now — no  more  {vwl — ovtciri).  Not  temporalj  pointing 
back  to  a  time  when  it  was  otherwise,  but  logical^  pointing  to 
an  inference.  After  this  statement  yon  ckn  no  more  maintain 
that,  etc. 

I  (eyo)).  My  personality  proper;  my  moral  self -conscious- 
ness which  has  approved  the  law  (ver.  16)  and  has  developed 
vague  desires  for  something  better.* 

18.  In  me.  The  entire  man  in  whom  sin  and  righteousness 
struggle,  in  whose  unregenerate  condition  sin  is  the  victor,  hav- 
ing its  domain  in  the  flesh.  Hence  in  me  considered  as  carnal 
{ver.  14).  That  another  element  is  present  appears  from  ^^  to 
will  is  present  with  me ; "  but  it  is  the  flesh  which  determines 
his  activity  as  an  unregenerate  man.  There  is  good  in  the  I^ 
but  not  in  the  /  considered  as  carnal.  This  is  brought  out  in 
ver.  25,  "  With  the  flesh  (I  serve)  the  law  of  sin."  Hence  there 
is  added  that  isj  in  my  Jleah, 

Is  present  {irapaKeirai),     Lit,  lies  beside  or  hefore. 

Perform  (/care/r/i^lecrdai).     Carry  the  desire  into  effect 

I  find  not  {ovx  evpCa/co}),  The  best  texts  omit  Jindy  and  read 
simply  oif  not.     So  Rev.,  *^  To  do  that  which  is  good  is  not 

(present)." 

19.  Do  not — do  {iroiA — irpcura-io).     See  on  ver.  15. 

*  I  hold  that,  in  this  chapter,  Paul  ia  describing  the  condition,  not  of  the 
regenerate  man  straggling  for  sanctification,  but  of  the  unregenerate.  Thooe 
who  maintain  the  opposite  view  explain  /  of  the  regenerate  personalitj,  and 
give  now — no  mare  the  temporal  sense.  *'  It  was  once  my  true  self,  it  is  no 
more  mj  true  self  which  works  the  wiU  of  sin."  Dr.  Dixon  sajs:  *'  Hardly 
anjr  recent  exegete  of  mark,  except  Philippi  and  Delitzsch,  lends  countenance 
to  the  view  that  Paul  is  depicting  the  experiences  of  the  believer  under  grace 
in  conflict  with  sin.*' 
Vol.  IIL— 6 


82  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TKSTAMEKT.         [Ch.  VIL 

21-  A  law.  With  the  article,  thu  law.  The  constant  rule 
of  experience  imposing  itBelf  on  the  will.  Thus  in  the  phrases 
law  nffaUh,  works,  the  epirii.  Here  the  law  of  raoral  contra- 
diction. 

When  I  would  (t^  SeXovrt  ifiol).  Lit.,  as  Rev.,  to  tne  who 
woiihl,  or  to  the  wU/dft/j  ine,  thns  eiiipIiaBizing  tlie  /  whose 
characteristic  it  is  to  wish,  but  not  to  do. 

22.  1  delight  in  ((tuviJSo/ww).  Lit.,  I  rejoice  with.  Stronger 
than  /  consent  unto  (ver.  16).  It  is  the  agreement  of  moral 
et/rajmihi/. 

The  inward  man  (tok  etrai  avSpotirov).  The  rational  and 
moral  /,  the  essence  of  the  man  which  is  conscious  of  itself  hs 
an  ethical  personality.  Not  to  be  confounded  with  th£  new 
mam,  (Epb.  iv.  24;  Col,  iii.  10).*  It  is  substantially  the  same 
with  the  mind  (ver.  23). 

23.  I  see  (jSXiTrat).  See  on  John  i.  29.  Paul  is  a  spectator 
of  his  own  personality. 

Another  {hepov).     See  on  Matt.  vi.  24. 
Warring  against    {avTuTrparevofifvov).     Only  here  in  the 
New  Testament.     Taking  the  field  against. 

The  law  of  my  mind  (t^  vofitp  rov  voix;  ptov).  Now  mind, 
is  a  term  distincti^'ely  characteristic  of  Paul,  though  not  con- 
fined to  him.     See  Lnke  xxiv.  45  ;  Apoc.  xiii.  18  ;  xvii.  9. 

Panl's  nsage  of  this  term  is  not  based,  like  that  of  spirit  and 
^flesht  on  the  Septuagint,  though  the  word  occurs  six  times  as 
the  rendering  of  lebh  heart,  and  once  of  ruach  spirit. 

He  nses  it  to  throw  into  sharper  relief  the  function  of  rejlect- 
ive  itUelligence  and  moral  judtpnent  which  is  expressed  gener- 
I  ally  by  xapZla  heart. 

■  The  key  to  its  Pauline  nsage  is  furnished  by  the  contrast  in 

I  1   Oor.  xiv,  14-19,  between  speaking  with  a  totigue  and  with 

I  the  understanding  (t^  vot),  and  between  the  spirit  and  t/ie  un- 

I  derstanding  {ver.  14).     There  it  is  the  faculty  of  reflective  in- 

H  telligence  which  receives  and  is  wrought  upon  by  the  Spirit,    It 


*  6o  ttioM  who  rafei  Uie  wciioD  to  the  regenente. 


Oh.  YU]  THB  EPISTLB  TO  THB  BOMANa  83 

18  associated  with  yvf»fA^  opinion^  resulting  from  its  exercise, 
in  1  Cor.  i.  10 ;  and  with  Kpivei  judgeth  in  Bom.  xiv.  5. 

Paul  uses  it  mainly  with  an  ethical  reference — moral  judg- 
ment as  related  to  action.  See  Som.  xii.  2,  where  the  renewing 
of  the  F0V9  mind  is  urged  as  a  necessary  preliminary  to  a  right 
moral  judgment  ("that  ye  lURy jprove,^^  etc.).  The  vov^  which 
does  not  exercise  this  judgment  is  oBotcifio^  not  c^jprovedj  repro- 
bate. See  note  on  reprobate^  i.  28,  and  compare  on  2  Tim.  iii. 
8 ;  Tit.  i.  15,  where  the  vov^  is  associated  with  the  conscience. 
See  also  on  Eph.  iv.  23. 

It  stands  related  to  irpevfia  spiritj  as  the  faculty  to  the  e£Gicient 
power.  It  is  "  the  faculty  of  moral  judgment  which  perceives 
and  approves  what  is  good,  but  has  not  the  power  of  practically 
controlling  the  life  in  conformity  with  its  theoretical  require- 
ments." In  the  portrayal  of  the  struggle  in  this  chapter  there 
is  no  reference  to  the  irvevfia  spirit^  which,  on  the  other  hand, 
distinctively  characterizes  the  christian  state  in  ch.  viii.  In  this 
chapter  Paul  employs  only  terms  pertaining  to  the  natural 
faculties  of  the  human  mind,  and  of  these  vov^  mind  is  in  the 
foreground. 

Bringing  into  captivity  (alxfJuiKarrl^ovTa).  Only  here,  2 
Oor.  X.  5,  and  Luke  xxi.  24.  See  on  captives^  Luke  iv.  18.  The 
warlike  figure  is  maintained.  Lit.,  making  me  prisoner  of 
war. 

Law  of  sin.  The  regime  of  the  sin-principle.  Sin  is  repre- 
sented in  the  New  Testament  as  an  organized  economy.  See 
Eph.  vi. 

The  conflict  between  the  worse  and  the  better  principle  in 
human  nature  appears  in  numerous  passages  in  the  classics. 
Godet  remarks  that  this  is  the  passage  in  all  Paul's  epistles 
which  presents  the  most  points  of  contact  with  profane  litera- 
ture. Thus  Ovid :  ^^  Desire  counsels  me  in  one  direction,  rea- 
son in  another."  ^^  I  see  and  approve  the  better,  but  I  follow 
the  worse."  Epictetus :  ^^  He  who  sins  does  not  what  he  would, 
and  does  what  he  would  not."  Seneca:  ^^What,  then,  is  it 
that,  when  we  would  go  in  one  direction,  drags  us  in  the  other?" 
See  also  the  passage  in  Plato  (^^  Phaedrus,"  246),  in  which  the 


84  WORD  8TUDIE9  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Cu.  VJL 

Iiuman  soul  is  represented  as  a  chariot  drawn  hy  two  horses, 
OTie  drawing  up  and  the  other  down. 

2i.  Wretched  ijaXaiTrapov).     Originaliy,  wretched  through 
the  exiiaiistion  of  hard  labor. 

Who  (rh)-     Referring  to  uperaotuU  deliverer. 

Body  of  this  death  (toO  vtatfiarm  tow  Savdrou  tovtov).  Tlie 
bod}'  serving  as  the  seat  of  the  death  into  which  t!ie  sonl  is 
sunk  tliroiigh  the  power  of  sin.  The  body  is  tlie  literal  body, 
regarded  as  the  priucipal  instrument  whieli  ein  uses  to  enslave 
and  destroy  the  soul.  In  explaining  this  much-disputed  phrase, 
it  must  be  noted ;  1.  That  Paul  associates  the  dominion  and 
energy  of  sin  prominently  with  the  body,  though  not  as  if  sin 
were  inherent  in  and  inseparable  from  the  body.  2.  Tliat  he 
represonts  the  service  of  sin  through  the  body  as  associated 
with,  identified  with,  tending  to,  resulting  in,  death.  And 
therefore,  3.  Tiiat  he  may  properly  speak  of  the  literal  body  as 
a  hody  of  death — this  death,  wliich  is  the  certain  issne  of  the 
abject  captivity  to  sin.  4.  That  Paul  is  not  expressing  a  desire 
to  escape  from  the  body,  and  therefore  for  death.  Meyer  para- 
phrases correctly ;  "  Who  sliall  deliver  me  out  of  bondage  un- 
der the  law  of  sin  into  moral  freedom,  in  which  my  body  shall 
no  longer  serve  as  the  scat  of  tbis  shameful  death ! "  Ignatius, 
in  his  letter  to  the  Smyrnaeans,  speaks  of  one  who  denies 
Christ's  humanity,  as  veicpo^pa^  one  who  oarrieg  a  corpse. 
1^  I  myself.  The  man  out  of  Christ.  Looking  back  and  suni- 
iniug  np  the  unregenerate  condition,  preparatory  to  setting 
forth  its  opposite  in  ch.  viii,  Paul  says  therefore,  that,  so  far 
as  conceiTis  his  moral  intelligence  or  reason,  he  approves  and 
pays  homage  to  God's  law ;  but,  being  in  bondage  to  sin,  made 
of  flesh,  sold  under  sin,  the  fleah  carries  him  its  own  way  and 
commands  his  allegiance  to  the  economy  of  ain. 


Oh.  Vm.]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMAITS.  85 


CHAPTER  YIIL 

1.  Therefore  now.  Connecting  with  vii.  25.  Being  freed 
through  Jesns  Christ,  there  is  therefore  no  condemnation 
now. 

Condemnation  {jcaroKpi^.  As  ch.  v.  16,  eenience  of  con- 
demnation. 

Who  walk  not,  etc  The  best  texts  omit  to  the  end  of  the 
verse. 

2.  The  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  (6  f6/ao9  toO  irveviuiTof;  rr^ 
fy^Tf^).  The  laWj  the  regulative  principle ;  the  Spiritj  the  divine 
Spirit  who  inspires  the  law  (compare  vii.  14).  OfUfe^  proceed- 
ing from  the  life  of  Jesus  and  producing  and  imparting  life. 
Compare  John  xvi.  15. 

In  Christ  Jesus.    Construe  with  hath  made  me  free.    Com 
pare  John  viii.  36. 

3.  What  the  law  could  not  do  {to  oBwarov  rou  vofiov). 
Lit.,  the  impossible  {thing)  of  the  law.  An  absolute  nominative 
in  apposition  with  the  divine  act — condemned  sin.  God  con* 
demned  sin,  which  condemnation  was  an  impossible  thing  on 
the  part  of  the  law.  The  words  stand  first  m  the  Greek  order 
for  emphasis. 

In  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh.  JAi.,  of  the  ftesh  of  sin. 
The  choice  of  words  is  especially  noteworthy.  Paul  does  not 
say  simply,  "  He  came  in  flesh  "  (1  John  iv.  2 ;  1  Tim.  iii.  16), 
for  this  would  not  have  expressed  the  bond  between  Christ's 
manhood  and  sin.  Not  in  the  flssh  of  sin^  which  would  havf 
represented  Him  as  partaking  of  sin.  Not  in  the  likeness  Oj 
fl^sh^  since  He  was  really  and  entirely  hnman ;  but,  in  the  Uke- 
ness  of  the  flesh  of  sin :  really  human,  conformed  in  appearance 
to  the  flesh  whose  characteristic  is  sin,  yet  sinless.  "  Christ 
appeared  in  a  body  which  was  like  that  of  other  men  in  so  far 


Si;  WORD  STUDIES   IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMEMT.        (Cc  VIIL 

as  it  consisted  of  flesh,  and  was  unlike  in  so  far  as  tlie  flesli  was 
not  iUsh  of  sin  "  (Dickson).* 

For  sin  {irepl  afiapTlcK).  The  preposition  expresses  the  whole 
relation  of  the  mission  of  Christ  to  sin.  The  special  relation 
is  stated  ill  condemntd.  For  sin — to  atone,  to  destroy,  to  save 
£nd  sanctify  its  victims. 

Condemned.  Deposed  from  its  dominion,  a  tiling  impos- 
sible to  the  law,  which  could  pronounce  judgment  and  inflict 
penalty,  but  not  dethrone.  Christ's  holy  character  was  a  con- 
demnation of  unholineas.  Construe  in  the  fieah  with  cou' 
demned. 

4.  Righteousness  {hMaUafM).  Rev.,  ordinance.  Primarily 
ihat  which  is  deemeii  right,  so  as  to  have  the  force  of  law ; 
hence  an  ordinance.  Here  collectively,  of  tlie  moral  precepts 
of  the  law:  \ts  righteous  requirement.  Compare  Luke  i.  6; 
Rom.  ii.  26  ;  Ileb.  ix.  1.     See  on  ch.  v.  16. 

The  Spirit  (wwO/ia),  From  m4w  to  breathe  or  blow.  The 
primary  conception  is  wind  or  breath.  Breath  being  the  sign 
and  condition  of  life  in  man,  it  comes  to  signify  l^e.  In  this 
sense,  physiologically  considered,  it  ie  frequent  in  the  classics. 
In  the  psychological  sense,  never.  In  the  Old  Testament  it  is 
ordinarily  the  translation  of  ruack.  It  is  also  used  to  translate 
chai  life,  laa.  xxxviii.  12  ;  n^shamah  breath,  1   Kings  xvii,  17. 

In  the  New  Testament  it  occurs  in  the  sense  of  wind  or 
breath,  John  iii.  8;  2  Thess.  ii.  8;  Ileb.  i.  7.  Closely  related 
to  the  physiological  sense  are  such  passages  as  Luke  viii.  65 ; 
Jas,  ii.  26  ;  A.poc.  xiii.  15. 

Pauline  usage  ; 

1.  Breath,  2  ThesB.  ii.  8. 

2.  The  spirit  or  mind  of  Tnan ;  the  inward,  eelf-conecions 
principle  which  feels  and  tliinks  and  wills  (1  Cor.  ii.  II ;  v.  3; 
vii.  34  ;  Col.  ii.  5). 

In  this  sense  it  is  distinirnished  from  aaifut  body,  or  accomp- 
anied with  a  personal  prononn  in  the  genitive,  as  my,  our,  his 

*  See  hii  fall  diBonHBioD  of  tliia  paEsoge  ia  "  St.  Paul's  Use  of  the  Terms 
flwh  and  Spirit,"  p.  SSa  8qq. 


■ 


Ch.  Vm.]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  BOMANa  87 

spirit  (Bom.  i.  9 ;  viii.  16 ;  1  Cor.  v.  4 ;  xvi.  18,  etc).  It  is 
used  as  parallel  with  '^p't/x'i  ^oulj  and  tcapBia  heart.  See  1  Cor. 
v.  3 ;  1  Thess.  ii.  17 ;  and  compare  John  xiii.  21  and  xii.  27 ; 
Matt.  XX vi.  38  and  Luke  i.  46,  47.  fiat  while  '^vx^  sotdj  is 
represented  as  the  svhject  of  life,  itvevfia  spirit^  represents  the 
principle  of  life,  having  independent  activity  in  all  circum- 
stances of  the  perceptive  and  emotional  life,  and  never  as  the 
subject.  Generally,  irveAfia  spiritj  may  be  described  as  the 
principle^  '^^vxj  sotU^  as  the  suljectj  and  xapSla  hearty  as  the  or- 
gan  of  life. 

3.  The  spirittuxl  nature  of  Christ.  Bom.  i.  4 ;  1  Cor.  xv. 
45 ;  1  Tim.  iii.  16. 

4.  The  divine  power  or  inflt^ence  belonging  to  Oodj  and  com-^ 
municated  in  Christ  tomen^  i/n  virttte  of  which  they  become  irvei}- 
fuiTitcoi  epiritiuil — recipients  and  organs  of  the  S^rit.  This  is 
Paul's  most  common  use  of  the  word.  Bom.  viii.  9 ;  1  Cor.  ii. 
13 ;  Gal.  iv.  6 ;  vi.  1 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  8.  In  this  sense  it  appears 
as: 

a.  Spirit  of  God.  Bom.  viii.  9,  11,  14 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  10,  11, 
12,  14:  iii.  16;  vi.  11;  vii.  40;  2  Cor.  iii.  3;  Eph.  iii. 
16. 

b.  Spirit  of  Christ.  Bom.  viii.  9;  2  Cor.  iii.  17,  18;  GaL 
iv.  6 ;  Philip,  i.  19. 

c.  Holy  Spirit.  Bom.  v.  6 ;  1  Cor.  vL  19 ;  xii.  3 ;  Eph.  L 
13 ;  1  Thess.  i.  6,  6 ;  iv.  8,  etc. 

d.  Spirit.  With  or  witliout  the  article,  but  with  its  refer- 
ence to  the  Spirit  of  God  or  Holy  Spirit  indicated  by 
the  context.  Bom.  viii.  16,  23,  26,  27 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  4,  10; 
xii.  4,  7,  8,  9 ;  Eph.  iv.  3 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  13,  etc. 

5.  A  power  or  influence^  the  cha/racter,  ma/nifestationSj  or  re- 
suits  of  which  are  more  peculiarly  defined  by  qualifying  geni- 
tives. Thus  spirit  of  meekness  J  faithjpoioer J  wisdom.  Bom. 
viii.  2,  15 ;  1  Cor.  iv.  21 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  13  ;  Gal.  vi.  1 ;  Eph.  i.  17; 
2  Tim.  i.  7,  etc. 

These  combinations  with  the  genitives  are  not  mere  peri- 
phrases for  a  faculty  or  disposition  of  man.  Sy  the  spirit  of 
meekness  or  wisdom^  for  instance,  is  not  meant  merely  a  meek 
or  wise  spirit ;  but  tbat  meeknesSy  wisdomy  power y  etc.,  are 


I 


8fl  WORD   BTDDIES  IN  THE  XKW  TKSTAMEST,       (Cu.  VHl. 

gifts  of  the  spirit  of  God.  Tliis  usage  is  according  to  Old- 
Testament  analogy.  Compare  Exod.  xxviii.  3 ;  xxxL  3  j 
XXXV.  31 ;  Isa.  xi.  '2. 

6.  In  the  plural,  used  of  spiritual  gifts  or  of  those  who  pro^ 
fess  to  be  under  spiritual  influence,  1  Cor.  xii.  10 ;  sir.  12. 

7.  Powers  or  influenoea  alien  or  averse  from  the  divine  Spirit, 
hut  with  some  qualifying  -word.  Thus,  the  spirit  of  tJie  world ; 
another  spirit ;  spirit  of  slumber.  Rom.  xi.  8 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  12 ;  2 
Cor.  xi.  4;  Eph.  ii.  2;  2  Tim.  i.  7.  Where  these  expressions 
are  in  negative  form  they  are  framed  after  the  analogj-  of  tJie 
positive  counterpart  with  which  thej  are  placed  in  contrast. 
Thus  Eom.  viii.  15 :  "  Ye  have  not  received  the  spirit  of  botul- 
age,  hut  of  adojition.  In  other  cases,  as  Eph.  ii.  2,  where  the 
expression  is  positive,  the  conception  is  shaped  according  to 
Old-Testament  usage,  where  spirits  of  evil  are  conceived  as 
issuing  from,  and  dependent  upon,  God,  so  far  as  lie  permits 
their  operation  and  makes  them  subservient  to  His  own  ends. 
See  Judges  ix.  23;  1  Sam.  xvi.  14-16,  23;  xviii.  10;  1  Kings 
xxii.  21  sqq. ;  Isa.  xix.  4. 

Spirit  is  found  contrasted  with  letter,  Horn.  ii.  29 ;  vii.  6 ;  2 
Cor.  iii.  6.     Withj«^A,  Rom.  viii.  1-13;  Gal.  v.  16,  24. 

It  is  frequently  associated  with  the  idea  oi  power  (Rom.  i.  4 ; 
XV.  13,  19;  1  Cor.  ii.  4;  Gal.  iii.  5;  Eph.  iii.  16;  2  Tim.  i.  7); 
and  the  verb  evepyelv,  denoting  to  work  efficaciously,  IS  used  to 
mark  its  special  operation  {1  Cor.  xii,  11 ;  Eph.  iii.  20;  Philip. 
iL  13;  Col.  i.  29).  It  is  also  closely  associated  with  life,  Rom. 
Tiii.  2,  6,  11,13;  1  Cor.  xv.  4,  6;  2  Cor.  iii.  6;  Gal.  v.  25  ; 
vi.  8. 

It  is  the  common  possession  of  the  Church  and  its  members ; 
tiot  an  occasional  gift,  but  an  essential  element  and  mark  of  the 
christian  life ;  not  appearing  merely  or  mainly  in  exceptional, 
roarveliuus,  ecstatic  demonstrations,  but  as  the  motive  and 
mainspring  of  all  christian  action  and  feeling.  It  reveals  itself 
in  aonfession  (1  Cor.  xii.  3);  in  the  consciousness  of  aonship 
(Rom.  viii.  16) ;  in  the  knowledge  of  the  love  of  God  (Rom.  v. 
5) ;  i»  the  peace  and  joy  of  faith  (Rom.  xiv.  17 ;  1  Thesa.  i,  6) ; 
in  Itope  (Horn,  v.  5;  xv.  13).  It  lea<ls  believers  (Rom.  viii.  14; 
Gal.  V.  IS):  they  serve  m  newness  of  the  Spirit  (Rom.  vii.  C). 


Oil  VIU.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMANa  89 

They  walk  after  the  Spirit  (Rom.  viii.  4,  5 ;  Gal.  v.  16-25). 
Through  the  Spirit  they  s^re  sanctified  {2  These,  ii.  13).  It  man- 
ifests itself  in  the  diversity  of  forms  and  operations,  appearing 
under  two  main  aspects :  a  difference  of  g^isy  and  a  difference 
of  /unctions.  See  Bom.  viii.  9 ;  1  Cor.  iii.  16 ;  v.  i.  ll ;  xii. 
13 ;  Eph.  1.  13 ;  iv.  3,  4,  30 ;  Philip,  ii.  1 ;  1  Cor.  xii.  4,  7,  11. 

As  compared  with  tlie  Old-Testament  conception,  Paul's 
irvevfia  ^'  is  the  roach  of  the  Old  Testament,  conceived  as  mani- 
festing itself  after  a  manner  analogous  to,  but  transcending,  its 
earlier  forms.  It  bears  the  same  characteristic  marks  of  divine 
origin,  of  supernatural  power,  of  motive  energy  in  active  exer- 
cise— standing  in  intimate  relation  to  the  fuller  religious  life 
and  distinctive  character  and  action  of  its  recipients.  But 
while  in  the  Old  Testament  it  is  partial,  occasional,  intermit- 
tent, here  it  is  general,  constant,  pervading.  While  in  the  Old 
Testament,  as  well  as  in  the  Kew,  its  forms  of  manifestation 
are  diverse,  they  are  expressly  referred  under  the  New  to  one 
and  the  same  Spirit.  While  in  the  Old  Testament  they  con- 
template mainly  the  official  equipment  of  men  for  special  work 
given  them  to  perform,  they  include  under  the  Kew  the  inward 
energy  of  moral  action  in  tlie  individual,  no  less  than  the  gifts 
requisite  for  the  edification  of  the  Church ;  they  embrace  the 
whole  domain  of  the  religious  life  in  the  believer,  and  in  the 
community  to  which  he  belongs.  The  irveOfia  of  the  apostle  is 
not  the  life-breath  of  man  as  originally  constituted  a  creature  of 
God  ;  but  it  is  the  life-spirit  of  "  the  new  creation  "  in  which 
all  things  have  become  new  "  (Dickson). 

With  the  relation  of  this  word  to  '^^v^  sovl  is  bound  up  the 
complicated  question  whether  Paul  recognizes  in  the  human 
personality  a  trichotomy^  or  threefold  dwision  into  body,  soul, 
and  spirit  On  the  one  side  it  is  claimed  that  Paul  r^ards 
man  as  consisting  of  body,  the  material  element  and  physical 
basis  of  his  being ;  soul,  the  principle  of  animal  life ;  and  spiritj 
the  higher  principle  of  the  intellectual  nature.  On  the  other 
side,  tliat  spirit  and  sotd  represent  different  sides  or  functions 
of  the  one  inner  man ;  the  former  embracing  the  higher  powers 
more  especially  distinctive  of  man,  the  latter  the  feelings  and 
appetites.     The  threefold  distinction  is  maintained  chiefly  on 


1)0  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  VUL 

the  basis  of  1  Theaa.  v.  23.     Compare  Heb.  iv.  ]2.*     On  tbe 
(liBtinction  from  ^v^ij  bohI,  see,  fnrther,  on  cb.  xi.  3. 

5,  They  that  are  (pi  Svrev).  Wider  in  meaning  than  waik, 
which  expreaeea  the  man^e«tation  of  the  condiiion  expreaee'd 
hy  are. 

Do  mind  {^popowrtv).  The  verb  primarily  means  to  have 
understanding  ;  then  to  fed  or  think  (1  Cor.  xiii.  11) ;  to  have 
an  opinion  (Rom.  xii.  3),  Hence  to  judge  (Acta  xxviii.  22; 
Gal.  V.  10;  Philip,  iii,  16).  To  direct  tite  faind  to  aomethincf, 
and  fio  to  seek  or  strive  for  (Matt,  xvi.  23,  note  ;  Philip,  iii.  19; 
Col.  iii,  2).  So  here.  The  object  of  their  thinking  and  striv- 
ing is  fleshly. 

6.  To  be  carnally  minded  [to  <f>p6i'T}fia  t^s  oapjco^).  Lit., 
as  Rev.,  t/ie  mind  of  thefiesh.  Fleshly  thinking  and  striving. 
Similarly  the  mindof  th&  Spirit  for  (o  he  spirituallg  jninded. 

1.  Is  not  subject  {oi/x  v-rroTdaaerai.).  See  on  Jaa.  iv.  T. 
Originally  to  arrange  under.  Poaaibly  with  a  shade  of  mili- 
tary irieaning  suggested  by  enmity.  It  is  viarekalled  unAar  a, 
boetile  banner. 

10.  The  body.     The  believer's  natural  body. 

The  spirit.     The  believer's  human  spiriLf 

•  The  diBouasiou  oauuot  bo  enlurBii  iij)OU  hera.  It  is  Bo»rijel7  fair  to  test 
Paul's  pliraseolog;  b;  llie  diitinotioos  of  niDdern  pB;roholog;r  ;  nor,  asflum- 
liig  hlB  f»miliuit;  with  Ihese.  is  it  to  ba  eipHctud,  u  lias  been  jiutlj  said, 
that  "  ha  would  emphogiio  (bem  ii>  an  eameat  prater  Cor  liis  converts,  poured 
out  from  a  full  hesrl."  Tho  ansumptiou  of  a  trichotomjr  reHulta  in  a  cboos  of 
exegesis,  oimiug  at  the  aoourate  duSuitioD  of  llio  tliruu  porla.  Frofesaor  Bid- 
die,  in  SchnfTs  Lauge,  has  soma  sensibla  remarks  on  this  subject.  He  liuds 
little  beflida  the  siugls  passage  !□  Tb-essalouioas  to  support  the  tricbotomlc 
view,  and  concludes  that  the  distinctian.  if  real.  "  is  not  of  such  importaaoe 
us  has  been  (bought,  &nd  esonot  be  made  the  basis  of  the  startling  propositions 
nhicb  human  speculation  has  deduced  from  it."  He  claims  that  the  prevail- 
ing tone  of  scripture  implies  a  tisofoid  rather  than  a  lhr»fotd  division.  This 
view  is  also  held  and  expounded  by  Professor  Dickson, 

f  ProfenorDlekBon,  however,  maintains  that  the  Holy  Spirit  as  "  tbe  source 
and  vehicle  of  life"  la  meant.  Ha  urges  tlie  deviation  from  strict  paralloliam 
of  Btruoture  which  would  require  de<t(C  to  be  oQleet  b;  living  instead  of  the  al> 
Blract  life. 


Ch.  VUL]  THB  BPISTLE  to  the  ROMANa  91 

13.  Ye  shall  die  (jUXkere  airaSv^atceiv).  The  expression  is 
stronger  than  the  simple  f  nture  of  the  verb.  It  indicates  a 
necessary  consequence.     So  Hev.,  ye  muH. 

Mortify  {Savarovre).     Fat  to  death. 

Deeds  (irpd^i^).  Habitual  practices.  See  on  ch.  vii.  15; 
John  iii.  21. 

14.  Sons  (viot).  See  on  John  i.  12 ;  Matt.  i.  1.  There  is 
an  implied  contrast  with  the  Jewish  idea  of  sonship  by  phys- 
ical descent. 

15.  Spirit  of  bondage  {yrvevna  hovkela/i;).  The  Holy  Spirit, 
as  in  Spirit  ofadopUon.  The  Spirit  which  ye  received  was  not 
a  spirit  of  bondage.     See  ver.  4,  under  wvevfui,  7. 

Spirit  of  adoption  {irpeOfia  vloScaiof:).  The  Spirit  of  Qod, 
producing  the  condition  of  adoption.  'TtoSea-la  adoptionj  is 
from  vio^  son,  and  ^ai^  a  Betting  or  placing :  the  placing  one 
in  the  position  of  a  son.  Mr.  Merivale,  illustrating  Paul's 
acquaintance  with  Eoman  law,  says:  "The  process  of  legal 
adoption  by  which  the  chosen  heir  became  entitled  not  only  to 
the  reversion  of  the  property  but  to  the  civil  status,  to  the 
burdens  as  well  as  the  rights  of  the  adopter — became,  as  it 
were,  his  other  self,  one  with  him  •  .  .  this  too  is  a  Rom- 
an principle,  peculiar  at  this  time  to  the  Romans,  unknown, 
I  believe,  to  the  Greeks,  unknown,  to  all  appearance,  to  the 
Jews,  as  it  certainly  is  not  found  in  the  l^slation  of  Moses, 
nor  mentioned  anywhere  as  a  usage  among  the  children  of  the 
covenant.  We  have  but  a  faint  conception  of  the  force  with 
which  such  an  illustration  would  speak  to  one  familiar  with  the 
Roman  practice ;  how  it  would  serve  to  impress  upon  him  the 
assurance  that  the  adopted  son  of  God  becomes,  in  a  peculiar 
and  intimate  sense,  one  with  the  heavenly  Father  '*  ("  Conver- 
sion of  the  Roman  Empire  "). 

We  cry  {xpa^ofiev).  Of  a  loud  cry  or  vociferation ;  express- 
ing deep  emotion. 

Abba  CAfifia).  Compare  Mark  xiv.  36.  A  Syrian  term,  to 
which  Paul  adds  the  Greek  Father.  The  repetition  is  prob- 
ably from   a  liturgical  formula  which   may  have  originated 


[Cii.  VIIL 

among  the  Heileiiistic  Jews  wlio  retaiued  the  coneecratetl  word 
ji        Abba.     Some  £ud  liere  a  iiint  of  tlie  unioii  of  Jew  aud  G«iitile 
in  God.* 

16.  Beareth  witness  with  our  spirit  {avfi,futprvptt  t^ 
TTvcw/toT*  rfiiSiv).  This  rendering  assumes  the  concurrent  testi- 
mony of  the  human  spirit  with  that  of  the  divine  Spirit.  Others, 
however,  prefer  to  render  io  onr  spirit,  ui^ing  that  the  linman 
epirit  can  give  no  testimony  nntil  acted  npon  by  the  Spirit  of 
God. 

Children  (teki^).     See  on  John  i.  12. 

17.  Joint-heirs.  lioman  law  made  all  children,  inclnding 
adopted  onea,  equal  heritors.  Jewish  law  gave  a  double  portion 
to  the  eldest  eon.  The  Roman  law  was  naturally  in  Paul's 
mind,  and  suits  the  context,  where  adoption  is  the  basis  of  in- 
heritance. 

If  so  be  that  {elirep).  The  conditional  particle  with  the  in- 
dicative mood  assumes  the  fact.    If  so  be,  as  is  really  the  case. 

Suffer  with  Him.  Mere  suffering  does  not  fulfil  the  condi- 
tion. It  is  suffering  with  Christ.  Compare  v>ith  Him — aU 
things,  ver.  32. 

18.  I  reckon  (Xoyl^ofuu).  See  on  1  Pet.  v.  12.  It  implies 
reasoning.  "I  judge  after  calculation  made"  (Godet).  Com. 
pare  iii.  28  ;  2  Cor.  xi.  5  ;  Philip,  lii.  13. 

19.  Earnest  expectation  [airoKapa^Kia).  Only  here  and 
Philip,  i.  20.  Fi-om  utto  awmj,  Ktlpa  t/ie  head,  SoKfiP  to  watch. 
A  watching  with  tlie  Iiead  erect  or  outstretched.  Hence  a 
waiting  in  suspense.  'Atra  from,  implies  abstraction,  the  at- 
tention turned  from  other  objects.  The  classical  student  will 
recall  the  watchman  in  the  opening  of  Aeschylus'  "Agamem- 
non," awaiting  the  beacon  which  is  to  announce  the  capture  of 
Troy. 

Creature  (xrlo-eai;).  The  word  may  signify  either  the  creative 
act  {as  i.  20),  or  the  thing  lyreated  {Mark  x.  6 ;  xiii.  19 ;  xvi.  15 ; 

I  •RoMorlrononMkrk  K 

\         BonUiDg  both  Jew  uid  Oer 


I 


Ch.  VIIL]  THB  epistle  to  the  BOMANa  93 

Col.  i.  23;  Heb.  iv.  13).  See  on  1  Pet.  ii.  13.  Here  in  the 
latter  sense.  The  interpretations  vary :  1.  The  whole  unre- 
deemed creation,  rational  and  irrational.  2.  All  creation,  ex- 
cept humanity.  The  point  of  difiPerence  is  the  inclusion  or 
exclusion  of  humanity.  The  second  explanation  is  preferable, 
the  nan-raUaruxl  creation  viewed  collectively,  animate  and  in- 
animate.    Equivalent  to  aU  nature, 

Waiteth  {aireKBexeraiy  Only  in  Paul  and  Heb.  ix.  28.  Tlie 
whole  passage,  with  the  expressions  waiting^  sighing^  hoping^ 
hondagey  is  poetical  and  prophetic.  Compare  Ps.  xix.  2 ;  Isa. 
xi.  6 ;  xiv.  8 ;  Iv.  12 ;  Ixv.  17 ;  Ezek.  xxxi.  15 ;  xxxvii. ;  Hab. 
ii.  11. 

20.  Vanity  (jjMra^TqrC).  Only  here,  Eph.  iv.  17;  2  Pet.  ii. 
18.  Compare  the  kindred  verb  became  vain  (Rom.  i.  21,  note), 
and  the  adjective  vain  (1  Cor.  iii.  20 ;  1  Pet.  L  18).  Vain  is 
also  used  to  render  /cei^o?  ( I  Cor.  xv.  14,  58 ;  Eph.  v.  6 ;  Jas.  ii. 
20).  Keim  signifies  empty ;  fiaToia:  idte^  restdtleM.  Kevi^, 
used  of  persons,  implies  not  merely  the  absence  of  good,  but 
tlie  presence  of  evil.  So  Jas.  ii.  20.  The  Greek  proverb  runs: 
^^  The  empty  think  empty  things."  Mareuo^  expresses  aimlesS' 
nesa.  All  which  has  not  Ood  for  the  true  end  of  its  being  is 
lidrcuo^.  Pindar  describes  the  vain  man  as  one  who  hunts 
bootless  things  with  fruitless  hopes.  Plato  ("  Laws,''  735)  of 
labor  to  no  purpose.  Ezek.  xiii.  6,  '^  prophesying  vain  things 
{pLaramy^  things  which  God  will  not  bring  to  pass.  Compare 
Tit  iii.  9.  Here,  therefore,  the  reference  is  to  a  perishable 
and  decaying  condition,  separate  from  God,  and  pursuing  false 
ends. 

By  reason  of  Him  who  hath  subjected  (SiA  rov  {nro- 
rd^avra).  God,  not  Adam  nor  Satan.  Paul  does  not  use  the 
grammatical  form  which  would  express  the  direct  agency  of 
God,  hy  Him  who  hath  subjected,  but  that  which  makes  God's 
will  tlie  occasion  rather  than  the  vyorker — on  account  of  Him. 
Adam's  sin  and  not  God's  will  was  the  direct  and  special  cause 
of  the  subjection  to  vanity.  The  supreme  will  of  God  is  thus 
removed  "to  a  wider  distance  from  corruption  and  vanity" 
(Alford). 


94  WORD  STUDIES  IN  TUB  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Cu.  VIII. 

21.  In  hope  because  {eV  eX-Wfit  on).  The  best  texts  trauB- 
fer  tliese  words  froin  tlie  preceding  verse,  and  coiiBtnie  with 
was  TTtade  subject,  rendering  ort  t/utt  ineiead  of  because.  "  Tiie 
creation  was  subjected  in  the  hope  that,"  etc.  In  hope  is  liter- 
ally on  hope,  as  a  foundation.  The  hope  is  tliat  of  ihe  a-ubjected, 
not  of  the  aubjector.  Nature  "  posseBees  in  the  feeling  of  lier 
unmerited  suffering,  a  sort  of  presentiment  of  her  future  de- 
liverance"  (God  et).  Some  adopt  a  very  suggestive  connection 
of  in  hope  with  waitetfifor  the  manifestation. 

Glorious  liberty  {ekev^p^v  t%  56^).  Better,  aud  more 
literally,  as  Rev.,  liberty  of  the  glory.  Liberty  ia  one  of  the 
elements  of  tbe  glorious  state  and  is  dependent  upon  it.  The 
glory  is  that  in  ver,  18.  The  Greek  student  will  note  the  ac- 
cumulation of  genitives,  giving  solemnity  to  the  passage. 

22.  For.  Introducing  the  proof  of  the  hope,  not  of  the 
bondage. 

Groaneth — travaileth  together  (xrworei/afet — irvvaSipet}. 
Both  only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  The  simple  verb  luSiW 
to  travail,  occurs  Gal.  iv.  19,  27 ;  Apoc,  xii.  2  ;  and  the  kindred 
noun  mSiv  birthing,  in  Matthew  and  Mark,  Acts,  and  1  Thess. 
V.  3.  See  on  Mark  xiii.  9 ;  Acta  ii.  24.  Together  refers  to  the 
common  longing  of  all  the  elen^ents  of  the  creation,  not  to  its 
longing  in  common  with  God's  children.  "Nature,  with  its 
melancholy  charm,  resembles  a  bride  who,  at  the  very  moment 
when  she  was  fully  attired  for  marriage,  saw  the  bridegroom 
die.  She  still  stands  with  lier  fi-esh  crown  and  in  her  bridal 
dress,  but  her  eyes  are  full  of  tears"  (Schelling,  cited  by  Godet). 

24.  By  hope  (tj  cXviBi).  Better  in  hope.  We  are  saved  by 
faith.     See  on  1  Pet.  i.  3. 

Hope — not  hope.  Here  the  word  is  used  of  the  object  of 
hope.     See  Col.  i.  5  ;  1  Tim.  i.  1 ;  Heb.  vi.  18. 

26.  Helpeth  (awavTiXafi^duerai).  Only  here  and  Luke  x. 
40,  on  which  see  note.  *^  Aau-^diKrai  taketh.  Preciaely  the 
same  verb  in  precisely  the  same  phrase,  which  is  translated 
'  took  our  infirmities  V'  Matt.  viii.  17  {Bushnell}. 


i 


Ch.  YUL]  THB  BPIBTLB  to  THB  BOMANa  95 

As  we  ought  {icaSo  Set).  Not  with  reference  to  the  form 
of  prayer,  but  to  the  circumstances  :  in  proportion  to  the  need. 
Compare  2  Cor.  viii.  12 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  13. 

Maketh  intercession  for  {inrtpevrvyxovei)'     Only  here  in 

^  the  New  Testament.     The  verb  iimrfxcano  means  to  light  upon 

or  fall  in  with  ;  to  go  to  meet  for  consultation,  conversation,  or 

sapplication.      So  Acts  xxv.  24,  "dealt  with,"  Rev.,  "made 

suit"     Compare  Bom.  viii.  34 ;  xi.  2 ;  Heb.  vii.  25. 

Which  cannot  be  uttered  (oXoXifroiv).  This  may  mean 
either  uniUterahle  or  unuttered. 

28.  Work  together  (ovpepyeT).  Or,  are  working  together^ 
now,  while  the  creation  is  in  travail.  Together  refers  to  the 
common  working  of  all  the  elements  included  in  irdvra  all 
things. 

For  good.  Jacob  cried,  all  these  things  are  against  me. 
Panl,  all  things  are  working  together  for  good. 

29.  Did  foreknow  {irpoiyva}).  Five  times  in  the  New  Test- 
ament. In  all  cases  it  meskUB/breknow.  Acts.  xxvi.  5 ;  1  Pet. 
i.  20;  2  Pet.  iii.  17;  Bom.  xi.  2.  It  does  not  meskii  foreordain. 
It  signifies  prescience^  not  prelection.  "  It  is  God's  being 
aware  in  Ilis  plan,  by  means  of  which,  before  the  subjects  are 
destined  by  Him  to  salvation.  He  knows  whom  He  has  to 
destine  thereto"  (Meyer).* 

It  is  to  be  remarked : 

1.  That  'jrpoeyvto  foreknew  is  used  by  the  apostle  as  distinct 
and  different  from  predestinated  {irpwopuTev), 

2.  That,  strictly  speaking,  it  is  coordinate  with  foreordained, 
"  In  God  is  no  before."  All  the  past,  present,  and  fntnre  are 
simnltaneously  present  to  Him.  In  presenting  the  two  phases, 
the  operation  of  God's  knowledge  and  of  His  decretory  will, 

*  This  18  the  simple,  common-sense  meaning.  The  attempt  to  attach  to  it 
the  sense  of  preelection,  to  make  it  inclade  the  divine  decree,  has  grown  ont 
of  dogmatic  considerations  in  the  interest  of  a  rigid  predestinarianism.  The 
scope  of  this  work  does  not  admit  a  discussion  of  the  infinitesimal  hair-split- 
ting which  has  been  applied  to  the  pasBtge,  and  which  is  as  profitless  as  it  is 
unsatisfactory. 


96  WORD  BTODIK8  IN  THE  NEW  TBSTAJtENT.       [Ca.  VUL 

the  sncceBBioD  of  time  is  introduced,  not  as  metaph^Bicallf 
true,  but  Iq  concesBion  to  human  limitationB  of  thought.  Hence 
the  coordinating  force  of  koI  also. 

3.  That  a  predetermination  of  God  ia  clearly  stated  as  ac- 
companying or  (humanly  speaking)  succeeding,  and  grounded 
upon  the  foreknowledge. 

4.  That  thiB  predetermination  is  to  the  end  of  conformity  to 
the  imago  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  that  thii^  is  the  vital  point  of 
the  poseage. 

a.  That,  therefore,  the  relation  Iwtweeii  foreknowledge  and 
predestination  ib  incidental,  and  is  not  contemplated  as  a  spectul 
point  of  dtscnseion.  God's  foreknowledge  and  His  decree  are 
alike  aimed  at  holy  character  and  final  ealvation. 

"  O  thou  predestination,  how  remote 

Thy  root  ig  from  the  upuat  of  all  thoaa 
Who  the  First  Caiiae  do  not  behold  enlira  t 
And  yoa,  O  mortals  !  hold  yourselves  reatruned 
Id  judging  ;  for  ourselvee,  wlio  look  oo  God, 
~  We  do  not  know  ok  jHt  all  the  elect ; 

And  sweet  to  ue  in  eucli  a  duprieation, 
Beoaose  our  good  in  this  good  is  made  perfect, 
That  whatsoe'er  God  nilla,  we  olao  witl." 

Dakte,  "  Paradiao,"  zz.,  130-138. 

To  ba  conformed  {avii^pJMvt).  With  an  inner  and  eaaen- 
tial  conformity.     See  on  trangjigured.  Matt.  xvii.  2. 

To  the  image  (-r^?  eiKoi^f).  See  ou  ch.  i.  23.  In  all  respects, 
sufferings  and  moral  character  no  lesa  than  glory.  Compare 
yv.  18,  28,  31,  and  see  Philip,  iii.  21  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  49;  2  Cor. 
iii.  18;  1  John  iii.  2,  3,  "There  is  another  kind  of  life  of 
which  science  as  yet  has  taken  little  cognizance.  It  obeys  the 
same  laws.  It  builds  np  an  organism  into  its  own  form.  It  is 
the  Christ-life.  As  the  bird-life  builds  up  a  bird,  the  image  of 
itself.  BO  the  Christ-life  builds  np  a  Christ,  the  image  of  Him- 
self, in  the  inward  nature  of  man.  .  .  .  According  to  the 
great  law  of  conformity  to  type,  this  fashioning  takes  a  specific 
form.  It  is  that  of  the  Artist  who  fashions.  And  all  through 
life  this  wonderful,  mystical,  glorious,  yet  perfectly  definite 


Ch.  Vm.]  THE  EPISTLB  TO  THB  BOMANfi.  97 

process  goes  on  ^  until  Christ  be  formed  'in  it "  (Drommond, 
«  Natural  Law  in  the  Spiritual  World  ^). 

First-born  {irporrirotcov).  See  on  Apoc.  i.  5.  Compare  CoL 
^  15, 18,  note. 

32.  Spared  {if^laaro).  Mostly  in  Paul.  Elsewhere  only 
Acts  XX.  29 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  4,  5.  Compare  Gen.  xxiL  16,  which  Paul 
may  have  had  in  mind. 

His  own  {IBiov).    See  on  Acts  L  7 ;  2  Pet  L  3,  20. 

With  Him.  Not  merely  in  addition  to  Him,  but  all  gifts  of 
God  are  to  be  received,  held,  and  enjoyed  in  communion  with 
Christ 

Freely  give.    In  contrast  with  spared. 

33.  Shall  lay— to  the  charge  (ijieaXiaei).  Only  here  by 
Paul.  Frequent  in  Acts.  See  xix.  38,  40 ;  xxiii.  28, 29 ;  xxvL 
2,  7.  Lit.,  "  to  call  something  in  one."  Hence  ccUl  to  account; 
bri/ng  a  charge  againsL 

The  following  clauses  are  differently  arranged  by  expositors. 
I  prefer  the  succession  of  four  interrogatives:  Who  shall  lay? 
etc.  Is  it  Oodt  etc.  Who  is  He  that  condemnethf  Is  it 
Christ  t  etc.* 

34.  Rather  (/iaXXoi;).  <<Our  faith  should  rest  on  Christ's 
<leath,  but  it  should  rather  also  so  far  progress  as  to  lean  on 
His  resurrection,  dominion,  and  second  coming"  (Bengel), 
^'  From  the  representations  of  the  dead  Christ  the  early  believ« 
ers  shrank  as  from  an  impiety.  To  them  He  was  the  living, 
not  the  dead  Christ — the  triumphant,  the  glorified,  the  infinite, 
— not  the  agonized  Christ  in  that  one  brief  hour  and  power  of 
darkness  which  was  but  the  spasm  of  an  eternal  glorification  " 
{Farrar,  "  Lives  of  the  Fathers,"  i.,  14). 


*  So  Alford,  De  Wette,  Jowett.    The  objeotions  are  baied  mainlj  on  the 
«appofled  logical  oorrelation  of  the  aeniences ;  on  which  it  aeema  saperflaooB 
to  insist  in  a  rhetorical  outbarst  like  this.    Mejer^s  arrangement  is  adopted  b/ 
Hot.  and  Dwight ;  Lange  and  Schaff  and  Riddle  hold  to  the  A.  V. 
Vol.  in. —7 


98  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Cn.  LX. 

37.  We  are  more  than  conquerors  {uwepviK&fiev).  A  vict- 
ory which  is  more  than  a  victory.  "  A  holy  arrogance  of  victory 
in  the  might  of  Christ"  (Mejer). 

38.  Powers  {apT(al).    Angelic,  higher  than  mere  angels. 

Things  present  (^veorwra).  Only  in  Paul  and  Ileb.  ix.  9. 
The  verb  literally  means  to  stand  in  sight.  Hence  to  impend 
or  threaten.  So  2  Theae.  ii.  a  ;  2  Tim.  iii.  1 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  26. 
Used  of  something  that  has  set  in  or  begun.  So  some  render 
here.*  Bengel  says:  "Thin^  past  are  not  mentioned,  not 
even  eins,  for  they  liave  passed  away." 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Ltither  says :  "  Who  hath  not  known  pasaion,  crosa,  and  trav- 
ail of  death,  cannot  treat  of  f*ti-eknowledge  (election  of  grace) 
without  injury  and  inward  enmity  toward  God.  Wherefore 
take  heed  thatthoii  drink  not  wine  while  thon  art  yet  a  sucking 
babe.  Sach  aeveral  doctrine  bath  its  own  reason  and  measure 
and  age." 

1.  In  Christ.  Not  "by  Christ,  as  the  formula  of  an  oathj 
Christ  being  never  Qsed  by  the  apostlea  in  such  a  formula, 
bnt  God.  Horn.  i.  9  ;  2  Cor.  i.  23  ;  si.  31 ;  Philip,  i.  8.  For 
this  favorite  expression  of  Paul,  see  Gal.  ii.  17 ;  1  Cor.  i.  2 ;  3 
Cor.  ii.  14,  17;  xii.  19,  etc. 

Conscience.     See  on  1  Pet.  iii.  16. 

Bearing  me  witness.  Rev,,  hearing  witness  with  me.  See 
on  ch.  viii.  16.  Concurring  with  my  testimony.  Morison  re- 
marks that  Paal  speaks  of  conscience  aa  if  it  were  something 

*  Hejer  ujh  :  Not  ibaolntal^  ooiD<)iil!ng  vltli  Oiinga  present  In  the  nauBl 
Bense.  thongb  this  la  KugaUtiokllj  poaalbl  •,  >  it  nert-T  in  ths  New  Tmttment. 
He  renden :  Wlial  it  in  the  act  of  htfi'-g  »el  in,  uid  oitea  G»l,  I  4,  wbere, 
however,  oommentatora  differ.     The  "Vulgate  farora  Mej'er,  rendering  intlanf 


i 


Oh.  IX.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  BOMAITO.  99 

diBtinct  from  himself,  and  he  cites  Adam  Smith's  phrase,  ^^  the 
man  within  the  breast" 

In  the  Holy  Ghost.  So  Bev.  The  concurrent  testimony 
of  his  declaration  and  of  conscience  was  ^^  the  echo  of  the  voice 
of  God's  Holy  Spirit "  (Morison) .♦ 

2.  Heaviness,  sorrow  (Xi^  oSvpff).  Seavinessj  bo  Wye. 
and  Tynd.,  in  the  earlier  sense  of  sorrow.    So  Chaucer : 


Shakspeare: 


**  Who  feeleth  doable  sorrow  and  heaWneas 
But  Palamon  ?  " 

*«  Knight's  Tale/'  1466. 


"  I  am  here,  brother,  fall  of  heaTlneas." 

2««HenrjIV.,"  W.,  5,  8. 


Hev.,  sorrow.  ^OBvptf  is  hotter  rendered  jMZtn.  Some  derive 
it  from  the  root  edecUy  as  indicating  consfwmwng  pain.  Compare 
Horace,  cura^  edaoes  devouring  ca/res.  Only  here  and  1  Tim. 
vi.  10. 

Heart.    See  on  ch.  i.  21. 

3.  I  could  wish  (17^x0/^71^).  Or  pray,  as  2  Cor.  xiii.  7,  9; 
Jas.  y.  16.  Lit,  I  was  wishing ;  but  the  imperfect  here  has  a 
tentative  force,  implying  the  wish  hegtm,  but  stopped  at  the 
outset  by  some  antecedent  consideration  which  renders  it  im- 
possible, so  that,  practically,  it  was  not  entertained  at  all.  So 
Paul  of  Onesimus :  ^'  Whom  /  could  ha/oe  wished  (i^vXjofi/r/v) 
to  keep  with  me,"  if  it  had  not  been  too  much  to  ask  (Philem. 
13).    Paul  would  wish  to  save  his  countrymen,  even  at  such 

*  The  American  Committee  of  Revisioxi  jostlj  take  exception  to  the  Tari*- 
tion  in  the  rendering  of  wrwfjM  trftov  Holy  SpirU^  Ohoti,  bj  the  Englidi  Be- 
▼isers.  Throaghoat  Matthew,  Mark,  and  Lake  thej  use  Ohott^  with  Qpirit  in 
margin,  as  also  throaghoat  Acts  and  Romans.  In  John,  Spirit  throaghoat, 
except  in  xx.  22,  for  no  apparent  reason.  In  1  Corinthians,  both  ;  in  2  Corin- 
thians, Ohcmt  throaghoat ;  in  Ephesians,  Spirit.  In  1  Thessalonians,  both.  In 
Timothy,  Titas,  1st  and  2d  Peter,  Ohoit ;  in  Jade,  Spifril.  See  mj  article  on 
"The  Revised  New  Testament, "  Presbyterian  Review,  October,  1881,  and 
some  severe  strictnres  in  the  same  direction  by  Professor  Dickson,  "  St  Paul's 
Use  of  the  Terms  Flesh  and  Spirit,*'  p.  240. 


100 


WOKD  STUDIES  IN  TUB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


ICii.  IX 


sacrifice,  if  it  were  morally  possible.  Others,  however,  esplaiit 
tlie  imperfect  as  stating  an  actual  wish  formerly  entertained.* 

Accursed  from  Christ(ai'ix^;Mia7ro  rov  j(pi<rrov).  Compare 
Gal.  i,  8,  9 ;  1  Cor.  xii.  3 ;  xvi.  ^2.  See  on  offerinyg,  Luke  xxi. 
6,  Set  apart  to  destruction  and  eo  separated  from  Christ  (PItilip. 
i.  21 ;  iii.  8,  20).  An  expresBioii  of  deep  devotion.  "It  is 
not  eaey  to  estimate  the  measure  of  love  in  a  Moses  and  a  Pan!. 
For  our  limited  reason  does  not  grasp  it,  as  the  child  cannot 
comprehend  the  courage  of  warriors"  (Bengel).  Compare 
Moses,  Exod.  xxxii.  32. 

4.  Who  (oiTivet).  The  double  relative  characterizes  the  Is- 
raelites with  their  call  and  privileges  as  sucA  that  for  them  he 
could  even  wish  himself  accursed. 

Israelites.     See  on  Acts  iii.  12, 

Adoption.  See  on  ch.  viii.  15.  Israel  is  always  represented 
as  the  Ijord's  son  OTJir8t-born  among  all  peoples.  Exod.  iv.  32 ; 
Dent.  xiv.  1 ;  Hos.  xi.  1. 

The  fflory.  The  visible,  luminous  appearance  of  the  divine 
presence  was  called  by  the  Israelites  the  glory  of  Jakceh,  or, 
in  rabbinical  phrase,  the  Shekinah.  See  Exod.  xxiv.  16 ;  xl. 
34,  35 ;  Ezek.  i.  28 ;  Heb.  ix.  5.  Not  the  final  glory  of  God's 
kingdom;  for  this  belongs  to  the  Gentiles  as  well  as  to  the 
Jews. 

The  covenants  (at  ita^Ktu).  See  on  Matt,  xxvi.  28. 
Those  coiiL-lnded  with  the  patriarchs  since  Abraham.  See  Gal. 
iii.  16,  17 ;  Ep!i.  ii.  12.  The  plural  never  occurs  in  the  Old 
Testament.     See  on  Ueb.  ix.  16. 


■•Boms  moke  the  words  "I  oonld  wiali— from  Christ."  pRrantheticsl.  Kiid 
tnppose  Piul  to  refer  to  hfs  own  attitude  totrard  Christ  before  hU  conversian, 
bv  -wKj  of  illuBtrating  the  sad  splritiml  aooditioa  of  his  oountrjmen.  Rnd 
thus  Moounting  for  Lis  sorrow  of  heart.  Others  retsin  Iho  wune  tenae  with- 
out the  parentheBis.  The  word  maj  sIbo  mean  "  I  prayed"  (3  Cor.  xiii.  T  ; 
Jw.  T,  16).  In  olassicaJ  Greeh,  though  not  id  the  New  Ttatament,  it  hu  the 
neanlng  "  TOW."  Lange  renders  "  I  made  a  tow,  "  paying  th&t  he  probably 
made  some  fearful  pledge  when  ha  raceived  authority  to  perseente  the  Christ- 
iana. The  Htuduut  will  find  the  T&rioiis  interpretations  fully  discuKsed  in 
Morlson's  monograph  on  Bonuni  ix.  uid  z.,  and  in  Bchaff's  Lange. 


Ch.  IX.]  THE  EPISTLB  TO  THE  BOMANa  lUl 

The  giving  of  the  law  (17  pofjLoSeala).  The  act  of  giving, 
with  a  secondary  reference  to  tlie  substance  of  the  law ;  legisla- 
tion. 

The  service  (17  Xarpetd).  See  on  John  xvi.  2 ;  Luke  i.  74 ; 
Apoc.  xxii.  3 ;  Pliilip.  iii.  3.  Here  the  sum-total  of  the  Levitical 
services  instituted  by  the  law. 

The  promises.  The  collective  messianic  promises  on  which 
the  covenants  were  based.  The  word  originally  means  an- 
nouncement.    See  on  Acts  i.  4. 

5.  Of  whom  (ef  &v).  From  the  midst  of  whom.  But  in 
order  to  guard  the  point  that  the  reference  is  only  to  Christ's 
human  origin,  he  adds,  as  concerning  the  flesh. 

Who  is  over  all,  God  blessed  for  ever  (6  &v  M  ircamov 
Beb^  6^X0717x09  €w  T0U9  al&va^).  Authorities  differ  as  to  the 
punctuation ;  some  placing  a  colon,  and  others  a  comma  after 
flesh.  This  difference  indicates  the  difference  in  the  interpre- 
tation ;  some  rendering  as  concerning  th^  flesh  the  Christ  came: 
God  who  is  over  all  be  blessed Jbr  ever  ;  thus  making  the  words 
God^  etc.,  a  doxology  :  others,  with  the  comma,  the  Christ,  who 
is  over  ally  God  blessed  Jbrever ;  i.e.,  Christ  is  God  (For 
minor  variations  see  margin  of  Rev.)  * 

Amen.    See  on  Apoc.  i.  6. 

6.  Not  as  though  {ovx  otov  Si  in).  Bev.,  hut  U  is  not  as 
though.  The  thought  is  abruptly  introduced.  I  am  not  speak- 
ing of  a  matter  of  such  a  nature  as  that  the  doctrine  of  faith 
involves  the  failure  of  God's  promises  to  Israel. 


*  I  incUne  to  the  dozological  ySew,  bat  the  long  and  intricate  diBonasioiL 
cannot  be  gone  into  here.  For  the  dozologioal  view  the  student  maj  consult 
Mejers  note,  Professor  Ezra  Abbot,  *' Joamal  of  the  American  Societj  of 
Biblical  Literature  and  Exegesis,"!  881  (also  <*  Critical  Essajs"),  and  Beet's 
^'Commentary  on  Romans.**  Also  G.  Vance  Smith,  **  Expositor/*  first  series, 
ix  ,  397,  to  which  are  appended  answers  bj  Archdeacon  Farrar  and  W.  San- 
dajr.  On  the  other  side.  President  Dwighfs  note  in  the  American  Meyer.  He 
refers  in  this  to  his  own  article  in  the  same  number  of  the  *' Journal  of  Bibli- 
cal Literature  'Mn  which  Professor  Abbot's  article  appears.  See,  also,  Farrar 
in  ** Expositor"  as  above,  p.  217,  and  Oodet  on  BomanSw 


102  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IX 

Hath  taken  none  effect  («(ore7rTw«ei').  Lit.,  hag  failen 
out.     Kev.,  come  to  nmight. 

7.  In  Isaac.  Not  in  Ishtnael,  though  Ishmael  also  was  the 
seed  of  Abraham.  The  sajing  of  Gen.  xxi.  12  is  directly  added 
without  U  is  lorltien  or  it  wets  said,  because  it  is  assumed  to  be 
well  known  to  the  readers  as  a  saying  of  God.  The  Hebrew 
is :  "  in  Isaac  shall  posterity  be  named  to  thee."  In  the  person 
of  Isaac  the  descendant  of  Abraham  will  be  represented  and 
recognized.  The  general  principle  asserted  is  that  the  true 
sonship  of  Abraham  does  not  rest  on  hodily  descent. 

Shall  be  called  {KX■n^<TeTal).  Named.  See  on  ch.  iv.  17. 
Others,  coiled  from  nothing.  But  the  promise  waa  made  after 
Isaac  was  born. 

8.  That  is.     The  Old-Testament  sayiog  amounts  to  this. 
Children   of  the  promise.     Originating  from  the  divine 

pi-omiae.     See  Gal.  iv.  23. 

9.  This  is  the  word  of  promise.  The  A.  Y.  obscures  the 
true  sense.  Tliere  is  no  article,  and  the  emphasis  is  on  promise. 
"  I  say  'a  word  of  promise,''  for  a  word  oi  promise  is  this  which 
follows."     Or,  as  Morison,  "tliis  word  is  one  of  promise." 

At  this  time  (Kari,  tw  xaipov  tovtov).  Rev.,  according  to 
this  season.  Tlie  reference  is  to  Gen.  xviii.  14,  where  the 
ilebrew  is  when  the  season  is  renewed  or  revives;  i.e.,  next 
year  at  this  time.  The  season  is  represented  as  reviving  peri- 
odically. 

10.  And  not  only  so.  The  thought  to  be  supplied  is :  Not 
only  have  we  an  example  of  the  election  of  a  son  of  Abraham 
by  one  woman,  and  a  rejection  of  his  son  by  another,  but  also 
of  the   election   and  rejection    of   the   children  of  the   same 


By  one.  Though  of  one  father,  a  different  destiny  was  di- 
vinely appointed  for  each  of  the  twins.  Hence  only  the  divine 
disposal  constitutes  the  true  and  valid  succession,  and  not  the 
bodily  descent. 

11,  Evil  {(f>aii\ov).     See  on  John  iii.  20  ;  Jas.  iii.  16. 


Ob.  DLJ  THB  epistle  TO  THE  BOMANa  103 

Purpose  according  to  election  (ij  icar  itcXoy^v  irpo^ats). 
For  irp6B€ai,^  purpose^  see  on  the  kindred  verb  irpoiSero,  ch.  iii. 
25,  and  compare  ch.  viii.  28.  The  phrase  signifies  a  purpose  so 
formed  that  in  it  an  election  was  made.  The  opposite  of  one 
foanded  npon  right  or  merit  For  similar  phrases  see  Acts 
xix.  20;  /carit  tcpdro^  according  to  might,  mig/UUy  f  Bom.  vii. 
13,  icaS^  {nr€pfio\i)v  according  to  excess^  exceedingly.     See  note. 

Might  stand  (jji^).  Lit.,  abide^  continue:  remain  un- 
changeable. This  nnchangeableness  of  purpose  was  conveyed 
in  His  declaration  to  Rebecca.  Contrast  with  oome  to  noughi 
(ver.  6). 

Of  works  (^f).     Lit.,  oiU  of.    By  virtue  of. 

Calleth  (/vaXoCin-09).  Eternal  salvation  is  not  contemplated. 
^^  The  matter  in  question  is  the  part  they  play  regarded  from 
the  theocratic  stand-point"  (Godet). 

12.  Elder  — younger  (jiei^wv  —  iKdaa-ovi).  Lit,  greater — 
smaller.  Compare  Gen.  xxvii.  1,  where  the  Hebrew  is:  **£sau 
his  great  son;"  Sept.,  irpea-fivrepop  elder.  Qen.  xxix.  16,  Sept., 
*^The  name  of  the  greater  was  Leah,  and  the  name  of  the 
younger  (t^  vearipa)  Rachel."  See  a  similar  use  in  Aeschylus, 
^^  Agamemnon,"  349,  ^'  Neither  old  (juyau')  nor  young  (veap&p) 
could  escape  the  great  net  of  slavery."  While  in  these  cases 
^^ greater"  and  ^^ smaller"  are  evidently  used  as  older  and 
younger^  yet  the  radical  meaning  is  greater  and  leeSy  and  the 
reference  is  not  to  age,  but  to  their  relative  position  in  the 
theocratic  plan.  Mei^tov  greatery  occurs  in  forty-four  passages 
in  the  New  Testament,  and  in  no  case  with  the  meaning  elder^ 
Compare  Qen.  xxv.  23,  be  stronger;  Sept.,  vrripe^i  shall  sur- 
pass.  The  reference,  if  to  the  persons  of  Jacob  and  Esau,  is 
to  them  as  representatives  of  the  two  nations.  See  Gen.  xxv. 
23. 

Historically  the  Edomites,  represented  by  Esau,  were  for  a 
time  the  greater,  and  surpassed  the  Israelites  in  national  and 
military  development.  Moses  sent  envoys  to  the  king  of  Edom 
from  SLadesh,  asking  permission  to  pass  through  his  country, 
which  was  refused,  and  tiie  Edomite  army  came  out  against 
Israel  (Num.  xx.  14-21).     Later  they  were  "  vexed "  by  Saul 


101 


WORD   STUDIES   IN   THE   NEW  TESTAMENT. 


CCh.  IX. 


i 


(1  Sara.  xiv.  47),  and  were  eonqneied  and  made  tributary  b_v 
David  (2  Sam.  viii,  li).  Their  utrengtli  was  sLown  in  their 
EiibEequent  attempte  to  recover  independence  (2  Kings  viii.  2U, 
21  ;  xiv.  7;  2  Chron,  xxviil,  17).  Their  final  Bubjiigation  waa 
effected  by  John  Hyrcanus,  wlio  incorporated  thein  into  the 
Jewish  nation  arid  compelled  them  to  be  circumcised. 

13.  Jacob—Esau.  See  Gen,  xxv,  23.  Representing  their 
respective  nations,  aa  often  in  tiie  Old  Testament.  Nnm.  xxiii. 
7,  10,  23 ;  xxiv.  5 ;  Jer.  xUx.  10 ;  compare  also  the  original  of 
the  citation,  Mai.  i.  2,  3,  the  burden  of  the  word  of  the  Lord  to 
Israel.  Compare  also  Edom,  in  ver.  4,  Bjnonyinoiis  with  Emu 
in  ver.  3  ;  and  Jgrad,  ver.  5,  synonymous  with  Jacobs  ver.  2. 

Hated  (e^tcr^ira).  The  expression  is  intentionally  strong  as 
an  expression  of  moral  antipathy.  Compare  Matt.  vi.  24; 
Luke  xiv.  26.     No  idea  of  malice  is  impliei]  of  conrse. 

15.  I  will  have  mercy — compassion  (eXeijtrw — oucTeipijtrio). 
See  Exod.  xxxiii.  19.  For  -mercy  see  on  2  John  3 ;  Lnke  i,  50. 
The  former  verb  emphasizes  the  sense  of  hninan  wretchednesa 
in  its  active  manifestation ;  the  latter  the  inward  feeling  ex- 
pressing itself  in  sighs  and  tears.  Have  mercy  therefore  con- 
templates, not  merely  the  sentiment  in  itself,  but  the  determin- 
ation of  those  who  should  be  its  objects.  Tlie  words  were 
spoken  to  Moaes  in  connection  with  his  prayer  for  a  general 
forgiveness  of  the  people,  which  was  refused,  and  his  request 
to  behold  Grud'a  glory,  which  was  granted.  With  reference  to 
the  latter,  God  asserts  that  His  gift  is  of  Ilis  own  free  grace, 
withont  any  recognition  of  Moses'  right  to  claim  it  on  the 
ground  of  merit  or  service. 

16.  It  Is  not  of  firm  that  willeth  nor  of  him  that  runneth. 
It,  the  participation  in  God's  mercy.  Of  him,  i.e,  depeiident 
•upon.  Jiunneth,  denoting  strenuous  efFort.  The  metaphor 
from  the  foot-race  is  a  favorite  one  with  Paul.  See  1  Cor.  is. 
24,  26;  Gal.  ii.  2;  v.  7;  Philip,  ii.  16;  2  Tliess.  iii.  1.  God 
is  laid  under  no  obligation  by  a  human  wiU  or  a  human  work. 

17.  Saith.  Present  tense.  "There  is  an  element  of  tire- 
lessnesB  in  the  utterance.     If  the  scripture  ever  spoke  at  all,  it 


d 


Ch.  IX.]  THE  BPISTLB  TO  THB  ROMANa  105 

continued  and  continues  to  speak.    It  lias  never  been  struck 
dumb  "  (Morison). 

Pharaoh.  The  original  meaning  of  the  word  is  now  sup' 
posed  to  be  ^A^  doiMe  house  or  jniUtce.  Compare  the  Subli/me 
PorU, 


thee  up  (efiTYetpa).  Hebrew,  caused'  thee  to  stana. 
Sept,  Bierffp^iSf)^  thou  wdst  preserved  alive.  Only  once  else- 
where in  the  New  Testament,  1  Cor.  vi.  14,  of  raising  from  the 
dead.  The  meaning  here  is  general,  aUawed  thee  to  appear  ; 
bnmght  thee  forward  on  the  etage  of  events^  as  Zech.  xi.  16.  So 
the  simple  verb  in  Matt.  xi.  11 ;  John  vii.  52.  Other  Explana- 
tions SLvey  preserved  thee  alive^  as  Sept.,  excited  thee  to  opposi* 
tioHy  as  Hab.  i.  6 ;  created  thee. 

Might  be  declared  {BiarfyeX^).  Published  abroad^  thor- 
on^hly  (Sm£).  So  Eev.  See  on  Luke  ix.  60.  ^'Even  to  the 
present  day,  wherever  throughout  the  world  Exodus  is  read, 
the  divine  intervention  is  realized  "  (Godet). 

18.  He  will  (3€X6i).  In  a  decretory  sense.  See  on  Matt, 
i.  19. 

Hardeneth  {ctcXofpwei).  Only  here  by  Paul.  See  on  hard. 
Matt.  XXV.  24 ;  Jude  14 ;  Jas.  iii.  4.  Three  words  are  nsed  in 
the  Hebrew  to  describe  the  hardening  of  Pharaoh's  heart.  The 
one  which  occurs  most  frequently,  properly  means  to  be  strong, 
and  therefore  represents  the  hardness  as  foolhardinesSy  infatu- 
ated insensibility  to  danger.  See  Exod.  xiv.  The  word  is  used 
in  its  positive  sense,  hardens,  not  merely  permits  to  become 
hard.  In  Exodus  the  hardening  is  represented  as  selfproduoed 
(viii.  15,  32 ;  ix.  34),  and  as  produced  by  Ood  (iv.  21 ;  vii  3 ; 
ix.  12 ;  X.  20,  27 ;  xi.  10).  Paul  here  chooses  the  latter  repre- 
sentation. 

19.  Hath  resisted  (avl^arfftcep).  Kev.,  more  correctly,  trnth- 
standeth.  The  idea  is  the  restUt  rather  than  the  process  of  re- 
sistance. A  man  may  resist  God's  will,  but  cannot  maintain 
his  resistance.     The  question  means,  who  can  resist  him  f 

20.  O  man.    Man  as  man,  not  Jew. 


106  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Cfi.  IX 

That  repliest  (o  am-avoKpivofitvo'i).  Only  hero  and  Luke 
xiv.  6.  Lit,,  to  contradict  in  repli/  ;  to  answer  hy  contradicting. 
Thus,  in  the  case  of  the  dropBical  man  (Luke  xir.),  Jeeus  a»- 
swered  {airoKptBein)  the  thought  in  the  minds  of  the  lawjera 
and  Phaneees  hy  aaking,  "Is  it  lawful  to  heal  on  the  Sabbath?" 
Then  He  aeked,  "  Who  of  joii  would  refuse  on  the  Sabbath  to 
extricate  his  beast  from  the  pit  into  which  it  has  fallen?" 
And  thej  were  unable  to  answer  Ilim  wt  repli/  :  to  answer  hy 
contradicting  ffim.  So  here,  the  word  signifies  to  reply  to  an 
answer  which  God  had  already  given,  and  implies,  as  Godet 
observes,  the  spirit  of  contention. 

21.  Power  (efonffiw).    Ot  rigid.    See  on  Mark  ii.  10;  John 

i.  12. 

Lump  (il>vpdfiaT<K).  From  ^vpdm  to  mue  so  at  to  tnuke  into 
dough.  Hence  any  substance  mixed  with  water  and  kneaded. 
Philo  uses  it  of  the  human  frame  as  compounded.  By  (/<« 
lump  is  here  meant  human  nature  with  its  moral  possibilities, 
"but  not  yet  conceived  of  in  its  definite,  individual,  moral 
stamp"  (Meyer).*  The  figure  of  man  as  clay  moulded  by 
God  carries  ns  back  to  the  earliest  traditions  of  the  creation 
of  man  (Gen.  11.  7).  According  to  primitive  ideas  man  is  re- 
garded as  issuing  from  tiie  earth.  The  traditions  of  Libya 
made  the  first  human  being  spring  from  the  plains  heated  by 
the  sun.  The  Egyptians  declared  that  the  Nile  mud,  exposed 
lu  the  heat  of  the  ean,  brought  forth  germs  which  sprang  np  as 
(he  bodies  of  men,  A  subsequent  divine  operation  endowed 
riiese  bodies  with  soul  and  intellect,  and  the  divine  fashioner  ap- 
pears npon  some  monuments  moulding  clay,  wherewith  to  form 
man,  upon  a  potter's  wheel.  The  Peruvians  called  the  first  man 
"animated  earth  ;"  and  the  Msndansof  North  America  related 
that  the  Great  Spirit  moulded  twofiguresof  clay,  which  he  dried 
and  animated  with  the  breath  of  his  mouth,  one  receiving  the 
name  of  First  Man,  the  other  that  of  Companion.  The  Babylon- 
ian account,  translated  by  Berosus,  represents  man  as  made  of 


'  Fien  an  irtlole  on  "The  Potter  snd  the  Cli;,"  hy  Deui  Plumptre, 
positor,"  flnl  Hris*,  ir.,  468. 


Cu.  IX.]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  BOMAN&  107 

day  after  the  manner  of  a  statue.     See  Franfois  Lenormant, 
"  Beginnings  of  History/' 

To  make  one  vessel  unto  honor  and  another  unto  dis- 
honor (irotfjacu  h  fiev  ek  rifiifv  cicetm,  h  Si  eh  arifjUav).  Bev., 
more  correctly,  to  make  one  pwrt  a  vesBd  unto  honor^  a/nd  an- 
ether  part^  etc.  For  vessely  see  on  1  Pet.  iii.  7;  compare  Matt, 
xii.  29 ;  Acts  ix.  15.  The  vessel  here  is  the  one  which  has 
just  come  from  the  potter's  hand.  Those  in  ver.  22  have  been 
in  household  use. 

22.  Willing  {SiXwv).  Although  willing,  not  heoatise.  Be- 
f  erring  not  to  the  determinate  jmrpose  of  God,  but  to  His  spon- 
taneous will  growing  out  of  His  holy  character.  In  the  former 
sense,  the  meaning  would  be  that  God's  long-suffering  was  de- 
signed to  enhance  the  final  penalty.  The  emphatic  position  of 
willing  prepares  the  way  for  the  contrast  with  Umg-suffering. 
Though  this  holy  will  would  lead  Him  to  show  His  wrath,  yet 
He  withheld  His  wrath  and  endured. 

Vessels  of  wrath  {a-Kevrj  opyfy:).  "Hot  filed  with  wrath^  nor 
prepared  to  serve  for  a  manifestation  ofdimne  wrath  ;  but  ap- 
pertaining to  wrath.  Such  as  by  their  own  acts  have  fallen 
under  His  wrath.     Compare  Ps.  ii.  9. 

Fitted  {/earifpTiafAeva).  Lit.,  adjtuted.  See  on  m^ending. 
Matt.  iv.  21 ;  perfect^  Matt.  xxi.  16  ;  Luke  vi.  40 ;  1  Pet.  v.  10. 
'Not  ftted  hy  Ood  for  destriustionj  but  in  an  adjectival  sense, 
ready^  ripe  for  destruction,  the  participle  denoting  a  present 
state  previously  formed,  but  giving  no  hint  of  how  it  has  been 
formed.  An  agency  of  some  kind  must  be  assumed.  That 
the  objects  of  final  wrath  had  themselves  a  hand  in  the  mat- 
ter may  be  seen  from  1  Thess.  ii.  15,  16.  That  the  hand  of 
God  is  also  operative  may  be  inferred  from  the  whole  drift 
of  the  chapter.  ''The  apostle  has  probably  chosen  this 
form  because  the  being  ready  certainly  arises  from  a  continual 
reciprocal  action  between  human  sin  and  the  divine  judg- 
ment of  blindness  and  hardness.  Every  development  of  sin 
is  a.  net- work  of  human  offences  and  divine  judgments" 
(Lange). 


108 


WORD  STDDiaS   IS   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


23.  And  that  He  might  make  known.  The  connection  is 
variously  explained.  Some  make  aW  that  dependent  on  He 
endured:  "If,  willing  to  show  His  wrath  .  .  .  God  en- 
dured .  .  .  and  also  t/uU."  OtherB  make  i/iai  dependent 
on  jUted:  "VeBseU  fitted  to  destruction  and  aim  that  He  miglit 
make  knoym"  etc.  Godet  supplies  He  called  from  ver.  2+ : 
"And  called  that  He  might  make  known,"  etc.  The  diffienlty 
is  resolved  by  the  omission  of  xai  and.  So  Westeott  and  Hort, 
on  the  single  authority  of  B.     See  Rev.,  in  margin. 

His  glory.  See  on  cU.  iii.  23.  Godet  thinks  the  phrase  was 
suggested  by  Moees'  request,  "Show  me  tliy  glory,"  Exod. 
xxxiii.  18. 

Afore  prepared  (■n-poijiW/KKj-ev).  Only  here  and  Eph.  ii,  10. 
The  studied  difference  in  the  use  of  this  term  instead  of  xarap- 
Ti^a  to  JU  (ver.  22),  cannot  lie  overlooked.  The  verb  is  not 
equivalent  to  foreonlaiiied  {irpoopHjat).  Fitied,  by  the  adjust- 
ment of  parts,  einphusizes  the  concnnence  of  all  the  elements 
of  the  case  to  the  final  result.  Prepared  ie  more  general.  In 
the  former  case  the  result  is  indicated  ;  in  the  latter,  t/ie  previ- 
ouaness.  Note  before  prepared,  while  before  is  wanting  in  ver. 
22.  In  this  passage  the  direct  agency  of  God  is  distinctly 
stated ;  in  tlie  otlier  the  agency  is  left  indefinite.  Here  a  single 
act  is  indicated;  there  a  process.  Tlie  simple  verb  eroifid^a 
often  indicates,  as  Meyer  remarks,  to  eonatiiute  ^ualitutively  / 
i.e.,  to  arrange  with  reference  to  the  reciprocal  quality  of  the 
thing  prepared,  and  that  for  which  it  is  prepared.  See  Luke 
i.  17;  John  xiv.  2;  1  Cor.  ii.  9;  2  Tim.  ii.  21.  "All,  truly," 
says  Reuss,  "  if  the  last  word  of  tiie  christian  revelation  is  con- 
tained in  the  image  of  the  potter  and  the  clay,  it  is  a  bitter 
derision  of  all  the  deep  needs  and  legitimate  desires  of  a  soui 
aspiring  toward  its  God.  This  would  be  at  once  a  satire  of 
reason  upon  herself  and  the  suicide  of  revelation.  But  it  is 
neither  the  last  word  nor  the  only  word  ;  nor  has  it  any  immed- 
iate observable  bearing  on  the  concrete  development  of  our 
lives.  It  is  not  the  only  word,  because,  in  nine-tenths  of  Scrip- 
ture, it  is  as  wholly  excluded  from  the  sphere  of  revelation  aa 
though  it  had  been  never  revealed  at  all ;  and  it  is  not  the  last 


^L  though  it 


d 


Ch.  IX.]  THB  BPISTLB  TO  THE  BOMANa  109 

word,  because,  throughont  the  whole  of  Scripture,  and  nowhere 
more  than  in  the  writings  of  the  very  apostle  who  has  faced 
this  problem  with  the  most  heroic  inflexibility,  we  see  bright 
glimpses  of  something  beyond.  How  little  we  were  intended 
to  draw  logical  conclusions  from  the  metaphor,  is  shown  by  the 
fact  that  we  are  living  souls,  not  dead  clay ;  ^nd  St.  Paul  else- 
where recognized  a  power,  both  within  and  without  our  beings, 
by  which,  as  by  an  omnipotent  alchemy,  mean  vessels  can  be- 
come precious,  and  vessels  of  earthenware  be  transmuted  into 
vessels  of  gold  "  (Farrar).     See  note  at  end  of  ch.  xi. 

24.  Called — of.  Compare  ch.  viii.  30.  For  of^  read  from 
(^f),  as  Rev.     From  among. 

25.  That  my  people  which  was  not  my  people  {jov 
oh  Xooi/  luAt  Xodi/  /iou).  The  Oreek  is  much  more  condensed. 
"  I  will  call  the  not-my-people  my-people."  See  Hos.  i.  6-9. 
The  reference  is  to  the  symbolical  names  given  by  the  prophet 
to  a  son  and  daughter :  Lo  Ammi  not  my  j[>eople^  and  Lo  Ru- 
luima  not  having  obtained  mercy.  The  new  people  whom  God 
will  call  my  people  will  be  made  up  from  both  Jews  and  Gent- 
iles. Ilosea,  it  is  true,  is  speaking  of  the  scattered  Israelites 
only,  and  not  of  the  Gentiles ;  but  the  ten  tribes,  by  their  lapse 
into  idolatry  had  put  themselves  upon  the  same  footing  with 
the  Gentiles,  so  that  the  words  could  be  applied  to  both.  A 
principle  of  the  divine  government  is  enunciated  '*  which  comes 
into  play  everywhere  when  circumstances  reappear  similar  to 
those  to  which  the  statement  was  originally  applied.  The 
exiled  Israelites  being  mingled  with  the  Gentiles,  and  forming 
one  homogeneous  mass  with  them,  cannot  be  brought  to  God 
separately  from  them.  Isa.  xlix.  22  represents  the  Gentiles  as 
carrying  tiie  sons  of  Israel  in  their  arms,  and  their  daughters 
on  tiieir  shoulders,  and  consequently  as  being  restored  to  grace 
along  witli  them  "  (Godet). 

27.  Crieth  {Kpdt^eC).  An  impassioned  utterance.  See  on 
Luke  xviii.  39  ;  compare  John  vii.  28,  37  ;  Acts  xix.  28 ;  xxiii. 
6.  Mostly  of  an  inarticulate  cry.  "The  prophet  in  awful 
earnestness,  and  as  with  a  scream  of  anguish,  cries  over  Israel  ^ 
(Morison). 


IIU 


WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


[Cn,  IX 


Concerning  {{nrep).     Lit.,  ccer,  as  proclaiming  a  jadgment 

wliich  bangs  over  Israel. 

28.  For  the  reading  of  the  A.  V.  read  ae  Rev.  The  L&rd 
will  execute  Hie  word  -upon  the  earth,  Jinishing  arid  cutting  it 
short.  Difficulty  arises  on  account  of  the  variation  ia  the  Greek 
text  and  the  difference  between  the  reading  adopted  by  tiie  bct-C 
authorities  and  the  Septuagint,  and  again  on  account  of  the 
variation  of  the  latter  from  the  Hebrew.  The  Hebrew  reads ; 
Ext'iTpation  is  decided,  flowing  with  righteottstiess,  for  a  con- 
sumj>tion  and  decree  ahail  tite  Lord  of  hosts  make  in  i/ie  midst 
of  all  the  land.  The  Rev.  adopts  the  shorter  reading  of  the 
Septuagint. 

Work  (Xoyov).  It  does  not  mean  work,  but  word,  utterance, 
doctrine;  not  decree,  which  X0709  never  means,  though  the  idea 
may  underlie  it.     Better  reckoning. 

Finish — cut  short  (<riwTeXaii'— ffwre/iiwi").  The  preposition 
avv  together  signifies  summarily  ;  bringing  to  an  end  at  the 
same  time.  Compare  the  peculiar  word  eicoXo^wSfiirav  should 
be  shortened,  in  Katt.  xxiv.  23,  and  see  note.  Omit  in  right- 
eousness. 

29.  Said  before  {vpoeCpi)Kev).  Not  in  a  previons  passage, 
but  by  way  of  prediction. 

Seed.  Following  the  Septnagint,  which  thus  renders  the 
Hebrew  remnant.  See  ver.  27.  Like  the  remnant  of  corn 
which  the  farmer  leaves  for  seed. 

L  30.  Attained  (ncoTcXa/Sew).     See  on  perceived.  Acts  iv.  13, 

I  and  takeih,  Mark  ix.  18  ;  John  i.  5.     Compare  attained  {fif>3atr- 

I  €v,  ver,  31).     liev.,  arrive  ui.     See  on  Matt.  xii.  28.     The 

I  meaning  is  substantially   the  same,  only  the  imagery  in  the 

I  two  words  differs ;  the  former  being  that  of  laying  hold  of  a 

I  prize,  and  the  latter  of  arriving  at  a  goal.     The  latter  is  ap- 

I  propriate  to  foUmaing  after,  and  is  carried  out  in  atumHin^ 

B  (ver.  32). 

H  Even  (Sc)  or  and  that.     Subjoining  something  distinct  and 

^ft  different  from  what  precedes,  though  itot  sharply  opposed  to  it 


Ch.  X.1  THB  BPIBTLB  TO  THB  ROMANa  H] 

Attained  righteousness,  that  is  not  that  arising  from  these  works, 
bat  from  faith. 

32.  Not  by  faith  (oifx  itc  irCtrrem).  A.  Y.  and  Rev.  snpplj 
the  ellipsis,  they  sought  it  not. 

They  stumbled  {wpoa-iKoy^xw).  *^  In  their  foolish  coarse  Is- 
rael thoaght  they  were  advancing  on  a  clear  path,  and  lo  I  all 
at  once  there  was  found  in  this  way  an  obstacle  upon  which 
they  were  broken;  and  this  obstacle  was  the  very  Messiah 
whom  they  had  so  long  invoked  in  all  their  prayers  "  (Godet). 

33.  Offence  {a/cavSdKov).    See  on  Matt.  v.  29 ;  xvi.  23. 

Shall  not  be  ashamed  (ov  tcarcucyyvdriaerM).  The  Hebrew 
in  Isa.  xxviii.  16  is,  sIuM  not  make  haste,  or  flee  hastily.  The 
quotation  combines  Isa.  viiL  4  and  xxviii.  16. 


CHAPTER  X. 

1.  Brethren.  See  on  1  John  ii.  9.  An  expression  of  affect- 
ionate interest  and  indicating  emotion. 

My  heart's  desire  (^  cvSokUi  rrj^  i/Ary;  fcapBla/9).  More  liter- 
ally, the  good  will  of  my  heart.  See  on  Lake  ii.  14.  Compare 
Philip,  i.  15 ;  ii.  13 ;  Eph.  i.  5,  9 ;  2  Thess.  L  11. 

Prayer  (8^<ri9).     See  on  Luke  v.  33. 

To  God  (wpo^).  Implying  communion.  See  on  vnth  Ood, 
John  i.  1. 

For  Israel.  The  best  texts  substitute  avr&v  for  them;  those 
described  in  the  last  three  verses  of  ch.  ix.  Bengel  remarks 
that  Paul  would  not  have  prayed  had  they  been  utterly  repro- 
bate. 

That  they  may  be  saved  {ek  atovnplav).  lit,  unto  (their) 
sdl/vation. 

2.  I  bear  them  record  (juaprvpSi).  Bev.,  witness.  '^  He 
seems  to  be  alluding  to  his  conduct  of  former  days,  and  to  say, 
^  I  know  something  of  it,  of  that  zeal'"  (Gtodet). 


113 


WORD   STUDIES  IN    THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


[Oil.  i 


,  St. 


Zeal  of  God  (^\oi>  Oeov).  Rev.,  seal  for  God.  Like  tin 
plirftso  "faitli  a/" Christ"  for  "faitli  in  Christ"  (Philip,  iii.  S); 
compare  Col.  ii.  13;  Epli.  iii.  19;  John  ii.  17,  "the  zeal  of 
thine  house,"  i.e.,  "/or  thy  house." 

Knowledge  {iiriyvaa-u/).  Fall  or  correct  and  vital  knowl- 
edge.    See  ou  di.  i.  28 ;  iii.  20. 

3.  God's  righteousness.  Tliat  mentioned  in  [\.  30.  Com- 
pare Philip,  iii.  0;  Kom.  i.  16,  IT;  iii.  20-22. 

To  establish  (ot^wo*).  Or  get  iij),  indicating  their  pride  in 
their  endeavor.  They  would  erect  a  righteousness  of  their  own 
as  a  nioiiuraent  to  their  own  glory  and  not  to  God's. 

4.  The  end  of  the  law  [riXo^  voixou).  First  in  the  sentence 
as  the  emphatic  point  of  thought.  Expositors  differ  as  to  the 
sense.  1.  The  aim.  Either  that  the  intent  of  the  law  was  to 
make  men  righteous,  which  was  accomplished  in  Christ,  or  that 
the  law  led  to  Him  as  a  paedagogue  (Gal.  iii.  24).  2,  The  fxd- 
jUment,  as  Matt,  v.  I".  3,  The  termination.  To  believers  in 
Christ  the  law  has  no  longer  legislative  authority  to  say,  "Do 
this  and  live;  do  this  or  die"  (Morison).  The  last  is  prefer- 
able. Paul  is  discussing  two  materially  exclusive  systems,  tiio 
one  based  on  doing,  the  other  on  Mi,eving.  The  system  of 
faith,  represented  by  Christ,  brings  to  an  end  and  excludes  the 
system  of  law ;  and  the  Jews,  in  holding  by  the  system  of  law, 
fail  of  the  righteousness  wliich  is  by  faith.  Compare  Gal.  ii. 
1(1;  iii.  2-14. 

5.  Describeth  the  righteousness — that  {ypa<f>ei  ttip  hifc- 
aioffvvTji' — 0T().  The  best  texts  transfer  on  that,  and  read 
Ipd^t  oTi,  etc.     Moses  wn'tetA  that  the  inan,  etc.     See  Lev, 

xviii.  5. 

Those  things— by  them  {ainti—iv  avroin).  Omit  those 
things,  and  read  for  iv  aiJTOK  h'j  them,  iv  oi/t^  hy  it,  i.e.,  the 
righteousness  which  is  of  the  law.  The  whole,  as  Rev.,  Mosua 
writeth  tliat  the  man  t/iat  d"eth  tlie  righteousness  which  ia  ofthi 
law  shall  live  thereby. 

6.  The  righteousness  which  is  of  faith  (17  eV  irlrreayt 
htKototrvvr)).      The   of-faith   righteousness.      Righteousness   is 


Ch.  X.]  THE  BPISTLB  TO  THE  ROMAN&  113 

personified.     Paul  makes  the  righteousness  of  faith  describe 
itself.     6^  faith,  Ik  from,.     Marking  the  source. 

Speaketh  on  this  wise  {pxnto^  TJyei).  The  quotation  in 
6-8  is  a  free  citation  from  Deut.  xxx.  11-14.  Paul  recognizes 
a  secondary  meaning  in  Moses'  words,  and  thus  changes  the 
original  expressions  so  as  to  apply  them  to  the  Christian  faith- 
system.  His  object  in  the  change  is  indicated  by  the  explana- 
tory words  which  he  adds.  lie  does  not  fonnally  declare  that 
Moses  describes  the  righteousness  of  faith  in  these  words,  but 
appropriates  the  words  of  Moses,  putting  them  into  the  mouth 
of  the  personified  faith-righteousness. 

Say  not  in  thy  heart.  In  thy  heart  is  added  by  Paul.  Tlie 
phrase  %ay  in  the  heart  is  a  Hebraism  for  thinks  compare  Ps. 
xiv.  1 ;  xxxvi.  1 ;  x.  11.  Usually  of  an  evil  thought.  Compare 
Matt.  iii.  9  ;  xxiv.  48 ;  Apoc.  xviii.  7. 

Who  shall  ascend  into  heaven  ?  The  Septuagint  adds^o/* 
ua^  and  hring  it  to  tea,  and  hearing  it  we  vnU  do  it. 

To  bring  down.     Interpreting  the  Septuagint,  a^nd  hring  it 

to  U8. 

7.  Descend  into  the  deep.  'Rev.joh/se.  Septuagint,  TFAo 
shall  pass  through  to  heyond  the  sea  f  See  on  Luke  viii.  81.^ 
Paul  changes  the  phrase  in  order  to  adapt  it  to  the  descent  of 
Christ  into  Hades.  The  two  ideas  may  be  reconciled  in  the  fac'. 
that  the  Jew  conceived  the  sea  as  the  abyss  of  waters  on  which 
the  earth  rested.  Compare  £xod.  xx.  4.  Thus  the  ideas  heyond 
the  sea  and  heneaih  the  earth  coincide  in  designating  the  realm 
of  the  dead.  Compare  Homer's  picture  of  the  region  of  the 
dead  beyond  the  Ocean-stream : 

**  As  Boon  as  thou  Bhalt  oroaa 
Ooeanufl,  and  come  to  the  low  shore 
And  groves  of  Proserpine,  the  lofty  groups 
Of  poplars,  and  the  willows  that  let  fall 
Their  withered  fruit,  moor  thou  thj  galley  there 
In  the  deep  eddies  of  Oceanns, 
And  pass  to  Pluto's  oomfortless  abode.** 

'^Odjsfiey.''^-.  606-512. 
Vol.  m.--8 


WORD   HTUD1K8   IN  THE   SEW  TEBTAMKNT. 


Reached  the  far  c.oul 
There  lies  the  lind  i 
Of  Ihu  Cimmeriaiu,  i 
And  darkDess." 


id  there  the  people  dwell 


"Odjesey,"  li.,  13-15. 


To  brins  up.     Tliere  is  no  need,    lie  is  already  rieen. 

8.  The  word  is  nigh  thee.  Septiiaglnt,  Vsri/  nigh  tli^e  is 
the  word.  Tlie  loord  is  the  whole  eiibjoet- matter  of  the  Gospel. 
See  ver.  9.  Moses  used  it  of  tlie  law.  See  on  Luke  i.  37.  The 
whole  quotation  in  the  Hebrew  is  as  follows:  "It  (the  coci- 
mandmentj  is  not  in  heaven,  that  ye  should  say,  Who  will 
ascend  for  us  to  heaven,  and  bring  it  to  us,  and  make  us  hear 
it  that  we  may  do  it?  And  it  is  not  beyond  the  sea,  that  ye 
should  say,  Who  will  go  over  for  ua  beyond  the  aea,  and  bring 
it  to  aB,and  make  ns  hear  it  that  we  may  do  it?  But  the  word 
is  very  near  thee,  in  thy  mouth  and  in  thy  heart,  to  do  it."' 
The  object  of  the  passage  is  to  contrast  the  system  of  faith  with 
the  system  of  law,  and  that,  especially,  with  reference  to  the 
remoteness  and  difficulty  of  righteousness.  Moses  says  that  the 
comroaodment  of  God  to  Israel  is  not  incapable  of  aiscoinpiieh- 
ment,  nor  is  it  a  distant  thing  to  be  attained  only  by  long  and 
laborious  effort.  The  people,  on  the  contrary,  carries  it  in  its 
mouth,  and  it  is  stamped  upon  its  heart.  Compare  Exod.  xiii. 
9 ;  DeuL  vi,  6-9.  In  applying  these  words  to  the  system  of 
faith,  Paul,  in  like  manner,  denies  that  this  system  involves 
any  painful  search  or  laborious  work.  Christ  has  accomp- 
lished the  two  great  things  necessary  for  salvation.  He  has 
descended  to  earth  and  has  risen  from  the  dead.  All  that  is 
necessary  is  to  accept  by  faith  the  incarnate  and  risen  Clirist, 
instead  of  having  recourse  to  the  long  and  painful  way  of  es- 
tablishing one's  own  righteousness  by  obedience  to  the  law. 

Word  of  feith.  Tlie  phrase  occurs  only  here.  "Which 
forms  the  substratum  and  object  of  faith"  (Alford).  Others, 
Mfl  burden  of  which  is  faith. 

We  preach  {K^pwraoinev).    See  on  Matt,  iv,  17,  and. prea4:hery 


S  Pet.  ii,  5. 


•Ch.  X.]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMANS.  115 

9.  That  (Sri).  So  rendered  as  expressing  the  oantetUs  of  the 
word  of  faith ;  but  better  hecattsey  giving  a  proof  that  the  word 
is  nigh.     Confers  and  hdieoe^  correspond  to  vrnouO^  and  heart. 

The  Lord  Jesus  {xvpiop  ^Itiaovv).  Others,  however,  read  ri 
fnifia  iv  r^  aroyjnl  cov  Sn  ic6pw$  ^Iffcov^  If  thou  shcdt  confess 
with  thy  mouth  the  word  thai  Jesus  is  Lord.  Bev.,  Jesus  as 
Lord. 

10.  With  the  heart  {icaf^U^.  As  the  seat  of  the  energy  of 
the  divine  Spirit  {irvevfia,  see  on  ch.  viiL  4) ;  mediating  the  per- 
sorud  life  (of  the  soid  '^^uxfi,  see  on  xL  3),  which  is  conditioned 
bj  the  Spirit  It  is  not  tiie  affections  as  distinguished  from  the 
intellect.  Believing  with  the  heart  is  in  contrast  with  oral  con- 
fession, not  with  intellectual  belief.  '^  Believing  is  a  mode  of 
thinking  not  oi  feeling.  It  is  that  particular  mode  of  thinking 
that  is  guided  to  its  object  by  the  testimony  of  another,  or 
by  some  kind  of  inter- mediation.  It  is  not  intuitive^  (Mori- 
son). 

Man  believeth  (?r^<rretWai).  The  verb  is  used  impersonally. 
Lit,  it  is  believed.    Believing  takes  place. 

Confession  is  made  (o/ioXoyeiroi).  Also  impersonal.  It  is 
confessed.  ^'  Confession  is  just  faith  turned  from  its  obverse 
side  to  its  reverse.  .  .  .  When  faith  comes  forth  from  its 
silence  to  announce  itself,  and  to  proclaim  the  glory  and  the 
grace  of  the  Lord,  its  voice  is  confession  "  (Morison). 

11.  The  scripture  saith.  The  quotation  from  Isa.  xxviii. 
16  is  repeated  (see  ch.  ix.  33)  with  the  addition  of  everyone^  who 
soever. 

12.  For.    Explaining  the  whosoever  of  ver.  11. 
Difference.    Better,  as  Bev.,  distinction.    See  on  ilL  22. 

Jew  and  Greek.  On  Ghreekj  see  on  Acts  vi  1.  Oreeks 
here  equivalent  to  Gentiles. 

Lord  (ioipios;).  See  on  Matt  xxi.  3.  The  reference  is  dis- 
puted :  some  Christy  others  Ood.  Probably  Christ.  See  ver. 
^,  and  compare  Acts  x.  36.    The  hearing  which  is  necessary  to 


116  WORD  STUDIES   IN   THE   NEW  TESTAMENT.  tCn.  X 

believing  conies  throiigli  the  word  of  Christ  (ver.  17,  where  tlie 
reading  is  Christ  instead  of  God). 

That  call  upon  (hrtKaXovfievovf;).  See  on  appeal.  Acts  xxv. 
H  ;  Jas.  ii.  7.  Tliat  invoke  Him  as  Lord:  ret'alling  vv.  9,  10. 
Coinpaie  Joel  ii.  32. 

15.  Be  sent  {wTrotrroKStaiv).  See  on  Matt.  x.  16;  Mark  iv. 
29. 

Beautiful  {mpaloi).  From  Stpa  the  time  offiJX  hloom.  or  de- 
velopmeni.  Ilence  tlie  radical  idea  of  the  word  includes  both 
blooming  nuUnrtty  and  vijor.  Appropriate  here  to  the  swift, 
vigorous  feet.  Plato  ("Republic,"  x.,  601)  distinguishes  be- 
tween faces  that  are  beautiful  {icdKSiv)  and  blooming  {wpaUav). 
In  Gen.  ii.  9  (Sept.)  of  tlie  trees  of  Eden,  Compare  Matt. 
xxiii.  27 ;  Acta  iii.  2,  10. 

Feet.  Emphasizing  the  rapid  approach  of  the  messenger. 
"In  their  running  and  hastening,  in  their  scaling  obstructing 
mountains,  and  in  their  appearance  and  descent  from  mount- 
ains, they  are  the  eyinbols  of  the  earnestly -desired,  winged 
movement  and  appearance  of  the  Gospel  itself"  (Laiige). 
Compare  Nahnm  i.  15 ;  Eph.  vi.  15  ;  Rom.  iii.  15  ;  Acts  v,  9. 
Paul  omits  the  mouniaina  from  the  citation.  Omit  thatpreach 
tlie  gofipel  of  peace. 

Bring  glad  tidings.  See  on  Gospel,  Matthew,  superscrip- 
tion. 

16.  Obeyed  {vrr^Kovaav),  See  on  obedience  and  disobedi- 
ence, ch.  V.  19.  Also  on  Acts  v.  29.  Obeyed  as  the  result  of 
listening,  and  so  especially  appropriate  here.  Compare  fieard 
and  hear,  ver.  14.  For  the  same  reason  hearken  (Rev.)  is  bet- 
ter than  obeyed. 

Report  {oKo^).  Lit.,  hearing.  Similarly,  Matt,  xiv.  1 ; 
Mark  xiii.  7.  Compare  the  phrase  vsord  of  hearing,  1  These. 
ii.  13  ;  Heb,  iv,  2  (Rev.) ;  and  hearing  offaith,  i.e.,  message  of 
faith.  Gal.  iii.  2. 

17.  By  hearing  (e'f  aieoJ)<i).  The  same  word  ae  report,  above, 
and  in  the  same  eenee,  tfuit  which  is  heard. 


'Jfl.  X.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMANS.  117 

Word  of  God  (pi^fuiTo^  BeoS).  The  btsRt  texts  read  of  Christ 
Probably  not  t/ie  Gospel^y  but  Clirist's  word  of  command  or  com- 
mission  to  its  preachers ;  thus  taking  up  except  they  he  sent  (ver. 
15),  and  emphasizing  the  authority  of  the  message.  Belief 
comes  through  the  message,  and  the  message  through  the  com- 
mand of  Christ. 

18.  Did  they  not  hear?  (jiii  ovk  fJKovaav).  A  negative 
answer  is  implied  by  the  interrogative  particle.  ^^  Surely  it  is 
not  true  that  they  did  not  hear." 

Sound  (^307709).  Only  here  and  1  Cor.  xiv.  7,  on  which 
see  note.  Paul  uses  the  Septuagint  translation  of  Ps.  xix.  4, 
where  the  Hebrew  line  or  plummet-line  (others  m,usical  chord) 
is  rendered  soimd.  The  voice  of  the  gospel  message  is  like 
that  of  the  starry  sky  proclaiming  Ood^s  glory  to  all  tlie  earth. 
The  Septuagint  sotmd  seems  to  be  a  free  rendering  in  order  to 
secure  parallelism  with  words.* 

Of  the  world  (r^  oueovfievi]^).  See  on  Luke  ii.  1;  John 
i.  9. 

19.  Did  Israel  not  know  ?  As  in  ver.  18,  a  negative  an- 
swer is  implied.  '*It  is  surely  not  true  that  Israel  did  not 
know.''  Did  not  know  what?  That  the  Gospel  should  go 
forth  into  all  the  earth.  Moses  and  Isaiah  had  prophesied  the 
conversion  of  the  Gentiles,  and  Isaiah  the  opposition  of  the 
Jews  thereto. 

First  Moses.    First  in  order ;  the  first  who  wrote. 

I  will  provoke  you  to  jealousy  (^  Tra/M^i/XcMrio  v/uk). 
From  Deut.  xxxii.  21.     See  Rom.  xi.  11,  14;  1  Cor.  x.  22. 


*  It  is  not  easy  to  draw  the  distinction  between  this  and  certain  other  words 
for  Yocal  utterances.  The  earlier  distinction  seems  to  have  been  that  ^iryyot 
was  used  as  distinguished  from  the  raice  (<rwr^)  as  a  physical  power.  Hence 
itb^yyos  wonld  describe  the  manifold  q^iality  of  the  voice.  So  Thncydides, 
▼ii.,  71.  **In  the  Athenian  army  one  might  hear  lamentation,  shouting, 
cries  of  victory  or  defeat,  and  all  the  various  sounds  which  a  great  host  in 
great  danger  would  be  compelled  to  utter  {(p^^yyta^at)  "  Thus  it  is  sound 
from  the  stand-point  of  the  hearer  rather  than  of  the  speaker  or  singer.  Plato 
distinguishes  <t>^6yyot  ob  swift  or  slow,  sharp  or  flat,  etc  (''Timaens/'  80;.  It 
is  used  of  musical  sounds. 


118  WORD   STUDIES  IN    TUB   NKW   TasrA.\U5KT.  [Ca  X. 

Used  only  hy  Paol.     The  Septiugint  has  th&m  instead  of 
you. 

By  them  that  are  no  people  {hr  ovk  «3>vi).  Lit.,  upon  a 
Tio-p^ojole.  The  relation  expresBed  by  the  preposition  is  that 
of  the  no-peoplo  as  forming  the  basis  of  the  jealousy.  The 
pi-ediction  is  that  Israel  shall  be  conquered  by  an  appar- 
ently inferior  people.  No-people  as  related  to  God's  heri- 
tage, not  that  the  Gentiles  were  inferior  or  insignificant  in 
theinselveB.  For  people  render  nation,  as  Rev.  See  on  1 
Pat.  ii.  9. 

By  a  foolish  nation  (^l  iBvtt  acwknf).  Lit.,  upon  a  fool- 
ish nation  as  the  basis  of  the  exasperatioD.  Yor/boHah,  aee  on 
eh.  i.  21. 

I  will  anger  (wapopyiA).  Or  provoke  to  artger.  The  force 
of  the  compounded  preposition  trapd  in  this  verb  and  in  irapa- 
^tlXtoa-o) provoke  to  jecd<ntgy,  seems  to  be  driving  to  the  side  of 
something  which  by  contact  or  comparison  excites  jealousy  or 
anger. 

30.  Is  very  bold  {avarokfi^).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment Plato,  "  Laws,"  701,  uses  it  of  liberty  as  too  presumpt- 
uous {a.woT€ToKfi.T}fi^v7}<!).  The  force  of  the  preposition  is  in- 
tensive, or  possibly  pointing  to  him  from  whom  the  action 
proceeds;  bold  of  himself.  Tlie  simple  verb  means  primarily 
to  dare,  and  implies  the  ■manifestation  of  that  boldness  or  con- 
fidence of  character  which  is  expressed  by  Sappio).  See  3  Cor. 
V.  6,  8 ;  vii.  16 ;  x.  2,  note. 

Saith.  Isa.  Ixv.  1.  Following  the  Septuagint,  with  tlie  in- 
version of  the  first  two  clauses.  Hebrew:  "I  have  offered 
to  give  answers  to  those  who  asked  not.  I  have  put  my- 
self in  the  way  of  those  who  sought  mo  not.  I  have  spread 
out  my  hand  all  the  day  to  a  refractory  people."  The  idea 
in  the  Hebrew  is,  "I  have  endeavored  to  be  sought  and 
found."  Compare  the  clause  omitted  in  Paul's  quotation :  "  I 
have  said  '  Here  sm  I '  to  a  people  who  did  not  call  upon  my 
Qsme." 


Ch.  XL]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THB  BOMAN&  119 

21.  Disobedient — gainsaying  {direiSovvra — atn-iXiyovra), 

See  on  John  iii.  36 ;  Jude  11.  Disobedience  is  the  manifesta- 
tion of  the  refractoriness  expressed  in  gainsaying.  Some  ex- 
plain gainsaying  as  contradicting.    Compare  Luke  xiiL  34,  35. 


CHAPTER  XL 

1.  I  say  then  (X^tw  obv).  Then  introduces  the  qnestion  as 
an  inference  from  the  whole  previous  discussion,  especially  vv. 
19-21. 

Hath  God  cast  away  (pAi  airwraro  6  6eo9).  A  negative 
answer  required.  ^'Surely  Ood  has  not,  has  He?"  The 
aorist  tense  points  to  a  definite  act.  Hence  Ilev.,  better,  did 
God  cast  off.  The  verb  means  literally  to  thrust  or  shorn. 
Thus  Homer,  of  Sisyphus  pushing  his  stone  before  him  ("Odys- 
sey," xi.,  596).  Oedipus  says :  "  I  charge  yon  that  no  one  shelter 
or  speak  to  that  murderer,  but  that  all  tiirust  him  {iAeiv)  from 
their  homes  "  ("  Oedipus  Tyrannus,"  241). 

People  Q\Mv).    See  on  1  Pet.  ii.  9 ;  Acts  xiii.  17. 

An  IsraelitOy  etc.  See  on  Philip,  iii.  5.  Paul  adduces  his 
own  case  first,  to  show  that  God  has  not  rejected  His  people 
en  masse.  An  Israelite  of  pure  descent,  he  is,  nevertheless  a 
true  believer. 

2.  Foreknew.     See  on  ch.  viii.  29. 

Or  {fj).  Compare  ch.  vi.  3 ;  vii.  1.  Confirming  what  pre- 
cedes by  presenting  the  only  alternative  in  the  case.  Or  is 
omitted  in  the  A.  V. 

Wot  ye  not  {oIk  oJSarc).  Why  should  the  Revisers  have 
retained  the  obsolete  wot  here,  when  they  have  rendered  else- 
where, know  ye  not?  See  Rom.  vi.  16;  1  Cor.  iii.  16;  v.  6  ; 
vi.  2,  etc.  The  phrase  indicates  that  this  cannot  be  thought  of 
as  true. 

Of  Elias  (iv  ^Hkia).  Wrong;  thong^h  Rev.  has  retained  it: 
of  Elijah^  with  in  in  margin  ;  probably  in  order  to  avoid  the 


120  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Cil  XI 

awkward  circumlocution  in  the  passage  treating  of  Elijah,  or 
the  ambiguous  in  Elijah.  See  on  in  the  bush,  Mark  xii,  26. 
Tliucydidea  (i.,9)  saye;  "  Homer,  in  'The  handing  down  of  tlie 
Bceptre,'  eaid,"  etc. ;  i.e.,  in  the  passage  describing  tlie  trans- 
niission  of  tlie  sceptre  in  the  second  book  of  the  Iliad.  A 
common  form  of  quotation  in  the  rabbinical  writings.  The 
passage  cited  is  1  Kings  six.  10,  14. 

He  maketh  intercession  {(vru^dveiy  See  on  ch.  viii.  2(j. 
Kev.,  pl^adeth. 

3.  They  have  killed  thy  prophets  —  and  digged,  etc. 
Paul  gives  the  first  two  clauses  in  reverse  order  from  both 
Septuagint  and  Hebrew. 

Digged  down  {tcariaica^v).  Sept.,  Ko^tKav piiMed  down. 
The  verb  occurs  only  here  and  Acts  xv,  16,  Compare  on  Matt. 
Ti.  19. 

Altars  i^vtruurr^pta).     See  on  Acts  xvii.  23. 
Alone  (/irfvo?).     Sept.  has  tlie  superlative  ftomiyraToit  ^terltf 
alone. 

Life  (^i-vxfjc).  From  ■^^if^w  ta  breathe  or  J/ow.  In  classical 
n&age  it  signifies  life  in  the  distinctness  of  individual  existence, 
especially  of  man,  occasionally  of  brutes.  Hence,  generally,  Md 
life  of  the  indvoid:\ial.  In  the  further  development  of  the  idea 
it  becomes,  instead  of  the  body,  the  seat  of  the  will,  disposi- 
tions, desires,  passions;  and,  combined  with  the  irStiut  body, 
denotes  the  constituent  parts  of  humanity.  Hence  the  vioraUy 
endowed  individualUy  of  man  which  continues  after  death.* 

ScBiPTiiHE.  In  the  Old  Testament,  answering  to  nephesh, 
primarily  life,  breath  ;  therefore  life  in  Us  distirict  individu- 
ality ;  life  as  such,  distinguished  from   other  men   and  from 

•  Yet  see  Homer,  "ni»d."t  ,  B,  4.  The  wrslh  otAchillei  "  hnrled  to  H»defl 
inui;  T»liant  n»tU  ♦ex*'*  of  herocB.  and  m«de  Ihe  men  VtemttLta  (aC-roi'i)  » 
prev  lo  dogs  «nd  all  birds."  Hera  Ihe  individnalily  ot  the  msn  ill  appsrenlly 
Identified  with  the  body  The  boqI  li  a  viin  shadow.  Compare  "Odjesev." 
Xll».  U.  "The™  dwell  the  «mi»  (i)™x»Oi  iinatrft  of  thr  rfwirf  (tOaM  n-^-if 
T»)."  Also,  "Od_YRBey,"  il.,  476.  "Hadss.where  dwell  lite  teiitilMi  'lead 
{rvifal  ifpittti)  itiuise*  of  departed  mortals." 


Ch.  XI.]  THB  EPISTLB  TO  THB  ROMANS.  121 

inanimate  nature.*  Kot  tJie  jprincyple  of  life,  but  that  which 
bears  in  itself  and  manifests  the  life-principle.  Hence  spirit 
{ruachj  irvevfia)  in  the  Old  Testament  never  signifies  the  indi- 
vidual. Soul  {'^^vxii)j  of  itself,  does  not  constitute  personality, 
but  only  when  it  is  the  soul  of  a  human  being.  Human  per- 
sonality is  derived  from  spirit  {irv€vfAa\  and  finds  expression  in 
soul  or  life  i^^vx^). 

The  New- Testament  usage  follows  the  Old,  in  denoting  all 
individuals  from  the  point  of  view  of  individual  life.  Thus 
the  phrase  Traa-a  y^vx^  every  eoulj  i.e.,  every  j>er8on  (Rom.  ii.  9 ; 
xiii.  1),  marking  them  ofiF  from  inanimate  nature.  So  Bom.  xi. 
3 ;  xvi.  4 ;  2  Cor.  i.  23  ;  xii.  15 ;  Philip,  ii.  30  ;  1  Thess.  ii.  8,  il- 
lustrate an  Old-Testament  usage  whereby  the  soul  is  tlie  seat 
of  personality,  and  is  employed  instead  of  the  personal  pronoun, 
with  a  collateral  notion  of  value  as  individual  personality. 

These  and  other  passages  are  opposed  to  the  view  which  lim- 
its the  term  to  a  mere  animal  life-principle.  See  Eph.  vi.  6 ; 
Col.  iii.  23 ;  the  compounds  av/jLypvxoi  vnth  one  soul,'  Uro^irxpv 
like-minded  (Philip,  i.  27  ;  ii.  20),  where  personal  interest  and 
accord  of  feeling  are  indicated,  and  not  lower  elements  of  per- 
sonality.    See,  especially  1  Thess.  v.  23. 

As  to  the  distinction  between  '^^vj(ri  soul  and  irvevfui  spirity 
it  is  to  be  said : 

1.  That  there  are  cases  where  the  meanings  approach  very 
closely,  if  they  are  not  practically  synonymous;  especially  where 
the  individuid  life  is  referred  to.  See  Luke  i.  47 ;  John  xi.  33, 
and  xii.  27 ;  Matt.  xi.  29,  and  1  Cor.  xvi.  18. 

2.  That  the  distinction  is  to  be  rejected  which  rests  on  the 
restriction  of  y^vxn  to  the  principle  of  animal  life.  This  cannot 
be  maintained  in  the  face  of  1  Cor.  xv.  45 ;  ii.  14,  in  which 
latter  the  kindred  adjective  ^^vx^^fco^  natural  has  reference  to 
the  faculty  of  discerning  spiritual  truth.     In  both  cases  the  an- 

*  It  is,  however,  occasionallj  used  in  the  Septuagint  to  translate  other 
words :  for  instance,  iah  man,  Lev.  zrii.  9 ;  chat  life.  Job  xxxviii.  89  (A.  Y . , 
appetiU),  Ps.  Ixiii.  1  ;  Lebh  heart,  2  Kings  vi.  11  ;  1  Chron.  xii.  88;  xv.  29  ; 
Ps.  IxviiL  20;  Prov.  vi.  21,  etc.  ;  meth  a  dead  body,  Esek.  xliv.  25.  In  Num. 
ix.  6,  nephesh  of  a  dead  body ;  P*ne  look  (A.  V.  state),  Prov.  xxvii.  28  ;  nuuh 
spt'rif.  Gen.  xii.  8  ;  Exod.  xxxv.  21. 


122  WORD   STUDIES   IN   THE   NEW   THSTAMKNT.  [Cu.  XI. 

titliesk  is  -mev/Mi  spirit  in  the  otliical  eenee,  requiriug  ait  cd- 
largenient  of  the  conception  of  ■^\r)(tico<i  natural  beyond  tliat  of 
(TapKiKO'i  fieiiJiiij. 

3.  That  "^vyff  soul  must  not  be  dietingiiished  from  trv^Dfut 
apirit  aa  being  alone  subject  to  the  dominion  of  sin,  since  tiio 
TTvevfta  is  deBcribcd  as  being  subject  to  such  dominion.  See  2 
Cor.  vii.  1.  So  1  Thess.  v.  23;  1  Cor.  vii.  34,  imply  that  the 
spirit  needs  sanctification.     Compare  £ph.  iv.  23. 

4.  Vvxn  ^o^  18  never  used  of  God  like  -nvevfia  spirit.  It  is 
used  of  Christ,  but  always  with  reference  to  Ilia  humanity. 

Whatever  distinction  there  is,  therefore,  is  not  between  a 
higher  and  a  lower  element  in  man.  It  is  rather  between  two 
sides  of  the  one  immaterial  nature  whicti  stands  in  contrast  with 
the  body.  Spirit  expresses  the  conception  of  that  nature  more 
generally,  being  used  hoth  of  the  earthly  and  of  the  non-earthly 
spirit,  while  soul  designates  it  on  the  side  of  the  creature.  In 
this  view  -^rw^  soul  is  akin  to  cdpf  flesh,  "  not  as  respects  the 
notion  conveyed  by  them,  but  as  respects  their  value  as  they 
both  stand  at  the  same  stage  of  crcatureliness  in  contradistinct- 
ion to  God."  nenco  the  distinction  follows  that  of  the  Old 
Testament  between  soul  and  spirit  as  viewed  from  two  differ- 
ent points:  the  soul  regarded  as  an  individual  possession,  dis- 
tinguishing tlie  holder  from  other  men  and  from  inanimate 
nature ;  the  spirit  regarded  as  coming  directly  from  God  and  re- 
turning to  Him.  "  The  former  indicates  the  life-principle  simply 
as  subsistent,  the  latter  marks  its  relation  to  God."  Spirit  and 
not  soid  is  the  point  of  contact  with  the  regenerating  forces  of 
the  Holy  Spirit;  the  point  from  which  the  whole  personality 
is  moved  mnnd  so  as  to  face  God. 

'VvT(fi  soul  is  thna : 

1.  The  individual  life,  the  seat  of  the  personality. 

3.  The  subject  of  the  life,  the  person  iii  which  it  dwells. 

3.  TIte  mind  as  the  sentient  principle,  the  seat  of  sensation 
ftnd  desire, 

4.  Answer  {j(pf]fuiTia-/i6^).  Only  here  in  the  New  Teeta- 
ment.  For  the  kindred  verb  xPVf^"^^  warn,  see  on  Matt,  il 
12 ;  Lnke  ii.  26 ;  Acta  xii.  26.     Compare  Rom.  vii.  3.     The 


Ch  XI.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMANa  123 

word  means  an  oracular  an&wer.     In  the  New  Testament  tbe 
verb  is  commonly  rendered  warn. 

I  have  reserved  (/car^iroi^).  Varying  from  both  Septua- 
gint  and  Hebrew.     Heb.,  I  will  reserve  /  Sept.,  thou  wiU  lea/oe. 

To  Baal  (r^  BadX).  The  feminine  article  is  used  with  the 
name  instead  of  the  masculine  (as  in  Septuagint  in  this  passage). 
It  occurs,  however,  in  the  Septuagint  with  both  the  masculine 
and  the  feminine  article.  Various  reasons  are  given  for  the  use 
of  the  feminine,  some  supposing  an  ellipsis,  the  image  of  Baal ; 
others  that  the  deity  was  conceived  as  bisexual ;  others  that  the 
feminine  article  represents  the  feminine  noun  i\  aurjfflhnf  shame 
Heb.,  loshethy  which  was  used  as  a  substitute  for  Baal  when 
this  name  became  odious  to  the  Israelites. 

6.  Otherwise  {iirel).    Lit.,  since.     Since,  in  that  case. 

Grace  is  no  more,  etc.  {yiverai).  Lit,  hecomM.  No  longer 
comes  into  manifestation  as  what  it  really  is.  '^  It  gives  up  its 
specific  character"  (Meyer). 

But  if  of  works,  etc.  The  best  texts  omit  to  the  end  of  the 
verse. 

7.  Obtained  {hrirvxev).  The  simple  verb  rvyx^^aw  means 
originally  to  hit  the  mark  /  hence  to  fall  in  toiih,  ligfU  upon, 
attain. 

The  election  (17  eKKoyrf).  Abstract  for  concrete.  Those 
elected ;  like  ff  irepirofii]  the  circu7ncision  for  those  uncircun^ 
cised  (Eph.  ii.  11.  Compare  t^i'  /earaTOfiiip  the  concision, 
Philip,  iii.  3). 

Were  blinded  {hrtopoi^aav).  Rev.,  correctly,  hwrdened, 
though  the  word  is  used  of  blindness  when  applied  to  the  eyes, 
as  Job  xvii.  7,  Sept.  See  on  hardness^  Mark  iii.  5.  Compare 
€rK\ripvv€i  hardenethj  Eom.  ix.  18. 

8.  It  is  written.  Three  quotations  follow,  two  of  which 
are  blended  in  this  verse :  Isa.  xxix.  10 ;  Deut.  xxix.  3  (4). 

Hath  given  (ISm/cev).  Heb.,  poured  out.  Sept.,  given  ts 
drink. 


124  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ce.  XL 

Slumber  (Karavv^eat';).  Ileb.,  d'^fj)  sleep.  Ooiy  here  in  tlie 
New  TestainDtit.  lA\,.,priclrinij  or pierving,  compunction.  Coin- 
paro  the  kindred  verb  Karevirfr^fftui  were  pricked.  Acts  ii.  3". 
Rev.  lendera  stupor,  the  secondary  meaning;  properly  tlie 
stupefaction  following  a  wmtnd  or  blow. 

9.  David  saith.  Pa.  Ixix.  23,  24.  It  is  doubtful  whether 
David  was  the  author.  Some  high  authorities  are  inclined  to 
ascribe  it  to  Jereiniali.  David  here  may  mean  nothing  more 
than  the  book  of  Psalma.  * 

Table.  Representing  material  prosperity :  feasting  in  wicked 
secnrity.  Some  explain  of  tlie  Jewa'  preaiimptnoiis  confidence 
ill  the  law. 

Snare  (m-arfihd).  From  ir^yvv/ii  to  t/iake /'ast.  The  anchor 
in  called  -jrayU  newn  ike  vviker-fmi  oftJie  ships. 

Trap  {^ptw).  Lit.,  (I  hutiting.  Only  here  in  the  NewTeet- 
nment,  and  neither  in  the  Hebrew  nor  Septiiagint.  Many 
render  Tiet,  following  Pa.  x.xxv.  8,  where  the  word  is  used  for 
the  Hebrew  reslieth  fiei.  No  kind  of  snare  will  bo  wanting. 
Their  presumptuous  security  will  become  to  them  a  snare,  a 
hunting,  a  stumbling-block. 

A  recompence  (uvraTroSo/ui).  Substituted  by  the  Septua- 
(;int  for  the  Hebrew,  to  them  at  ease.  It  carries  the  idea  of  a 
J'tst  retrihution. 

10.  Bow  down  {iTuyicaff\lroii).  Lit.,  lend  together.  Hebrew, 
s/uiie  i/t^  loins. 

12.  Diminishing  {ijTTr)fia).  The  literal  translation.  Kev, 
renders  loss.  Referring  apparently  to  the  diminution  in  num- 
bers of  the  Jewish  people.  Otlier  explanations  are  defeat,  wn- 
poveriahiaent,  injury,  minoriti/. 

F ulneaa  (wX^pa/ui).  See  on  John  i.  16.  The  word  may  mean 
that  with  which  anything  it  filled  (1  Cor.  x.  26,  28  ;  Matt.  ix. 
16;  Mark  vi.  43);    that  which  is  filled  {Eph.  i.  23);  possibly 

•  So  Hltrig.  DelitiBoh  Inolines  to  his  view.  »nd  Pefowna  thinks  the  Darldla 
ftatkonhip  rerj  doubtfal.     Meyer  Hijri,  poaiUTsl;,  "  not  DsTid."    So  F07. 


Co.  XL]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  aOMAK&  125 

tlie  act  offUvng  (Rom.  xiii.  10),  though  this  is  donbtfnl.*  Here 
in  the  first  sense :  the  fulness  of  their  number  contrasted  with 
the  diminution.  They  will  belong  as  an  integral  whole  to  the 
people  of  God. 

13.  For  I  speak.  The  best  texts  read  tk  hut  instead  of  7<^ 
for.  The  sentence  does  not  state  the  reason  for  the  promin- 
ence of  the  Gentiles  asserted  in  ver.  12,  but  makes  a  transit- 
ion from  the  statement  of  the  divine  plan  to  the  statement  of 
Paul's  own  course  of  working  on  the  line  of  that  plan.  He 
labors  the  more  earnestly  for  the  Gentiles  with  a  view  to  the 
salvation  of  his  own  race. 

Inasmuch  as  I  am.  The  best  texts  insert  oiv  then.  So 
Bev. ;  thus  disconnecting  the  clause  from  the  preceding,  and 
connecting  it  with  what  follows. 

I  magnify  mine  ofFice  {ri^v  huucovlav  ^lov  ho^a^).  Lit.,  1 
glorify  my  ministry  ^  as  Rev.  Not  I  praise  j  but  I  honor  hy  the 
faithful  discharge  of  its  duties.  He  implies,  however,  that 
the  office  is  a  glorious  one.  The  verb,  which  occurs  about  sixty 
times  in  the  New  Testament,  most  frequently  in  John,  is  nsed, 
with  very  few  exceptions,  of  glorifying  Gk)d  or  Christ.  In  ch. 
viii.  30,  of  God's  elect.  In  1  Cor.  xii.  26,  of  the  members  of 
the  body.  In  Apoc.  xviii.  7,  of  Babylon.  For  mvnistryj  see 
on  m^inisteVy  Matt.  xx.  26. 

14.  Some  of  them.  A  modest  expression  which  recalls 
Paul's  limited  success  among  his  own  countrymen. 

15.  The  casting  away  (17  aTrojSoXfj).  In  contrast  with  re- 
eeiving.  Only  here  and  Acts  xxvii.  22,  where  it  means  loss. 
Here  exclusion  from  God's  people. 

Reconcih'ng  of  the  world  {/cardKKa^  Koafiov).  See  on  du 
V.  10, 11.     Defining  the  phrase  riches  of  the  world  in  ver.  12. 

Life  from  the  dead.  The  exact  meaning  cannot  be  de- 
termined.    Some  refer  it  to  the  resurrection  to  follow  the  con- 


*  The  student  will  find  the  subject  fallj  discussed  by  Bishop  Lightfoot, 
*'  Comment&rj  on  Colossians."  p.  828  ;  EUioott  on  Ghd.  !▼.  4 ;  Eph.  i.  28 ; 
Eadie  and  Alford  on  Eph.  i.  23.  See,  also,  an  article  bj  John  Macpherson, 
'*  Expositor/'  second  series,  !▼.  462. 


126  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  HEW   TESTAMENT,  [Cn.  XL 

version  of  Israel,  iocludiag  the  new  life  which  the  reGurrectloii 
will  inaugurate.  Others,  a  new  spiritual  life.  Others  coinbine 
the  two  views. 

16.  For  {Bi).     Better  hut,  or  now.    A  new  paragraph  begins. 
The  first-fruit— holy.      See  on  Jaa.  i.  18;  Acta  xxvi.  10. 

Keferring  to  the  patriarchs. 

Lump.  See  on  ch.  ix.  21.  The  whole  body  of  the  people. 
Tlie  apparent  confueion  of  metaphor,  jir^fmU,  lump,  is  re- 
solved by  the  fact  \\ia,t  Jirat-fruit  does  not  apply  exclusively  to 
harvest,  bnt  is  the  general  term  for  the  first  portion  of  every 
thing  which  was  offered  to  God.  The  reference  here  is  to 
Num.  XV.  18-21 ;  according  to  which  the  Israelites  were  to  set 
apart  a  portion  of  the  dough  of  each  baking  of  bread  for  a  cake 
for  the  prieeta.     Tliis  was  called  atrap^  Jirst-fruiii. 

Root — branches.  The  same  thought  nnder  another  figure. 
The  second  figure  is  more  comprehensive,  since  it  admits  an 
application  to  the  conversion  of  t!ie  Gentiles.*  The  thought 
of  both  figures  centres  in  hd,y.  Eotli  the  first-fruits  and  the 
root  represent  the  patriarchs  (or  Abraham  singly,  compare  ver. 
28).  The  holiness  by  call  and  destination  of  the  nation  as 
represented  by  its  fathers  (first-fruits,  root)  implies  their  future 
restoration,  the  holiness  of  the  lump  and  branches. 

17.  Branches  were  broken  off  {jCKa&oiv  i^eKkdirS^a-av). 
See  on  Matt.  xxiv.  32;  Mark  x'l.  8.  The  derivation  of  tcXaBoju 
branches,  from  xXaat  to  break,  is  exhibited  in  the  word-play 
between  the  noun  and  the  verb :  kladoii,  exeklasthesan. 

A  wild  olive-tree  {a^pt,i\ato<i).  To  be  taken  as  an  adjective, 
belonging  to  the  ipU'I  nlivc.  Hence  Rev.,  correctly,  rejects  tree, 
since  the  Gentilea  are  addressed  not  as  a  whole  bnt  as  individ- 
uals, Meyer  says:  "The  ingrafting  of  the  Gentiles  took 
place  at  first  only  partially  and  iu  single  instances;  while  the 
tAou  addressed  cannot  represent  heathendom  as  a  whole,  and  is 
also  not  appropriate  to  the  figure  itself;  because,  in  fact,  not 

■  For  the  nameroua  altempis  to  tat^e  the  two  GgnreB  represent  different 
tLoughta,  Bee  Lange  on  the  pissage. 


Ch.  XL]  THB  BPISTLE  TO  THB  BOMANa  121 

whole  trees,  not  even  qnite  yonng  ones  are  ingrafted,  eithef 
with  the  stem  or  as  to  all  their  branches.  Besides,  ver.  24  con- 
tradicts this  view." 

Wert  graffed  in  among  them  {ivetceirrpiaSTy:  iv  airrok). 
The  verb  occurs  only  in  this  chapter.  From  tchnrpov  a  sting j  a 
goad.  See  on  Apoc.  ix.  9.  Thns,  in  the  verb  to  graft  the  fn- 
cision  is  emphasized.  Some  render  in  their  j>lacej  instead  of 
among  them  /  bnt  the  latter  agrees  better  with  partakest. 
Hence  thie  reference  is  not  to  some  of  the  broken-off  branches 
in  whose  place  the  Gentiles  were  grafted,  bnt  to  the  branches 
in  general. 

With  them  partakest  {avytcoawpo^  iyhfov).  lit,  asBev., 
didst  become  jHirtaker  with  them.  See  on  Apoc.  L  9 ;  and^r^ 
nerSy  Luke  v.  10.    WUh  ihem^  the  natural  branches. 

Of  the  root  and  fatness  (ri}?  pOSq^  koX  r^  Trtonfro^).  The 
best  texts  omit  leaX  and,  and  render  of  the  root  of  the  fatness : 
the  root  as  the  source  of  the  fatness. 

Paul's  figure  is:  The  Jewish  nation  is  a  tree  from  which 
some  branches  have  been  cut,  but  which  remains  living  because 
the  root  (and  therefore  all  the  branches  connected  with  it)  is 
still  alive.  Into  this  living  tree  the  wild  branch,  the  Gentile, 
is  grafted  among  the  living  branches,  and  thus  draws  life  from 
the  root.  The  insertion  of  the  wild  branches  takes  place  in 
connection  with  the  cutting  ofiF  of  the  natural  branches  (the 
bringing  in  of  the  Gentiles  in  connection  with  the  rejection  of 
the  Jews).  But  the  grafted  branches  should  not  glory  over  the 
natural  branches  because  of  the  cutting  ofiF  of  some  of  the  latter, 
since  they  derive  their  life  from  the  common  root  ^^  The  life- 
force  and  the  blessing  are  received  by  the  Gentile  through  the 
Jew,  and  not  by  the  Jew  through  the  Gentile.  The  spiritual 
plan  moves  from  the  Abrahamic  covenant  downward,  and  from 
the  Israelitish  nation  outward"  (Dwight). 

The  figure  is  challenged  on  the  ground  that  the  process  of 
grafting  is  the  insertion  of  the  good  into  the  inferior  stock, 
while  here  the  case  is  reversed.  It  has  been  suggested  in  ex- 
f)lanation  that  Paul  took  the  figure  merely  at  the  point  of  in- 
serting  one  piece  into  another ;  that  he  was  ignorant  of  the 


J28  WORD  BTUDIB9   IN  THE   SEVf   TESTAMENT.  (Cb.  KL 

agricultural  procesB;  that  be  was  emphasizing  the  proceBS  of 
grace  as  contrary  to  that  of  oature.  Ilefereuces  to  a  custom 
o£  grafting  wild  upon  good  trees  are  not  sufficiently  decisive  to 
warrant  the  belief  that  the  practice  was  common.  Dr.  Thom- 
son says:  "In  the  kingdom  of  nature  generally, certainly  in  the 
case  of  the  olive,  the  process  referred  to  by  the  apostle  never 
succeeds.  Graft  the  good  upon  the  wild,  and,  as  the  Arabs  say, 
'  it  will  conquer  the  wild ; '  hot  you  cannot  reverse  the  process 
with  success.  .  .  .  It  is  only  in  the  kingdom  of  grace  that 
a  process  thus  contrary  to  natnre  can  be  successful;  and  it  is 
tliis  circumstance  which  the  apostle  has  seized  upon  to  magnify 
the  mercy  shown  to  the  Gentiles  by  grafting  them,  a  wild  race, 
contrary  to  the  nature  of  such  operations,  into  the  good  olive- 
tree  of  tlie  church,  and  causing  them  to  flourish  there  and 
bring  forth  fruit  unto  eternal  life.  The  apostle  lived  in  the 
land  of  the  olive,  and  was  in  no  danger  of  falling  into  a  blunder 
in  founding  liis  argument  upon  such  a  circumstance  in  its  cult- 
ivation" ("  Land  and  Book,  Lebanon,  Damascus  and  Beyond 
Joi-dan,"  p.  35).  Meyer  says:  "The  subject-matter  did  not 
require  the  figure  of  the  ordinary  grafting,  but  the  coni-erse — 
the  grafting  of  the  wild  scion  and  its  ennobteraent  thereby. 
The  Gentile  scion  was  to  receive,  not  to  impart,  fertility." 

18.  The  branches.  Of  the  oHve-trea  generally,  Jewish 
Christians  and  unbelieving  Jews.  Kot  those  that  are  broken 
off,  who  are  specially  indicated  in  ver.  19. 

20.  Well  (KflXto?).  Admitting  the  fact.  Thou  art  right. 
Compare  Mark  xii.  32.     Some  take  it  as  irouical. 

22.  Goodness  and  severity  {^(p^trroTTfTa  leal  awoTOfiiav), 
¥oT goodtuxs,  see  on  ch.  iii.  1^.  'AiroTOftta  s&oerilt/,  only  here  in 
the  New  Testament.  The  kindred  adverb,  dTroTo^wasfl/iarp/y, 
occurs  2  Cor.  xiii.  10;  Tit.  i.  13.  From  axore/iwu  to  cut  off. 
Hence  that  whicli  is  <^yrupi,  sharp. 

Thou  shalt  be  cut  off  (^xmnnfo^).  Lit,  cnt  out.  See  on 
Luke  xiii.  7. 

23.  Able  {hwaToi).     See  on  ch.  iv.  21. 

^  Contrary  to  nature.     See  remarks  on  ver.  17. 


Cb.  XL]  THB  BPISTLB  TO  THB  BOMANa  129 

25.  Mystery  (jiwmjpiop).  In  the  Septuagint  only  in  Daniel. 
See  ch.  ii.  18, 19,  27,  28,  30,  of  the  king's  fiecret.  It  occurs  f  re« 
quentlj  in  the  apocryphal  books,  mostly  of  secrets  of  state,  or 
plans  kept  by  a  king  in  his  own  mind.  This  meaning  illustrates 
the  use  of  the  word  in  passages  like  Matt.  xiii.  11,  ^'mysteries 
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  " — secret  purposes  or  counsels  which 
God  intends  to  carry  into  effect  in  His  kingdom.  So  here ; 
Rom.  xvi.  25  ;  Eph.  i.  9  ;  iii.  9 ;  Col.  i.  26,  27 ;  ii.  2 ;  iv.  3 ; 
Apoc.  X.  7.  In  Justin  Martyr  (second  century)  it  is  commonly 
used  in  connection  with  crvfifioXop  symbol^  rwro^  type^  irapafioXfj 
j>arailej  and  so  is  evidently  closely  related  in  meaning  to  these 
words.  Compare  Apoc.  i.  20 ;  xvii.  7.  This  meaning  may  pos- 
sibly throw  light  on  Eph.  v.  32.  In  early  ecclesiastical  Latin 
fivoTijpiop  was  rendered  by  acusramentum^  which  in  classical  Latin 
means  the  mUitary  oath.  The  explanation  of  the  word  aacrc^ 
menlj  which  is  so  often  founded  on  this  etymology,  is  therefore 
mistaken,  since  the  meaning  of  sacrament  belongs  to  fLwrn^piop 
and  not  to  aaoramentum  in  the  classical  sense. 

In  Eph.  iii.  3-6,  Paul  uses  the  word  as  here,  of  the  admission 
of  the  Gentiles. 

Wise  {4>p6pi/ioi).  See  on  the  kindred  noun  ^p6pfi<ri,^  vrisdonij 
Luke  1.  17.  Mostly  in  the  New  Testament  oi  practical  wisdom, 
prudence  /  thus  distinguished  from  ao(f>ia  which  is  mental  ex- 
cellence in  its  highest  and  fullest  sense ;  and  from  ovpea&^  in- 
telligencej  which  is  combinative  wisdom  ;  wisdom  in  its  critical 
applications.     See  Col.  i.  9,  and  compare  Eph.  i.  8. 

Blindness  {wdpcoa-i^).     See  on  ver.  7.     Rev.,  hardening. 

In  part  {airb  pMpovsi).  Mipo^part  is  never  used  adverbially 
in  the  Gospels,  Acts,  and  Apocalypse.  In  the  Epistles  it  is 
rarely  used  in  any  other  way.  The  only  exceptions  are  2  Cor. 
iii.  10;  ix.  3 ;  Eph.  iv.  9,  16.  Paul  employs  it  in  several  com- 
binations. "With  airo  from  (1  Cor.  i.  14 ;  ii.  5),  and  ix  out  of 
(1  Cor.  xii.  27 ;  xiii.  9,  10,  12),  in  which  a  thing  is  conceived 
as  looked  &tfrom  the  part,  either  (ajro)  as  a  simple  point  of 
view,  or  (ix)  as  a  standard  according  to  which  the  whole  is  es- 
timated. Thus  1  Cor.  xii.  27,  "  members  ix  fiipov^  severally y 
Le.,  members  from  a  part  of  the  whole  point  of  view.  Also 
Vol.  IIL— 9 


130  WORD   STDDIES   IN   THE  SEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XL 

with  iv  in,  as  Col.  ij.  16,  with  respai  to,  literally,  hi  the  niattef 
of.  With  cLvd  up,  the  idea  being  of  a.  eeriea  or  colunia  of  parts 
reckoned  upward,  joa/-)!  by  part.  Mepm  t*  imt/i  regard  to  some 
part,  partly,  occurs  1  Cor.  xi.  IS  ;  and  Kari^  /iepm,  reckoning 
part  by  part  downward;  aocording  to  part,  particularly,  Ileb. 
ix.  5. 

CouBtniB  liere  with  hath  happened:  has  partially  befall- 
en. Not  partial  liardeuiug,  but  liardening  extending  over  a 
part. 

26.  The  deliverar  (o  ^yo/ievos).  The  Hebrew  ib  goel  re- 
deetner,  avenger.  The  nearest  relative  of  a  murdered  person, 
oa  whom  devolved  the  duty  of  avenger,  was  called  goel  kaddam 
a/oenger  of  blood.  So  the  goel  was  the  nearest  kinsnian  of  a 
childless  widow,  and  was  required  to  marry  her  (Deut.  xxv.  5- 
10).  It  ia  the  word  nsed  by  Job  in  tlie  celebrated  passage  xix, 
25.     See,  also,  Euth  iii.  12,  13;  iv.  1-10.* 

29.  Without  repentance  (u/j^Ta/wXi^ra).  Only  here  and 
2  Cor.  vii.  10.  See  on  repented.  Matt  xxi.  29.  Not  rabjeet  to 
recall. 

32.  Concluded  {awkicKeiaev).  Only  here,  Lnke  v.  6 ;  Gal. 
iii.  23,  23.  A  very  literal  rendering,  etyinologically  considered ; 
con  loget/ier,  daudere  to  shut.  The  A.  V.  followed  the  Vulgate 
oondugit.  So  Hooker :  "  The  pei-son  of  Christ  was  only  touch- 
ing bodily  substance  concluded  within  the  grave."  The  word 
has  lost  this  sense.  Rev.,  hath  shut  up.  Some  explain  in 
the  later  Greek  Beaee,  to  hand  over  to  a  jMwer  which  holde  in 
ward. 

All  (tou?  •TravTiw).  Lit.,  t/ie  all.  The  totality,  Jews  and 
Gentiles,  jointly  and  severally. 

33.  O  the  depth  of  the  riches  both  of  the  wisdom  and 
knowledge.  So  both  A.  V.  and  Rev.,  making  depth  govern 
riches,  and  riches  govern  ■wisdom  and  knowledge.  Otliers, 
more  simply,  make  the  three  genitives  coordinate,  and  all  gov- 
erned by  d^th :  the  depth  of  the  riches  and  'wisdom,  and  knowl- 


Co.  XI.]  THE  BPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMAK&  131 

edge.  ^^  like  a  traveller  who  has  reached  the  Bummit  of  an 
Alpine  ascent,  the  apostle  turns  and  contemplates.  Depths  are 
at  his  feet,  but  waves  of  light  illumine  them,  and  there  spreads 
all  around  an  immense  horizon  which  his  eje  commands" 
(Gtxlet).     Compare  the  conclusion  of  ch.  viii. 


*'  Therefore  into  the  joatice  Bempitemal 
The  power  of  vision  which  your  world  reoeives 
As  eje  into  the  ocean  penetrates  ; 
Which,  though  it  see  the  bottom  near  the  shofo, 
Upon  the  deep  perceives  it  not,  and  yet 
*Ti8  there,  but  it  is  hidden  bj  the  depth. 
There  is  no  light  bat  comes  from  the  serene 
That  never  is  o'ercast,  naj,  it  is  darkness 
Or  shadow  of  the  flesh,  or  else  its  poison." 

Dante,  ''  Paradiso,**  six.. 


Oompare  also  Sophocles : 


**  In  words  and  deeds  whose  laws  on  high  are  set 
Throogh  heaven's  clear  ether  spread, 
Whose  birth  Oljmpos  boasts, 
Their  one.  their  onlj  sire, 
Whom  man's  frail  flesh  begat  not, 
Kor  in  forgetfulness 
Shall  lull  to  sleep  of  death ; 
In  them  our  god  is  great, 
In  them  he  grows  not  old  forevermore.** 

**  Oedipus  Tjrannoa,**  865-871. 


Wiadom  —  knowledge  (0-0^09 — yvt^aem).  Used  togethet 
only  here,  1  Cor.  xii.  8 ;  Col.  ii.  3.  There  is  ranch  difference 
of  opinion  as  to  the  precise  distinction.  It  is  agreed  on  all 
hands  that  wisdom  is  the  nobler  attribute,  being  bound  up  with 
moral  character  as  knowledge  is  not.  Hence  wisdom  is  ascribed 
in  scripture  only  to  God  or  to  good  men,  unless  it  is  used  ironi- 
cally. See  1  Cor.  i.  20;  ii.  6;  Luke  x.  21.  Cicero  calls  wisdom 
*'the  chief  of  all  virtues."  The  earlier  distinction,  as  August- 
ine, is  unsatisfactory :  that  wisdom  is  concerned  with  eternal 
things,  and  knowledge  with  things  of  sense  ;  for  yvSnTi,^  hnowl- 
edg€j  is  described  as  having  for  its  object  God  (2  Cor.  x.  5) ;  the 


132  WORD  8TUDIBS  IN  THK  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Cu.  XI 

glorj  of  God  ia  the  face  of  Chriet  (3  Cor.  iv.  6) ;  Chriet  Jesus 
I  Philip,  iii.  8). 

Ab  applied  to  human  acqaaintance  with  divine  things,  yvSi- 
VII  knowledge,  is  the  lower,  iro^ita  wisdom,  the  higher  stage. 
Knowledge  may  issue  in  eelf-conceit.  It  ie  wisdom  that  biiilila 
up  the  man  (I  Cor.  viii.  1).  Aa  attributes  of  God,  the  distinct- 
ion appears  to  be  between  general  and  special:  tlie  wisdom  of 
God  ruling  everything  in  the  best  way  for  the  best  end  ;  tlie 
knowledge  of  God,  His  wisdom  as  it  contemplates  the  rela- 
tions of  things,  and  adopts  means  and  methods.  The  wiBdoni 
forms  the  plan ;  the  knowledge  knows  the  ways  of  carrying 
it  out.* 

Past  finding  out  (avf^ixviatrroi).  Only  here  and  Eph.  iii,  8. 
Appropriate  to  wags  or  j>ath^.     Lit,,  which  eumwt  be  tracked. 

34.  Who  hath  known,  etc.  From  lea.  xl.  13.  Heb.,  TT7u> 
JuUh  measured  the  Spirit  f  Tliough  measu,re<l  may  be  rendered 
tried,  proved;  regulated.  Compare  the  same  citation  in  1  Cor. 
ii.  16.  This  is  the  only  passage  in  tlie  Septnaglnt  where  ruach 
spirit  is  translated  by  voxk  miiid.  I^nown  (e7wu)  may  refer 
to  God's  fvSiaK  knowledge  and  wags  in  ver.  33;  counsellor 
to  Ilis  wisdom  and  Jitdgmenis.  No  one  has  counselled  with 
Jlim  in  forming  His  decisions. 

3.''..  Who  hath  first  given,  etc.  From  Job  xli.  3.  Heb., 
WTio  has  heen  beforehand  with  m£  that  I  sliould  repag  Aim  t 
Paul  here  follows  the  Aramaic  translation.  The  Septnagiiit 
is :    H'Afl  shaJl  resist  me  and  abide  f 

3fi.  Of— through— to  (i^—Bid—ett).  Of,  proceeding  frmi 
ae  the  source :  through,  by  means  of,  as  maintainer,  preserver, 
ruler:  to  or  unto,  lie  is  the  point  to  which  all  tends.  All 
men  and  things  are  for  His  glory  (1  Cor.  xv.  28),  Alford  styles 
this  doxology"the  subtimest  apostrophe  existing  even  in  the 
pages  of  inspiration  itself." 

•Tli«Ter("Leifcon"l,  Kruxriedgr .  re}i»rdedb_T  iteelf ;  r/tWom, eihlbited  In 
krtloo.  Lightfoot,  Knouifiig*  l»  aimplj  intnitirf.  wiartom  ia  r»tiocin«liTe  also. 
Knowledge  spplicB  chiefly  to  the  ipprehenjioii  of  truthb,  Wiadom  fluperadds 
the  power  of  retaoniug  ibout  them. 


Ch.  XL]  THIS  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMAN&  133 


NOTE. 
PAUL'S  ARGUMENT  IN  BOMANS  IX.,  X.,  AND  XL 

Thkb  chapierSy  as  they  are  the  meet  difficult  of  Pftol's  writings, 
Lave  been  most  misunderstood  and  misapplied.  Their  most  dan- 
gerous perversion  is  that  which  draws  from  them  the  doctrine  of 
Crod's  arbitrary  predestination  of  individuals  to  eternal  life  or  etern- 
al perdition. 

It  can  be  shown  that  such  is  not  the  intent  of  these  chapters. 
They  do  not  discuss  the  doctrine  of  individual  election  and  repro- 
bation with  reference  to  eternal  destiny.  The  treatment  of  this 
question  is  subordinate  to  a  different  purpose,  and  is  not,  as  it  is 
not  intended  to  be,  exhaustive. 

At  the  time  when  the  epistle  was  written,  this  question  was  not 
agitating  the  Church  at  large  nor  the  Eoman  church  in  particular. 
Had  this  been  the  case,  we  may  be  sure,  from  the  analogy  of  other 
epistles  of  Paul,  that  he  would  have  treated  it  specifically,  as 
he  does  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith,  in  this  epistle, 
and  the  questions  of  idol-meats  and  the  resurrection  in  first  Corin- 
thians. 

Such  a  discussion  would  not  have  been  germane  to  the  design  of 
this  epistle,  which  was  to  imfold  the  Christian  doctrine  of  justifica- 
tion by  faith,  as  against  the  Jewish  doctrine  of  justification  by 
work& 

The  great  question  which  was  then  agitating  the  Church  was  the 
relation  of  Judaism  to  Christianity.  Paul  declared  that  Christian- 
ity had  superseded  Judaism.  The  Jew  maintained,  either,  that  the 
Messiah  had  not  come  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  that 
Christianity  was  therefore  an  imposture  ;  or  that,  admitting  Jesus 
to  be  the  Messiah,  He  had  come  to  maintain  the  law  and  the  insti- 
tutions of  Judaism  :  that,  therefore,  entrance  into  the  messianic 
kingdom  was  possible  only  through  the  gate  of  Judaism  ;  and  that 
the  true  Christian  must  remain  constant  to  all  the  ordinances  and 
commandments  of  the  law  of  Moses. 

According  to  the  Jewish  idea,  all  Oentiles  were  excluded  from 


134 


WORD  STUDIES   Iff  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Ca.  XI 


the  kingdom  of  God.  UDlesB  they  ahould  enter  it  as  Jewish  prooe- 
lyt«8,  Paul  himself,  before  his  conversion,  had  undertakeu  to 
stamp  out  Christianity  as  heresy,  verily  thinking  that  he  '■  ought 
to  do  many  things  contrary  to  the  name  of  Jesus  of  Noznretli  " 
(Acts  xxvi,  9).  Hence  the  Jew  "  compassed  sea  and  laud  to  make 
one  proselyte  "  (Matt.  iiiiL  15).  Every  Gentile  who  shoulJ  resist 
the  conquest  of  the  world  by  Israel  would  be  destroyed  by  Mes- 
siah. The  Jew  had  no  doubts  aa  to  the  absoluteneaa  of  the  divine 
sovereignty,  since  its  fancied  application  flattered  his  self-compla- 
cency and  national  pride.  All  Jews  were  elect,  and  all  others  were 
reprobate.  Paul's  proclamation  of  Messianic  privilege  to  the  Gen- 
tiles did,  perhaps,  quite  as  much  to  evoke  Jewish  hatred  against 
himself,  as  his  allegiance  to  the  Jesus  whom  the  Jews  had  crucified 
aa  a  malefactor. 

The  discussion  in  these  three  chapters  fits  perfectly  into  this 
question.  It  is  aimed  at  the  Jews'  national  and  religious  conceit. 
It  is  designed  to  show  them  that,  notwithstanding  their  claim  to  be 
Qod's  elect  people,  the  great  mass  of  their  nation  has  been  justly 
rejected  by  God  ;  and  furtlier,  that  God's  elective  purpose  includes 
the  Gentiles.  Hence,  whOe  maintaining  the  truth  of  divine  sover- 
eignty in  the  strongest  and  most  positive  manner,  it  treats  it  on  a. 
grander  scale,  and  brings  it  to  bear  against  the  very  elect  thetn- 


Early  in  the  discassion,  Paul  had  asserted  that  the  measianio 
salvation  had  been  decreed  to  the  Jevjfintl  (L  IC  ;  iL  10  :  compare 
John  i.  11).  In  the  face  of  this  stood  the  fact  that  the  Jewish  peo- 
ple generally  hod  rejected  the  offer  of  God  in  Christ,  Paul  him- 
self, after  offering  the  Gospel  to  the  Jews  at  Antioch  in  Pisidia,  had 
said  :  "  It  was  necessary  that  the  word  of  Ood  should  Jirat  have 
been  spoken  to  you  ;  but  seeing  ye  put  it  from  you,  aad  judge 
yoiirselvei  unworthy  of  everlasting  life,  lo,  we  turn  to  the  Gentiles  " 
(Acts  xiii.  46  ;  compare  Acts  sviii.  C).  Tiie  Jew  had  ^leii  under  the 
judgment  of  God  (Rom.  ii.  1,  2).  Resting  in  the  law,  ninkiug  bis 
boast  of  God,  claiming  to  be  a  guide  of  the  blind,  a  light  of  them 
which  are  in  darkness,  an  instructor  of  the  foolish,  and  haviug  the 


Ch.  XI]  TUB  BPISTLB  TO  THB  BOMAKa  135 

form  of  knowledge  and  of  the  truth  in  the  law,  he  had  made  him- 
self a  scandal  in  the  eyes  of  the  Oentiles  by  his  notorious  deprav- 
ity, and  had  proved  himself  to  be  not  a  Jew,  since  his  circumcision 
was  not  of  the  heart  (Bom.  iL  17-29). 

Notwithstanding  these  facts,  the  Jew  claimed  that  because  he  uxu 
a  Jew  Ckxl  could  not  reject  him  consistently  with  His  own  election 
and  coTcnant  promise.  If  the  (Gospel  were  true,  and  Jesus  really 
the  Messiah,  the  promises  made  to  the  Jewish  people,  who  rejected 
the  Messiah,  were  nullified.  Or,  if  the  election  of  Ood  held,  Israel 
was  and  foreyer  remained  the  people  of  Ood,  in  which  case  the 
Oospel  was  false,  and  Jesus  an  impostor.  "  Thus  the  dilemma 
seemed  to  be :  either  to  affirm  Gk>d's  faithfulness  to  His  own  elect- 
ion and  deny  the  Oospel,  or  to  affirm  the  Oospel,  but  give  the  lie 
to  the  divine  election  and  &ithfulnes&"  (Gbdei) 

Paul  must  face  this  problem.  It  lies  in  the  straight  line  of  his 
argument  Hints  of  it  have  already  appeared  in  chs.  iiL  1  sqq. ; 
iv.  L  The  discussion  necessarily  involves  the  truth  of  the  divine 
sovereignty  and  election. 

In  studying  Paul's  treatment  of  this  question,  mistake  and  mis- 
construction are  easy,  because  the  truths  of  divine  sovereignty  and 
elective  freedom  require  to  be  presented  in  their  most  absolute  as- 
pect as  against  man's  right  to  dictate  to  Ood.  The  parallel  facts 
of  man's  free  agency  and  consequent  responsibility,  which  are 
equally  patent  in  these  chapters,  are,  at  certain  points,  thrown  into 
the  shade ;  so  that,  if  the  attention  is  fastened  upon  particular 
passages  or  groups  of  passages,  the  result  will  be  a  one-sided  and 
untruthful  conception  of  the  divine  economy,  which  may  easily  run 
into  a  challenge  of  Ood's  justice  and  benevolence.  The  assertion 
Ood  must  act  according  to  my  construction  of  His  promise  and  de- 
crecy  can  be  met  only  by  the  bare,  hard,  crushing  counter-statement 
Ood  is  supreme  and  does  as  lie  urill,  and  has  the  right  to  do  as  Ee 
toilL  This  assertion,  we  repeat,  does  not  exclude  the  element  of 
individual  freedom ;  it  does  not  imply  that  Ood  will  do  violence  to 
it ;  it  is  consistent  with  the  assumption  of  the  most  impartial  just- 
ice, the  most  expansive  benevolence,  the  tenderest  mercy,  the  pur- 
est love  on  Ood's  pari  The  argument  merely  sets  these  elements 
aside  for  the  time  being  and  for  a  purpose,  only  to  emphasize  them 
at  a  later  stage.    As  Meyer  aptly  says : 


13C  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TKSTAMKNT.  [Cu.  iL 

"  Aa  oftan  m  we  treat  mdg  onf  of  Iha  (uw  tmthB ;  ■  God  U  ibBolutelj  fre« 
and  ill-efflciHnt,'  and  '  Man  liia  moral  freedom,  aiid  is.  Id  virtue  of  his  propet 
B«lt-diitermiDatlon  and  reHponaibilit;  aa  s  (reti  agent,  the  aalhor  of  hia  ualva- 
tioD  or  perdiljun.'  auJ  cur;  it  out  iu  a  couaistent  tliaorj.  and  therefore  lu  a 
ODe-aided  metliod,  we  are  compelled  to  apeak  in  such  a  nianner  that  lh»  ollur 
truth  appairi  to  U  annulled.  Oulj  appair*.  however  ;  tor,  in  fact,  all  tiiat 
takes  place  in  thia  case  ia  a  temporary  and  conacioiu  lathdrawiag  of  aiUntinii 
from  the  other.  Id  the  pruseut  iustaiice  I'aul  fouod  himaslf  \a  thia  case,  and 
he  ezpressen  himaelf  accordiog  to  this  mode  of  view,  not  mere);  Iu  a  passing 
referenoe,  bat  In  the  whole  reaaoniog  of  is.  6-39.  In  opposition  to  the  Jew- 
iah  oonceit  of  descent  and  works,  he  desired  to  establiah  the  free  and  absolute 
■OTereign  power  of  the  divine  will  and  action,  and  that  the  more  deciaivelj 
and  ezdusiTelj,  the  lesa  ha  would  leave  an;  ground  for  Ihe  arrogant  iltualon 
of  the  Jews  that  God  mutt  be  graciooa  to  them.  The  apostle  haR  herv  wholl; 
taken  his  position  on  the  abuJute  stand-point  of  the  theor;  of  pure  dependence 
Dpun  Odd,  and  that  with  all  the  boldness  of  clear  couaistencjr ;  but  onl;  until 
he  has  done  justice  to  the  polemical  object  whioh  he  haa  In  view.  He  then 
returns  (vv.  30  sqq)  from  that  abatracllon  to  the  human  mora!  stand  point  of 
practloe,  10  that  be  allows  the  claims  of  both  modes  of  consideration  to  stand 
dde  by  aide,  joat  aa  the;  exist  side  b;  side  within  the  llmlta  of  human  thonght. 
The  ooutempUtion^ whioh  lies  bejond  theae  limiU — of  the  metaphyaical  rela- 
tion of  easentlal  interdependence  between  the  two — namelv,  objectivel;  di- 
vine and  subjectively  human,  freedom  and  activity  of  wilt — neceaaarilj  re- 
mained outxide  nnd  lieroiid  hia  aphere  of  view  ;  aa  he  would  have  had  no  oc- 
casion at  all  iu  this  place  to  enter  npon  tbig  problem,  seeing  that  it  was  in- 
oiimbeut  npon  him  to  crush  the  Jewish  pretensions  with  the  one  side  only  of 
11— the  absoluteness  of  Qod." 

That  tbe  factor  of  human  freedom  haa  full  scope  in  the  divioe 
economy  is  too  obvious  to  require  proof.  It  appears  in  numerous 
utterances  of  Paul  himself,  and  in  the  entire  drift  of  fw;ript«re, 
where  man's  power  of  moral  choice  is  both  asserted,  assumed,  and 
appealed  to  ;  where  tbe  punishment  of  unbelief  and  disobedience 
is  clearly  shown  to  be  due  to  man's  own  obstinacy  and  perversenessi. 
"Were  this  not  tbe  case,  if  human  destiny  were  absolutely  and  un- 
changeably fixed  by  an  arbitrary  decree,  the  eihortationa  to  carry 
out  our  own  salvation,  to  obedience  and  perseverance  in  right- 
doing,  the  cautions  against  moml  Inpse,  tbe  plain  suggestions  of 
the  possibility  of  forfeiting  divine  blessings,  the  use  of  the  divine 
promises  themselves  as  appeals  to  repentance  and  holiness,  the 
recognitions  of  the  possibiUty  of  moral  transformation,  would  assert 
themselves  as  a  stupendous  farce,  a  colossal  and  cruel  satire. 

It  must  suffice  for  us  that  these  two  factors  of  divine  sovereignty 


Ch.  XL]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMANa  137 

and  human  freedom  are  both  alike  distinctly  recognized  in  Script- 
ure. Their  interplay  and  mutual  adjustment  in  the  divine  adminis' 
tration  carry  us  out  of  our  depth.  Thai  matter  must  be  left  with 
Ood,  and  faced  by  man  with/ai^A,  not  with  knowledge.  That  there 
is  a  divine  election — the  act  of  Gkxl's  holy  will  in  selecting  His  own 
methods,  instruments,  and  times  for  carrying  out  His  own  pur- 
poses— is  a  fact  of  history  and  of  daily  observation.  It  appears  in 
the  different  natural  endowments  of  men ;  in  the  distribution  of 
those  natural  advantages  which  minister  to  the  strength  or  weak- 
ness of  nations ;  in  the  inferiority  of  the  Ethiopian  to  the  Caucasian ; 
in  the  inteUectual  superiority  of  a  Kant  or  a  Descartes  to  a  Chinese 
coolie. 

'*  It  is  true,  and  no  argnment  can  gainsay  it,  that  men  are  placed  in  the 
world  unequally  favored,  both  in  inward  disposition  and  outward  oiroum- 
stances.  Some  children  are  bom  with  temperaments  which  make  a  life  of 
innocence  and  purity  natural  and  easy  to  them  ;  others  are  bom  with  violent 
passions,  or  even  with  distinct  tendencies  to  evil,  inherited  from  their  ances- 
tors and  seemingly  unconquerable  ;  some  are  constitutionally  brave,  others 
are  constitutionally  cowards  ;  some  are  bom  in  religious  families  and  are  care- 
fully educated  and  watched  over  ;  others  draw  their  first  breath  in  an  atmo- 
sphere of  crime,  and  cease  to  inhale  it  only  when  thej  pass  into  their  graves. 
Only  a  fourth  part  of  mankind  are  bom  Christians.  The  remainder  nevet 
hear  the  name  of  Christ  except  as  a  reproach.*'    (Froude,  "CalvinisnL") 

Such  election  must  needs  be  arbitrary  ;  not  as  not  having  good 
and  sufficient  reasons  behind  it,  but  as  impelled  by  such  reasons 
as  are  either  beyond  human  apprehension  or  are  withheld  from  it 
in  God's  good  pleasure.  All  that  we  can  say  in  our  ignorance  of 
these  reasons  is :  Ood  did  thus  because  it  pleased  Him.  Certain  it 
is  that,  could  we  penetrate  to  these  reasons,  we  should  come,  in 
every  case,  at  last,  upon  perfect  wisdom  and  perfect  love,  working 
out  along  hidden  lines  to  such  results  as  will  fill  heaven  with  ador- 
ing joy  and  wonder. 

THB  OOUBSB  OF  THB  ABOTJlCENTi 

This  we  shall  follow  in  detail  through  cb.  ix.,  and  in  general  out- 
lines through  chs.  x.  and  xL 

(w.  1-3.)  I  have  great  sorrow  of  heart  for  my  Jewish  kinsmen 
because  of  their  spiritual  condition  arising  from  their  rejection  of 


138  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  (Oh.  XL 

JeeuH,  and  their  consequent  exclusion  from  the  blessings  of  Mes- 
siah's kingdom. 

(4,  6.)  Thia  condition  ia  the  more  lamentable  because  of  their 
original  privileges  involved  in  Ck>d's  election  of  them  to  be  Hia 
chosen  people — adoption,  viflible  manifestations  of  God,  covenants, 
a  divine  legislation,  a  divinely  arranged  order  of  worship,  mes- 
sianic promises,  descent  from  the  revered  fathers,  selection  as  the 
race  from  whom  the  Christ  was  to  spring  (compare  Isa.  xlv,  3,  4). 

(6.)  There  is,  however,  no  inconsistency  between  their  posses- 
sion of  these  original  privileges  and  their  present  exclusion.  The 
case  does  not  stand  so  as  that  God's  word  has  failed  of  fulfilment. 
Those  who  make  this  charge,  aasuming  that  tbey  are  entitled  to 
acceptance  with  God  on  the  mere  ground  of  descent,  are  to  remem- 
ber the  general  principle  that  messianic  blessing  is  not  conditioned 
by  mere  descent ;  that  not  all  who  are  phyaicaily  descended  from 
Israel  are  the  true,  ideal  Israel  of  God  (compare  Bom.  iii.  28). 

(7-9.)  This  appears  from  the  history  of  the  patriarchal  lineage. 
Though  Abraham  had  two  sons,  Ishmael  and  Isaac,  Isaac  was 
selected  as  the  channel  of  the  messianic  seed  of  Abraham,  according 
to  the  promise,  "  In  Isaac  shall  thy  seed  be  called  "  (compare  Gal. 
iv.  23),  and  not  Ishmael,  who  was  the  child  of  Abraham  in  a  physic- 
al sense  merely,  and  not  the  child  of  the  promise  which  is  recorded 
in  Gen.  xviii.  10. 

(10-13.)  Not  only  have  we  an  example  of  divine  selection  in  the 
casa  of  children  of  different  mothers,  but  we  have  an  example  in 
the  case  of  the  children  of  the  same  mother.  Between  Jacob  and 
Esau,  representatives  of  the  two  nations  of  Israel  and  Bklom  (Gen. 
sxv.  23),  a  divine  choice  was  mode,  and  it  was  declared  by  God 
that  the  elder  should  serve  the  younger.  This  choice  was  not  based 
upon  purity  of  descent,  since  both  children  were  by  the  aame  father 
and  lawful  mother.  Nor  was  it  based  upon  moral  superiority, 
since  it  was  made  before  they  had  done  eitlier  good  or  evil  The 
choice  was  made  according  to  God's  sovereign  will,  so  that  Hia 
messianic  purpose  might  remain  intact ;  the  characteristic  of  which 
purpose  was  that  it  was  ficconling  to  election  ;  that  is,  not  determ- 
ined by  ment  or  descent,  but  by  the  sovereign  pleasure  of  God. 

(14.)  If  it  be  asked,  therefore.  "Is  there  unrighteousness  with 
God  ?    Does  God  contradict  Himself  in  His  rejection  of  unbeliev 


Ch.  XL]  THE  EPISTLB  TO  THE  BOMAN&  189 

ing  Israel?"— it  must  be  answered,  "No!"  If  there  was  no 
unrighteousness  in  the  exclusion  of  Ishmael  and  Edom  from  the 
temporal  privileges  of  the  chosen  people,  there  is  none  in  the 
exclusion  of  the  persistently  rebellious  Israelites  from  the  higher 
privileges  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  If  not  all  the  physical 
descendants  of  Abraham  and  Isaac  can  claim  their  father's  name 
and  rights,  it  follows  that  Gk>d's  promise  is  not  violated  in  exclud- 
ing from  His  kingdom  a  portion  of  the  descendants  of  Jacob. 
Descent  cannot  be  gleaded  against  God's  right  to  exclude,  since 
He  has  already  excluded  from  the  messianic  line  without  regard  to 
descent  This  choice  Israel  approved  and  cannot,  therefore,  repud- 
iate it  when  the  same  choice  and  exclusion  are  applied  to  unbe- 
lieving Israel  Gbd  is  not  restricted  to  the  Hebrew  race,  nor 
bound  by  the  claims  of  descent  As  He  chose  between  the  chOd- 
ren  of  the  flesh  and  the  children  of  the  promise,  so  He  may  choose 
between  mere  descendants  and  true  believers,  whether  Jew  or 
Gentile. 

It  is  to  be  remarked  on  this  passage  that  the  matter  of  eternal, 
individual  salvation  or  pretention  is  not  contemplated  in  the  argu- 
ment, as  it  is  not  in  MaL  L  2,  3,  from  which  the  words  "  Jacob 
have  I  loved,"  etc.,  are  quoted.  The  matter  in  question  is  the  part 
played  by  the  two  nations  regarded  from  the  theocratic  stand- 
point 

(15.)  God  cannot  be  unrighteous.  This  is  apparent  from  your 
own  Scriptures,  which,  as  you  admit,  glorify  Gk>d's  righteousness, 
and  which  give  you  God's  own  statements  concerning  Himself  in 
the  cases  of  Moses  and  Pharaoh.  There  can,  therefore,  be  no  dis- 
crepancy between  God's  righteousness  and  the  principle  for  which 
I  am  contending,  since  Gk>d  represents  Himself  as  acting  on  this 
very  principle ;  Divine  choice  is  not  founded  upon  human  desert. 
Man  has  no  right  to  Ood' a  favors.  For  when  Moses  asked  God  to 
show  him  His  glory,  Qod,  in  complying,  assured  him  that  He  did 
not  grant  the  request  on  the  ground  of  Moses'  merit  or  services, 
but  solely  of  His  own  free  mercy.  He  would  have  mercy  and  com- 
passion upon  whom  He  would.  Moses  had  no  claim  upon  that 
revelation. 

(16.)  Thus  it  appears  that  the  divine  bestowment  proceeds  from 
sovereign  grace,  and  not  from  the  will  or  the  effort  of  the  recipient 


140  WORD   STDDIES    IN    THE   NEW  TESTAMENT.  ICa.  XL 

Hence  the  Jew  cannot  claim  it  on  the  ground  of  race  or  of  moi-a] 
striTiog. 

It  is  right  to  ivish  and  right  to  run.  Paul  elaewhere  aaya,  "So 
run  that  ye  may  obtain  "  (1  Cor.  ix.  24),  But  that  is  iiot  now  the 
point  in  riew.  The  point  is  to  emphasize  the  fact  of  God's  sovereign 
right  to  dispenae  Hia  favora  aa  He  will,  in  opposition  to  the  Jew's 
claim  that  God  iiiuHt  dit>peuae  His  favors  to  him  on  the  ground  of 
his  descent  Hence  the  argument  bears  alao  on  the  divine  dealing 
with  the  Qentilea.  The  Jew  says,  "  The  Jewa  alone  are  subjects  of 
the  divine  mercy ;  the  Gentiles  are  excluded."  Paul  replies,  "  Tour 
own  Scripturea  show  j'ou  that  God  has  the  right  to  ahow  mercy  to 
whom  He  will  The  fact  that  He  originally  did  not  chooae  the 
Gentile,  but  chose  the  Jew,  doea  not  exclude  Him  from  extending 
Hia  aalvation  to  the  Gentile  if  Ho  so  wilL  The  fact  that  He  did  ao 
chooae  the  Jew,  doea  not  aave  the  Jew  from  the  peril  of  exclusion 
and  rejection." 

(17.)  A.gain,  God  ia  vindicated  against  the  charge  of  iujuatice  by 
Hia  declaration  of  the  same  principle  applied  to  the  matter  of  with- 
holding  mercy  in  the  case  of  Fbaraoh.  The  one  statement  impliea 
the  other.  The  right  to  beatow  at  will  implies  the  right  to  with- 
hold at  will.  Thus  He  aaya  to  Pharaoh  that  He  has  raiaed  him  up 
in  order  to  ahow  Hia  power  through  hia  defeat  and  deatruction. 

(18.)  Hence  the  concluaion,  God  has  the  absolute  right  to  dia- 
pense  or  to  withhold  mercy  at  pleasure.  "He  hath  mercy  upon 
whom  He  will  have  mercy,  and  whom  He  will  He  hardeneth." 

Thia  last  statement,  on  its  face,  appears  to  be  the  assertion  of  a 
rigid,  inexorable  predeterminiam.  But  let  it  be  at  once  said  that 
Paul  commits  himself  to  no  such  theory.  For  to  interpret  this  pas- 
sage ns  meaning  that  God  takes  deliberate  measures  to  harden  any 
man  against  holy  and  gracious  iuflueucea,  ao  as  to  encourage  him 
to  sin  in  order  that  He  may  show  Hia  power  in  destroying  him,  Is : 

L  To  ascribe  to  God  the  most  monstrous  cruelty  and  injustice, 
according  to  the  standard  of  Hia  own  revealed  character  and 
law. 

2.  To  make  God  the  author  an<l  promoter  of  ein. 

3.  To  contradict  other  declarations  of  Scripture,  aa  1  Tim.  ii.  4  ; 
Jas.  i.  13  ;  2  Pet.  hi.  9. 

4  To  contradict  the  facts  iu  Pbaraoh'a  own  cose,  since  God  gave 


Ch.  XIJ 


THE    EPIBTLE  TO  THE  KOBfAMS. 


141 


Pharaoh  abund&nt  waming,  iostmotiDii,  and  call  aod  induce- 

ment  to  rejicutance. 

The  key-uote  ut  the  discuBsion  must  be  kept  clearly  in  mind  aa 
Bhaping  this  particular  form  of  atatemeot.  To  repeat :  Paul  is 
strikiug  sharply  at  the  osBumption  of  the  Jew  that  God  munt  dis- 
pense mesaianic  blessing  to  him,  and  muM  not  exclude  him,  he- 
cause  he  is  a  Jew.  Paul  meets  this  with  the  hare  statement  of 
God's  sovereign  right  to  dispose  of  men  aa  He  will.  He  does  not 
ignore  the  efforts  which  God  mokes  to  save  men  from  blindness 
and  hardness  of  heart,  but  the  attitude  of  the  Jew  does  not  call 
for  the  assertion  of  these  :  ouly  for  the  assertion  of  God's  absolute 
Borereigntj  against  an  iusolent  and  presumptuous  claim. 

Bearing  this  in  mind,  we  are  here  confronted  with  n  class  of  facts 
which  we  cannot  explain — certain  arrangements  the  reasons  for 
which  lie  back  in  the  sovereign  will  of  God.  Moses  was  placed  uu- 
der  circumstances  which  promoted  his  becoming  the  leader  and 
lawgiver  of  God's  people.  Pharaoh  was  bom  to  an  inheritance  of 
despotic  power  and  inhaled  from  his  birth  the  traditions  of  Oiient- 
nl  tyranny.  These  influences  went  to  harden  him  against  God's 
command.  Apparently  the  circumstances  favored  Pharaoh's  he- 
coming  a  cruel  tyrant.  Why  the  difference  ?  We  cannot  tell. 
These  causes  operated  acconHng  to  their  natural  law.  There  was 
also  the  operation  of  a  psychological  and  moral  law,  according  to 
which  the  indulgence  of  any  evil  passion  or  impulse  confirms  it 
and  fosters  its  growth.  Pride  begets  pride ;  resistance  intensifies 
obstinacy,  encourages  presumption,  blunts  susceptibihty  to  bett«r 
influences.  Again,  the  penal  element  entered  into  the  case.  Per- 
sistent disobedience  and  resistance,  working  their  natural  result  of 
inflated  pride  and  presumptuous  foolhardineas,  wrought  out  a  con- 
dition of  heart  which  invited  and  insured  judgment.  A  parallel  is 
found  in  the  first  chapter  of  this  epistle,  where  it  is  said  that  the 
heathen,  having  a  certain  revelation  of  God,  refused  to  improve  it ; 
wherefore,  as  they  did  not  like  to  retain  God  in  their  knowledge, 
God  gave  them  up  to  uncleanness,  vile  passions,  and  a  reprobate 
mind  (i.  24,  26,  28). 

'■  It  is  pBYcholoi;io&1lj  imposBiblH  ihM  bqcIi  determinsd  Impenltonoe  ooald 
fca  churi'sbttd  hy  the  monarcli,  and  yei  prodnoe  no  effects  In  the  MiidEbilllEei 
sf  hii  liearl.     in  bucIi  nuueasu'y  ivorlciDg  the  huid  of  God  xaatt  needs  be  Im- 


1 


I4'2  WORD  STDDIBS   IN  THE  NEW  TE3TAMENT.  [Ch.  XC 

nMUient,  Whan  ve  imperBonAlIf  my  '  mnat '  ■nd  spe&k  impersonnlly  of  '  ne- 
ceBBity  '  in  refereiiot!  to  tbe  oondilions  of  tlis  liumao  seDBibilitj,  we  either  ex- 
prewly  or  implloilly  point  to  the  operation  of  God.  God  did  hwden  of  old, 
and  Elill  He  bardenB  when  sin  is  cheriBhed."     (Uorison. ) 

And  jet  the  operation  of  these  forces  did  not  esclude  moral 
agency  or  moral  freedom.  No  irresistible  constraiut  compelleil 
Pharaoh  to  yield  to  this  preBsure  toward  evil.  Hia  power  of  choice 
was  recognized,  assumed,  and  appealed  to.  He  could  not  plead 
ignorance,  for  God  instructed  him  through  Moses.  He  could  not 
plead  doubt  of  God's  power,  for  God  wrought  before  his  eyes  an 
unexampled  seriea  of  wonders.  If  any  "  viaitinga  of  nature  "  could 
have  power  over  him,  the  misery  of  his  slave  population  was  before 
his  eyes.  Only  when  all  these  influences  hod  been  repelled,  and 
all  opportunities  for  yielding  scornfully  rejected,  did  God  have  re- 
course to  judgment.  God  raised  up  Pharaoh  in  order  to  show  His 
power ;  but  two  opposite  exhibitions  of  God's  power  in  Pharaoh 
were  poasible.  If  he  had  yielded,  he  would  have  been  a  co-worker 
■n-ith  God  in  the  evolution  of  the  Jewish  commonwealth.  God's 
power  would  have  been  displayed  in  the  prosperity  of  his  kingdom, 
as  it  was  through  the  presence  of  Joseph.  He  resisted,  and  God's 
power  was  terribly  manifested  in  his  torment  and  final  destruction. 

"No  one,"  as  Muller  observes,  "can  withdraw  himself  from  the 
range  and  influence  of  God's  revelations,  without  altering  his  moral 
atatua."*  Hence,  though  it  ia  affirmed  that  God  hardened  Pha- 
raoh's heart — the  side  of  the  statement  which  best  suits  the  imme- 
diate purpose  of  Paul's  argument — it  ia  also  affirmed  that  Pharaoh 
hardened  his  own  heart  (compare  Exod.  iv,  21  ;  vii  3  ;  ix.  12  ;  x. 
20,  27;  XL  10;  and  viii.  15,  32;  ix.  34)  |.  The  divine  and  the 
human  agencies  work  freely  side  by  side. 

Tlio  cases  of  both  Moses  and  Pharaoh  make  against  the  charge 
of  God's  injuatice  toward  the  unbeheving  Jews,  since  they  show 

•  "  Dootrine  of  Bin." 

f  ChsTns,  on  Taaiah  vi.  9,  10,  whlah  Bboald  be  oompared  with  this  passage, 
ujl  that  the  phrase  "  hardening  of  the  heait "  iB  oa\y  twiae  applied  to  indi- 
viduals ia  books  of  the  Old  Testament ;  Dunel}-,  to  Pharaoh,  and  to  Sihon, 
King  of  Heahbon  (Deut.  ii.  30).  Jews  never  have  this  phraae  applied  to 
Ihitm.  but  onl;  the  Jewish  nation,  or  Bections  of  it,  a«  Isa.  vi.  9, 10;  zziz.  10, 
"  The  PropheoieB  of  laaiah. "  Compare  Isa.  Ixiii.  17. 


Ch.  SI.J  the  epistle  to  the  ROMANS.  HS 

thnt  He  acts  conaistently  on  the  pnDciple  of  exercising  His  diviin' 
Bovereignty  according  to  Hia  supreme  will ;  but  tbey  also  furnis!; 
another  argument  to  the  Bame  effect,  by  ehoning  that  He  exerciser 
His  sorereigntj  with  long-Buffering  and  mercy.  The  God  who  acts 
with  mercy  and  forbearance  cannot  be  unrighteouH.  God'a  revelii- 
tion  to  Moses  was  a  diaplay  of  His  great  mercy.  In  it  He  repealed 
"  the  Lord  God,  merciful  and  gracious,  long-suffering,  and  abund- 
ant in  goodness  and  truth,  keeping  mercy  for  thousands,  forpjiv- 
ing  iniquity,  transgression,  and  ain,  and  that  will  by  no  means 
clear  the  Ruilty  "  (Exod.  xxxiv.  6,  7).  God'a  dealing  with  Pharaoh 
was  marked  by  forbearance,  opportunities  for  repentance,  instruct- 
ion, and  chastisement. 

Verses  19,  20,  21  are  not  properly  port  of  the  proof,  but  are  in- 
troduced by  way  of  rebuke  to  a  presumptuous  question  or  chal- 
lenge ;  so  that,  in  the  regular  line  of  the  argument,  we  may  pro- 
ceed directly  from  the  close  of  ver,  18  to  ver.  22. 

(19.)  The  objector  now  catches  at  the  words,  "whom  He  wiU 
He  bai-denetb,"  as  an  opportunity  (or  shifting  the  responsibility 
from  himself  to  God.  If  God  hardens,  why  blame  the  hardened  ? 
If  God  ordains,  who  can  resist  His  will  ? 

The  fault  of  interpretation  at  this  point  Ues  in  construing  Paul's 
answer  as  a  counter- argument ;  whereas  Paul  does  not  entertain 
tbe  objector's  words  as  an  argument  at  alL  He  neither  admits, 
denies,  nor  answers  them  as  an  argument  His  reply  is  directed 
solely  at  the  objector's  attUade  as  a  challenger  of  God.  It  is  a  re- 
buke of  the  creature  for  charging  his  sin  upon  tbe  Creator.  Paul 
is  not  dealing  with  tbe  objector's  logic,  but  with  the  sublime  im- 
pudence of  the  objector  himself.  He  ia  not  vindicating  God 
against  the  charge,  nor  exposing  the  falsity  of  the  charge  itself. 

For  if  this  answer  of  Paul,  with  tbe  similitude  of  the  potter  and 
tbe  clay,  is  to  be  taken  as  an  argument  for  God's  right  to  harden 
men  at  Hi>t  arbitrary  pleasure,  then  Paul  ia  open  to  rebuke  quite 
as  much  as  his  opponent.  For,  in  the  first  place,  the  answer  is  a 
tacit  admission  of  the  Jew's  premiss,  and,  in  tbe  second  place,  re- 
garded as  an  answer  to  an  argument,  it  ia  a  specimen  of  the  moat 
brutal  dogmatism,  and  of  tbe  most  faUacious  and  shallow  logic,  if 
it  can  be  called  logic  at  all.  This  is  the  case,  in  brief.  The  Jew. 
"God  hardens  at  Hia  arbitrary  will  and  pleasure.     If,  therefore, 


u 


144  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  (Ch.  XI 

He  hardened  me  so  that  I  could  not  believe,  He  is  to  blame,  not  1 
Why  does  He  find  fault  with  me  for  not  believing?  If  He  is  su- 
preme, who  can  resist  Hia  will  ?  "  Paul.  "  Suppose  He  did  harden 
you  so  that  you  could  not  believe,  what  have  you  to  say  about  it? 
Shut  your  mouth  I  God  does  as  He  pieaees  with  you.  You  are 
simply  a  lump  of  clay  m  the  hands  of  a  potter,  and  must  be  con- 
tent to  be  what  tbe  potter  makes  you." 

From  this  point  of  view  it  must  be  said  that  tbe  objector  baa 
the  best  of  it,  and  that  Paul's  answer  is  no  answer.  Regarded  as 
au  ar^ment,  it  is  an  argument  from  an  analogy  wbich  is  no  anal- 
ogy. Man,  on  God's  own  showing,  is  not  a  lump  of  senseless  clay. 
He  is  a  sentient,  reasoning  being,  endowed  by  God  with  the  power 
of  self-determination.  God  Himself  cannot  and  does  not  treat  him 
as  a  lump  of  clay ;  and  to  assert  such  a  relation  between  God  and 
man  made  in  God's  image,  is  to  assert  what  is  contrary  to  common 
sense  and  to  God's  own  declarations  and  assumptions  in  Scripture. 
The  objector  might  well  turn  upon  Paul  and  say,  "  Well,  then,  if 
man  ia  only  a  lump  of  clay,  and  therefore  without  right  or  power 
to  reply,  who,  pray,  art  thou  that  repliest/or  God  ?  Thou  art,  on 
thine  own  showing,  a  lump  of  clay  like  myself.  If  clay  cannot  and 
must  not  reason  nor  answer,  what  is  the  peculiar  quality  of  (/ly 
clay  which  entitles  thee  to  apeak  as  God's  advocate?" 

It  is  quite  safe  to  say  that  Paul  is  too  good  a  reasoner,  and  too 
well  acquainted  with  the  character,  the  word,  ond  tbe  economy  of 
God  as  displayed  in  the  history  of  his  own  race,  to  bo  betrayed 
into  any  such  logical  absurdity  as  this :  too  thoroughly  humane, 
too  mindful  of  his  own  deep  doubts  and  questionings,  too  trans- 
parently candid  to  meet  even  a  conceited  and  presumptuous  argu- 
ment with  a  counter-argument  consisting  of  a  bare  dogma  and  a 
false  analogy.  Paul  does  not  admit  that  God  made  the  Jew  siu. 
He  does  not  admit  that  God  made  the  Jew  incapable  of  believing. 
He  does  not  admit  that  the  responsibility  for  tlie  Jew's  rejection 
lies  anywhere  but  with  himself. 

Yet  even  the  figure  of  the  potter  and  the  clay,  properly  under- 
stood, might  have  suggested  to  tbe  angry  Jew  something  beside 
the  thought  of  sovereign  power  and  will  arbitrarily  moulding  help- 
less matter. 


THE  EPISTLB  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


THR    POTTKB    AND    THB    OUT. 


The  iUnBtnitioQ  is  a  common  one  in  tlie  Old  Testament  and  it 
is  reasonable  tbat  Paul's  use  of  it  should  be  uolored  hy  its  usage 
there. 

It  occurs  in  Jeremiah  sviji.  1-10.  Jeremiah,  in  great  deBpond- 
encj  over  the  demoralization  of  Israel,  was  bidden  to  go  down  to 
the  potter's  house.  The  potter  shaped  a  vessel  on  the  wheel,  but, 
owing  to  some  defect  in  the  clay,  the  veBsel  was  marred.  So  the 
potter  made,  of  the  same  lump,  another  vessel  different  from  that 
which  he  had  at  first  designed.  He  did  not  throw  away  the  claj, 
but  his  skill  prevailed  to  triumph  over  the  defect,  and  to  make  a 
vessel,  perhaps  inferior  to  the  first,  yet  still  capable  of  use.  So 
God  had  designed  Israel  for  a  high  destiny,  a  royal  nation,  a  pe- 
culiar people  ;  but  Israel  defeated  this  destiny  by  its  idolatries 
and  rebellious.  Hence  God  made  it  another  and  baser  vessel. 
"  The  pressure  of  the  potter's  hand  waa  to  be  harder.  Shame  and 
suffering  and  exile — their  land  left  desolate,  and  they  themselves 
weeping  by  the  waters  of  Babylon — this  was  the  process  to  which 
they  were  now  called  on  to  submit."  The  potter  exercised  his 
power  by  making  the  vessel  unto  dishonor  which  he  originally  de- 
signed unto  honor.  Side  by  side  with  the  potter's  power  over  the 
clay,  there  goes,  figuratively  speaking,  in  the  prophet's  representa- 
tion, the  power  of  change  and  choice  in  the  lump.  "  Ye  are  in  my 
hand  as  this  clay  in  the  hand  of  the  potter.  If,  when  I  am  about 
to  degrade  the  nation,  they  turn  from  their  evil.  I  will  repent  of 
the  evit.  On  the  contrary,  when  I  am  planning  for  an  honorable 
and  powerful  kingdom,  if  the  people  turn  to  evil,  then  I  will  re- 
pent of  the  good  wherewith  I  aaid  that  I  would  benefit  them." 
Israel  has  a  power  of  choice.  If  it  is  made  into  a  vessel  unto  dis- 
honor, the  fault  is  its  own,  but  repentance  and  suhmissioQ  may 
change  the  issue. 

Look  again  at  Isaiah  xxix.  IG.  This  passage  occurs  iu  the  pro- 
phecy concerning  Jerusalem  under  the  name  of  Ariel.  The  prophet 
predicts  siege,  thunder,  and  earthquake.  He  says  that  the  Lord 
hath  poured  on  the  people  the  spirit  of  deep  sleep,  and  hath  closed 
their  eyes  and  covered  their  heads,  so  that  the  prophetic  viaiou  ap- 
Voi^  III.— 10 


i 


liG  WORD  STUDIES  IN  TUK  NKW  TKaTAMBNT.  [Ca.  XL 

peaia  to  them  as  a  sealed  letter  to  a  idbd  who  can  read,  or  aa  a 
writing  to  one  who  caauot  read. 

Thie  IB  OD  the  same  line  with  the  hardening  of  Pharaoh's  heart.  It 
is  ascribed  to  the  direct  agency  of  God.  But  immediately  there 
follows  the  statement  of  their  owu  responsibility  for  their  sin.  The 
people  have  removed  their  heart  from  the  Lord  and  worship  Him 
with  the  hps  only.  Therefore,  God  will  proceed  to  do  marvellous  and 
terrible  works  among  them.  0  your  perverseness  I  Tliiiik  you  you 
can  hide  your  counsel  from  God?  "Surely  your  turning  of  things 
upside  down  shall  be  esteemed  as  the  potter's  clay ;  for  shall  the 
work  aay  of  him  that  made  it,  '  He  made  me  not? '  or  shall  the  thinf; 
framed  say  of  him  that  framed  it,  'He  hath  no  understanding?'" 
In  other  words,  why  do  men  think  that  they  can  escape  God  by  hid- 
ing their  purposes  fromffim?  Shall  God  (the  potter)  be  accounted 
as  clay  (the  man)  ?  Shall  man  ignore  the  fact  that  he  was  made  by 
Ood,  and  act  as  if  God  had  no  understanding?  The  parallel  be- 
tween this  utterance  and  that  in  Romans  ix.  will  be  evident  at  a 

Isa.  xlv,  9.  The  prophecy  concerning  Cyrus.  God  calls  hini, 
though  a  heathen,  for  the  soke  of  Jacob  His  servant,  and  Israel  His 
elect  In  this  call  God  asserts  His  sovereignty:  "lam  Jehovah, 
and  there  is  none  else.  I  girded  thee  when  thou  knewest  me  not." 
This  idea  is  further  carried  out  by  the  figure  of  the  potter  and  the 
clay.  "  Woe  to  him  that  striveth  with  his  maker.  Let  the  potsherd 
strive  with  the  potsherds  of  the  earth.  Shall  the  clay  say  to  bjm 
that  fashioned  it,  'What  makest  thou?' or  thy  work,  'He  hath  no 
hands?'"  The  same  thought  appears  in  ver.  10.  Shall  a  child 
remonstrate  with  its  parents  because  they  have  brought  into  the 
world  a  being  weak,  ugly,  or  deformed?  And  again,  in  ver.  11: 
"Concerning  the  things  to  come  will  ye  question  me?  Concerning 
my  children  and  the  work  of  my  hands  will  ye  lay  commands  upon 
me  ?    It  was  I  that  made  the  earth  and  created  the  men  upon  it,"  etc. 

Along  with  these  declarations  of  absolute  sovereignty,  which 
silence  the  hps  of  men,  stand  exhortations  which  assume  the  power 
of  free  choice.  "  I  said  not  unto  the  seed  of  Jacob  '  Seek  ye  me 
in  vain.'"  "Assemble  yourselves  and  come."  "Let  them  take 
counsel  together."     "  Turn  ye  unto  me  and  be  ye  saved." 

Isa.  Ixiv   8.     "And   now  Jehovah,  thou  art   our  Father.     W« 


Cn.  XI.] 


THK   EPtSTLK  TO   THE   ROMANS. 


147 


Are  the  day,  and  thou  &rt  our  foahioner,  and  the  work  of  tb;  hocdH 
are  ne  alL"  But  ver.  6,  "  Behold  thou  wast  wroth,  aud  toe  sinned, 
and  we  went  axlray  :  our  iniq\Htie>t  ob  the  wind  have  carried  ua  away. 
Thou  hast  delivered  us  into  the  hand  of  our  iniquities."  "Since 
thou  art  our  fashioner,  and  we  are  the  clay,  look  upon  ub  :  remem- 
ber not  iniquity  forever." 

6j  all  these  Old-Testament  passages  the  idea  of  God  dealing 
with  men  as  hfeless  clay,  shaping  them  to  eternal  life  or  death  nc- 
«>rdiDg  to  His  arbitrary  will,  ia  contradicted.  The  illuatration 
points  away  from  God'a  causing  unbeUef,  to  God's  bearing  with 
man's  voluntary  and  persistent  disobedience,  and  to  Hia  making  of 
hirn  the  best  that  can  be  made  consistently  with  diviae  justice  aud 
holinesa  So  far  from  accentuating  rigid  narrowness  of  purpose, 
arbitrary  and  inexorable  destination  of  individuals  to  honor  or  dis- 
honor, the  illustration  opens  a  vast  range  and  free  play  of  divine 
purpose  to  turn  evil  to  good,  and  to  shape  men  into  obedient  and 
faithful  aervants  through  divine  cbastieementa  The  potter  does 
not  make  vessels  in  order  to  shiver  them.  God  does  not  make  men 
in  order  to  destroy  them.  God  ordaioa  no  man  to  eternal  death. 
He  desires  to  honor  humanity,  not  to  dishonor  It ;  and  the  fact 
that  men  do  become  vessels  unto  dishonor,  merely  proves  the 
power  which  God  boa  lodged  in  the  human  will  of  modifying,  and 
in  a  aense  defeating,  Hia  sovereign  purpose  of  love.  He  "  will 
have  all  men  to  be  saved  and  come  to  a  knowledge  of  the 
truth;"  yet  Christ  cornea  to  His  own,  and  Hia  own  receive  Him 
not,  aud  He  weeps  as  He  exclaims,  "  Te  will  not  come  unto  me 
that  ye  might  have  life." 

(22.)  The  argument  now  proceeds  in  regular  course  from  ver.  18, 
flhowiug  that  the  exercise  of  God's  sovereign  right  ia  marked  by 
mercy  even  toward  those  who  deserve  His  wrath.  Are  you  diij- 
poaed  to  construe  the  words  "  whom  He  will  He  hardeneth  "  into 
an  assertion  of  the  arbitrary,  relentless,  and  unjust  severity  of 
dod?  Suppose  it  can  be  shown  that  Gk>d,  though  the  spontan- 
eous  recoil  of  His  holy  nature  from  sin  moved  Him  to  display  Hia 
wrath  and  make  known  Hia  power  againat  men  who  were  fit  for  de- 
atxuction — endured  these  with  much  long-suffering. 

This  could  easily  be  shown  from  the  case  of  the  laraelitea  tbem- 
aelvea  and  of  Pharaoh. 


I 


148 


WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW   TBSTAMEl 


ICiL  XI 


DiJ  not  this  emlurance  imply  opportunity  to  repeut,  and  assume 
that  destruction  was  not  God'a  iirliitrary  choice,  but  tlieirs  ? 

Still  further,  wliat  if  God,  tbrougb  this  same  endurance,  was 
working,  not  only  to  save  the  Jewish  people  if  possible,  but  also  tu 
carry  out  a  larger  purpose  toward  a  jteople  which,  in  His  eternal 
counsels.  He  had  destined  for  the  glory  of  the  messianic  kingdom  ? 

Here  He  introduces  the  subject  of  the  iuclusion  of  the  Gentiles 
in  the  messianic  kingdom.  God  is  merciful  in  carrying  out  His 
will,  but  in  His  mercy  He  none  the  less  carries  out  His  will  Both 
Hia  Bovereif^rnty  and  His  mercy  will  be  vindicated  in  His  making  a 
people  (or  Himself  from  the  Gentiles  and  from  the  believing  Jews. 
What  hoe  Israel  to  aay  ?  The  word  of  God  has  not  been  brought 
to  nought  by  his  rejection.  The  principle  of  divine  selection  which 
operated  in  Abraham  and  Jacob  is  carried  out  in  the  selection  of 
believing  Isriiel  from  the  unbelieving  mass,  and  in  the  call  of  the 
Gentiles.  The  elective  purpose  of  Goil  was  broader  than  Israel 
thought  In  choosing  Israel  God  was  contemplating  the  salvation 
of  the  world,  and  did  not  abdicate  His  liberty  to  reject  unbelievers, 
or  to  call  others  not  Jews. 

With  this  should  be  compared  the  discourse  of  Jesus  in  John  vL 
After  having  given  a  sign  of  His  divine  power  and  commission  by 
the  feeding  of  the  multitudes.  His  announcement  of  Himself  as  the 
bread  from  heaven,  the  true  and  only  life  of  the  world,  is  met  with 
a  stupid,  materiuliatic  construction  of  Hia  words,  and  with  obstin- 
ate incredulity ;  whereupon  He  says,  "  Ye  also  have  seen  me  and 
believe  not "  (ver.  36).  At  this  point  He  seems  to  pause  and  con- 
template His  failure  to  roach  the  Jews,  and  to  ask  Himself  if  His 
indeed  for  nought  It  is  the  answer  to  this  inward 
question  which  exphuns  the  apparent  disconnection  of  ver.  37  with 
what  precedes.  Though  the  Jews  reject,  yet  God  will  have  a 
people  for  Himself.  "  All  that  the  Father  giveth  me  shall  come 
to  me."  There  is  a  clear  foreshadowing  here  of  the  call  of  the 
Gentiles. 

(25,  26.)  But  not  only  is  God's  word  not  annulled  ;  it  is  ful- 
filled. For  He  says,  by  the  prophet  Hosea,  that  He  will  call  by  the 
name  my  peoph  those  who  are  not  His  people,  and  that  nation 
beloved  which  was  not  beloved  ;  and  in  the  Gentile  lands,  where 
Ck>d,  hj  tlie  punishment  of  exile,  said  to  Israel,  "  Ye  are  not  my 


d 


Cu.  XI.]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THB  ROHAN&  149 

people,"  there  Qod  would  visit  them  and  recall  them  along  with 
the  Gentiles. 

Here  the  apostle  applies  to  the  Gentiles  what  Hosea  said  of  the 
Jews  only.  The  tribes,  by  their  lapse  into  idolatry,  had  placed 
themselves  on  the  same  footing  with  the  Gbntiles  (not  His  people), 
so  that  the  general  truth  could  be  appUed  to  both.  In  Isaiah 
xlix.  22,  the  Gentiles  are  represented  as  restored  to  grace  along 
with  the  Jews. 

(27-29.)  But  this  people  shall  not  consist  of  Gentiles  only ;  for 
God  says  by  Isaiah  that  a  remnant  shall  be  preserved  out  of  Israel, 
a  small  number  out  of  the  great  unbeHeving  mass»  which  shall  at- 
tain to  the  salvation  and  privileges  of  the  messianic  kingdom :  a 
remnant,  for  Qod  in  His  righteous  judgment  wiU  make  a  summary 
reckoning  with  the  Jewish  nation,  and  the  great  body  of  it  shall  be 
cut  o£f ;  but  a  remnant  shall  be  left  as  a  seed  by  which  the  true  peo- 
ple of  Qod  shall  be  perpetuated.  This  preservation  of  a  remnant  is 
a  mark  of  divine  mercy.  But  for  this,  the  whole  nation  would 
have  been  destroyed  like  Sodom. 

(30.)  Paul  now  turns  to  the  facts  of  human  agency,  moral  free- 
dom, and  consequent  responsibility,  which,  up  to  this  point,  have 
been  kept  in  the  shadow  of  the  truth  of  divine  sovereignty.  There 
is  a  correspondence  between  God's  freedom  in  His  government  and 
the  freedom  of  men  in  their  faith  and  unbelief.  He  summarily 
states  the  truth  which  he  develops  in  ch.  x. ;  namely,  that  Israel  toas 
the  cause  of  Us  own  rejection,  alluding  at  the  same  time  incidentally 
to  the  cause  of  the  Gfrentiles*  reception. 

The  reason  why  the  Jews  were  rejected  was  because  they  did  not 
seek  after  the  righteousness  which  is  by  faith,  but  dung  to  the  law, 
and  sought  to  be  justified  by  its  worka  The  Gentiles,  who  had  no 
revelation,  and  who  therefore  did  not  seek  after  righteousness  in 
the  New-Testament  sense,  nevertheless  attained  it^  accepting  it 
when  it  was  offered,*  and  not  being  hindered  by  the  legal  bigotry 
and  pretension  of  the  Jew ;  but  Israel,  following  after  the  law, 
which,  in  itself,  is  holy  and  just  and  good,  and  which  was  intended 
to  lead  to  Christ,  pursued  it  only  as  an  external  standard  of  right- 
eousness, and  on  the  side  of  legal  observance,  and  so  found  a  stumb- 
li Tig-block  in  the  very  Messiah  to  whom  it  led  them. 

*  Godet  compares  the  parable  of  the  man  fiudiiig  treasure  hid  iu  the  field. 


WORD   STUDIES   IN  THE   NEW   TESTAMENT. 


Ohaptbb  X. 

Tbe  general  statement  in  ix.  30-33  is  developed. 

(1-3.)  Israel  woB  zealous  fur  God,  but  without  diBcemment  ot 
tlie  true  meaning  luiiJ  t«DdeDCy  of  the  law.  Hence,  iu  the  endeavor 
to  establish  its  own  legal  righteoiisnesa,  it  missed  the  rigbteous- 
neaa  of  faith,  tbe  nature  of  which  is  expounded  iu  this  epistle. 

(1-11.)  They  did  not  perceive  that  Christ  briugs  tbe  legal  dis- 
pensation to  aa  end  iu  ititroducing  Himself  as  tbe  object  of  faith 
and  tbe  source  of  justifyLug  righteousness.  They  accepted  onlj 
the  declaration  of  Moaes  concerning  righteousness,  that  tbe  man 
who  keeps  tbe  law  shall  Uve  bj  it,  and  did  not  see  that  the  law, 
properly  understood,  implied  also  the  work  of  grace  and  depend- 
ence on  God.  They  regarded  righteousneBB  as  aomething  remote 
and  to  be  attained  only  by  laborious  effort ;  whereas  even  Moses 
would  have  told  them  that  Jehovah's  help  was  near  at  band  to  as- 
sist them  iu  tbe  daily  understanding  and  keeping  of  the  law.  No 
one  need  be  sent  to  heaven  nor  beyond  tbe  aea  to  bring  back  tbe 
explanation  of  its  commandments,  or  to  enable  them  to  fulfil  them. 
Still  more  plainly,  to  the  same  effect,  spoke  tbe  righteousness  of 
faith  in  Christ,  No  need  to  ascend  to  heaven  to  bring  Him  down. 
He  has  already  descended  to  earth.  No  need  to  dive  into  the 
depths  of  the  earth  to  bring  Him  up.  He  baa  already  risen  from 
the  dead.  They  have  only  to  actrept  by  faith  His  death  and  hie 
resurrection,  and  to  confess  Him  who  has  accompliabed  In  Himself 
the  two  great  things  which  needed  to  be  done.  Such  faith  shall  not 
put  them  to  shame.  They  shall  be  saved  as  if  they  bad  fulfilled  all 
I  he  necessary  conditions  themselves. 

(12,  13.)  Not  only  is  this  salvation /ree.  It  is  also  umuersai, 
to  whosoever  shall  believe.  T)jus  it  appeals  to  the  Gentile  no  less 
than  to  the  Jew.  It  strikes  at  the  notion  that  the  Jew  alone  is  tbe 
subject  of  messianic  salvation  ;  that  the  Gentile  must  enter  tbe 
kingdom  through  the  gate  of  Judaism.  Both  Jew  and  Gentile 
enter  through  faith  only.  There  is  no  difference  between  the  Jew 
and  tbe  Gentile.  Tbe  Lord,  who  is  Lord  of  both  alike,  dispenses 
His  riches  to  all  of  both  nations  who  call  upon  Him. 

(14-21.)  The  Jew  cannot  plead  in  excuse  for  rejecting  this  sal- 


Ch.  XL]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMA1I8.  151 

vation,  either  that  he  has  not  heard  it  announoed,  or  that  its  ani« 
vers»ality  is  inconsistent  with  Old-Testament  teaching.  Both  ex- 
cuses are  shattered  upon  Old-Testament  dedarationa  It  was  pro- 
phesied by  Isaiah  that  Israel  would  not  all  submit  themselves  to 
the  Gospel  The  good  tidings  has  been  proclaimed,  but  they  have 
not  believed  the  report  Faith  comes  by  hearing,  and  they  have 
heard  the  Gbspel  in  their  cities  and  synagogues.*  Had  Israel  any 
reason  to  be  surprised  at  the  universality  of  the  Gk>8pel — its  pro- 
clamation to  the  Gentiles  ?  On  the  contrary,  did  not  Israel  know  ? 
Had  not  Moses  and  Isaiah  prophesied  that  God  would  manifest  His 
grace  to  the  Gentiles,  and  that  the  Gentiles  would  receive  it — yea, 
that  through  the  Gentiles  Israel  should  be  brought  back  to  Gk>d  ? 
Did  not  Isaiah  prophesy  that,  notwithstanding  God's  long-suffer- 
ing and  entreaty,  Israel  would  prove  a  disobedient  and  gainsaying 
nation  ? 

Thus  the  argument  is,  Israel  is  responsible  for  its  own  rejection. 
In  blind  reliance  on  its  original  election,  it  has  claimed  a  monopoly 
of  divine  favor,  has  made  a  stand  for  legal  righteousness,  and  has 
rejected  the  gospel  message  of  salvation  by  faith.  It  has  thus  re- 
pelled the  offer  of  a  free  and  un%\XT9al  salvation.  For  this  it  is 
without  excuse.  It  was  warned  by  its  own  Scriptures  of  the  danger 
of  being  superseded  by  the  Gentiles,  and  the  salvation  of  Christ 
was  offered  to  it  along  with  the  Gentiles  by  Christ's  mini8ter& 

Chapter  XL 

In  ch.  ix.  it  is  shown  that  when  Gk)d  elected  Israel  He  did  not 
fibjure  the  right  to  reject  them  for  good  reason. 

In  ch.  X.  this  reason  is  shown  to  be  their  unbeliel 

The  question  now  arises  :  1%  this  rejection  complete  and  forever  f 
Paul  proceeds  to  show  that  the  rejection  is  not  total,  but  partial ; 
not  eternal,  but  temporary  ;  and  that  it  shall  subserve  the  salva- 
tion of  mankind  and  of  the  Israelitish  nation  itsell 

(2-6.)  From  the  history  of  Elijah  be  shows  how,  in  the  midst 
of  general  moral  defection  and  decline,  Gk>d  preserved  a  remnant  of 
faithful  ones  ;  and  declares  that  the  same  is  true  at  the  present  time. 

In  virtue  of  His  free  grace  displayed  in  His  original  election,  God 

*  Compare  John  vi  44. 


\ 


152  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  KEW  TB8TAMENT.  [Cil  XI. 

hae  not  left  the  nation  without  a  believing  remnant.  The  elective 
purpose  holds,  though  operating  in  a  way  different  from  larael's 
■vuiu  and  narrow  conception  of  its  nature  aud  extent  The  preser- 
vation of  this  remnant  is  a  matter  of  God's  fiee  grace,  not  of  In- 
rael's  merit 

(T'lO.)  The  case  then  stands  that  Israel  has  not  attained  the 
righteouanesB  which  it  sought  (in  the  wrong  way),  but  tiie  chosen 
remnant  has  attained  it,  while  the  great  mass  of  the  nation  was 
blinded  according  to  the  prophesy  in  Isaiah  xxix.  and  Psalm  Ixtx. 

It  is  to  be  observed  that,  in  those  very  chapters,  the  full  respon- 
dbility  of  those  who  are  punished  is  asserted  ;  aud  that,  in  citing 
the  Paalm,  Paul  renders  the  Hebrew/or  Iho.ie  toko  are  in  security 
by  the  worda/or  a  recompense,  thus  indicating  a  just  retribution. 

(11,  12.)  The  rejection  of  the  Jews,  however,  is  not  total  nor 
final,  and  it  works  for  two  ulterior  ends  :  first,  the  conversion  of 
the  Oentile  ;  second,  the  restoration  of  the  Jews  by  means  of  the 
converted  Oen tiles. 

(13-15.)  Hence  Paul  labors  the  more  earnestly  for  the  Genliles, 
with  B.  view  to  promote  the  salvation  of  his  own  race. 

(lG-24.)  The  Gentiles,  however,  are  warned  against,  entertain- 
ing contempt  for  the  Jews  on  account  of  their  own  position  in 
the  messianic  kingdom.  However  lapsed,  Israel  still  retains  the 
character  of  God's  holy  nation  impressed  iu  its  original  call ; 
and  this  original  call,  represented  in  the  fathere,  implies  its  future 
restoration.  So  far  from  despising  them,  the  Gentiles  are  to  re- 
member that  they  themselves  are  not  the  origiu:d  stock,  but  outy 
a  graft ;  aud  to  take  warning  by  the  history  of  Israel,  that  tlje 
called  may  he  rejected,  and  that  they,  by  unbelief,  disobedience, 
and  rebellion,  may,  like  Israel,  forfeit  their  high  privilege.  "  If  God 
spared  not  the  natural  branches,  take  heed  lest  He  also  spare  not 
thee,"  "  Behold,  therefore,  the  goodness  and  aeverity  of  God  :  on 
them  which  fell,  severity,  but  toward  thee  goodness,  if  thou  conliniie 
in  His  goodness ;  otherwise  thou  also  shall  6«  cut  off"'  Israel,  too, 
shall  be  restored  to  its  place  in  God's  kingdom,  grafFed  in  again, 
if  they  continue  not  in  nnbdifif;  much  more,  since  they  are  natural 
branches,  and  the  tree  is  their  own  native  stock. 

(25-32.)  Tlius,  then,  the  plan  of  (rod  shall  work  H self  out :  the 
purpose,  so  much  of  which  was  enshrouded  in  mystery,  shall  at 


Ch.  XU.]  THB  BPISTLB  to  THB  ROMANa  153 

last  reveal  its  full,  grand  proportions.  Through  the  Gentile,  Is- 
rael shall  attain  the  righteousness  of  faith  in  the  Deliverer  out  of 
Zion.  Qod  has  made  no  mistake.  He  does  not  repent  His  origi- 
nal call,  nor  the  displays  of  His  divine  grace  to  Israel,  nor  the 
special  aptitudes  with  which  He  endowed  it,  in  order  to  make  it 
the  special  vehicle  of  His  salvation.  Jew  and  G^tile  have  alike 
been  unbelievers  and  disobedient,  but  the  unbelief  of  both  has 
been  overruled  to  the  inclusion  of  both  in  Qod*B  messianic  king- 
dom. Thus  the  argument  which  opened  at  the  beginning  of  the 
epistle  with  the  condemnation  of  all,  doses  with  mercy  upon  alL 


CHAPTER  XII. 

1.  I  beseech  {irapcuuLKM),    See  on  oonsoUUion^  Luke  vL  24. 

By  the  mercies  {hih  r&v  oucripfi&v).  By,  not  as  an  adju- 
ration, but  as  presenting  the  motive  for  obedience.  I  use  the 
compassion  of  God  to  move  you  to  present,  etc. 

Present.  See  on  ch.  vi.  13.  It  is  the  technical  term  for 
presenting  the  Levitical  victims  and  offerings.  See  Luke  ii.  22. 
In  the  Levitical  sacrifices  the  offerer  placed  his  offering  so  as  to 
face  the  Most  Holy  Place,  thus  bringing  it  before  the  Lord. 

Bodies.  Literally,  but  regarded  as  the  outward  organ  of 
the  will.  So,  expressly,  Rom.  vi.  13,  19;  2  Cor.  v.  10.  Com- 
pare Rom.  viL  5,  23.  Hence  the  exhortation  to  glorify  God  in 
the  body  (1  Cor.  vi.  20 ;  compare  Philip,  i.  20 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  10). 
So  the  body  is  called  the  body  of  sin  (Rom.  vi.  6 ;  compare  Col. 
ii.  11).  In  later  Greek  usage  slaves  were  called  a-tofuiTa  bodies. 
See  Apoc.  xviii.  13. 

A  living  sacrifice  {^wrCav  ^Aaav).  Living,  in  contrast  with 
the  slain  Levitical  offerings.  Compare  ch.  vi.  8, 11.  "  How  can 
the  body  become  a  sacrifice  ?  Let  the  eye  look  on  no  evil,  and 
it  is  a  sacrifice.  Let  the  tongue  utter  nothing  base,  and  it  is 
an  offering.  Let  the  hand  work  no  sin,  and  it  is  a  holocaust. 
Tint  more,  this  suffices  not,  but  besides  we  must  actively  exert 
ourselves  for  good ;  the  hand  giving  alms,  the  mouth  blessing 


151 


WORD   STUDHia   IN   THE   NEW   TESTAUENT.         [Cn.  XII. 

B  US,  tlie  ear  ever  at  leisure  for  Uflteuing  to  God  " 


them  tliat  c 
(Chrysoatoni). 

Acceptable  {evdpetrrov).     Lit.,  wdl-pleaging. 

Which  is  your  reasonable  service  {t^v  Xoyiidtv  Xarptiav). 
Explaining  the  whole  previous  clause.  Service,  see  on  eh.  ix.  4. 
The  special  woi-d  for  the  service  rendered  by  the  laraeliles  as 
the  peculiar  people  of  God  ia  very  significant  here.  Jieasonable, 
not  in  the  popular  sense  of  the  term,  as  a  thing  h^Jitting  or 
proper,  but  rational,  aa  distinguished  from  merely  external  or 
material.  Hence  nearly  equivalent  to  spiritual.  So  Rev.,  in 
margin.     It  ia  in  harmony  with  the  highest  reason. 

3.  Conformed — transformed  {irvirxniMTi^eaSe  —  /lerafiop- 
iPovffSe).  See  on  io(M  tratisjiijured,  Matt.  xvii.  2.  For  con- 
formed  to.  Rev,,  conectXyy  fashioned  according  to. 

Mind  («»«).  See  on  ch.  vii.  33.  Agreeing  with  rsagonable 
service. 

That  good  and  acceptable  and  perfect  will.  Better  to 
render  the  three  adjectives  as  appositional.  "May  prove  what 
is  the  will  of  God,  what  is  good,"  etc.  The  other  rendering 
compels  ua  to  take  weU-pleasing  in  the  sense  of  agreeable  to 
men. 

3.  Not  to  think,  etc.  The  play  upon  <f>povetv  to  think  and 
ita  compounds  is  very  noticeable.  "  Not  to  he  high-minded  {hy- 
perphronein)  above  what  he  ought  to  he  minded  (phronein),  but 
to  be  minded  (pAronein)  unto  the  being  sober-minded  (sophron- 
ein.     See  on  1  Pet.  iv.  7. 


The  measure  of  faith  (jUrpov  •jria-T€tD<;).  An  expressioD 
which  it  ia  not  easy  to  define  accurately.  It  ia  to  be  noted  :  1. 
That  the  point  of  the  passage  ia  a  warning  against  !in  undue 
self-estimate,  and  a  corresponding  exhortation  to  estimate  one's 
self  with  discrimination  and  sober  judgment.  2.  That  Paul 
has  a  standard  by  whlcli  self-estimate  is  to  be  regulated.  This 
ia  expressed  liy  w  as,  according  as.  3.  That  this  scale  or  meas- 
ure is  different  in  different  peraons,  so  that  the  line  between 
conceit  and  sober  thinking  ia  not  the  same  for  all.     Thia  is  ex- 


k 


ch.  xil}  thb  bpistlb  to  TUK  R0)IAN&  155 

pressed  by  ifupurev  hath  impartedj  dutnbuted^  and  itedtrrf  U 
each  one.  4.  The  character  of  this  measure  or  standard  is  de- 
termined by  faiih.  It  mnst  be  observed  that  the  general  ex- 
hortation to  a  proper  self-estimate  is  shaped  by,  and  fore* 
shadows,  tlie  subsequent  words  respecting  difEerences  of  gifts* 
It  was  at  this  point  that  the  tendency  to  self-conceit  and  spirit* 
ual  arrogance  'would  develop  itself.  Hence  the  precise  defini- 
tion oi  faith  here  will  be  affected  by  its  relation  to  the  differing 
gifts  in  ver.  6.  Its  meaning,  therefore,  must  not  be  strictly 
limited  to  the  conception  of  justifying  faith  in  Christ,  though 
that  conception  includes  and  is  really  the  basis  of  every  wider 
conception.  It  is  faith  as  the  condition  of  the  powers  and  of- 
fices of  believers,  faith  regarded  as  spiritual  insight,  which,  ac- 
cording to  its  degree,  qualifies  a  man  to  be  a  prophet,  a  teacher, 
a  minister,  etc. ;  faith  in  its  relation  to  character,  as  the  only 
principle  which  develops  a  man's  true  character,  and  which, 
therefore,  is  the  determining  principle  of  the  renewed  man's 
tendencies,  whether  they  lead  him  to  meditation  and  research, 
or  to  practical  activity.  As  faith  is  the  sphere  and  subjective 
condition  of  the  powers  and  functions  of  believers,  so  it  furn- 
ishes a  test  or  regulative  standard  of  their  respective  endow- 
ments and  functions.  Thus  the  measure  applied  is  distinctively 
a  measure  of  faith.  With  faith  the  believer  receives  a  power 
of  discernment  as  to  the  actual  limitations  of  his  gifts.  Faith, 
in  introducing  him  into  God^s  kingdom,  introduces  him  to  new 
standards  of  measurement,  according  to  which  he  accurately 
determines  the  nature  and  extent  of  his  powers,  and  so  does 
not  think  of  himself  too  highly.  This  measure  is  different  in 
different  individuals,  but  in  every  case  faith  is  the  determining 
element  of  the  measure.  Paul,  then,  does  not  mean  precisely  to 
say  that  a  man  is  to  think  more  or  less  soberly  of  himself  ac- 
cording to  the  quantity  of  faith  which  he  has,  though  that  is 
true  as  a  fact ;  but  that  sound  and  correct  views  as  to  the  char- 
acter and  extent  of  spiritual  gifts  and  functions  are  fixed  by  a 
measure,  the  determining  element  of  which,  in  each  particular 
ease,  is  faith. 

4.   Office  {irpa^iv).    Lit.,  mode  of  acting. 


156  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.        [Co.  Xil 

5.  Being  many  (o/ ttoXXoI).  Lit.,  ilte  many.  Rev.,  better, 
who  are  many. 

Every  one  (to  hi  koS^  eU).  The  literal  phrase  can  only  be 
rendered  awkwardly :  and  as  to  v>/iai  is  true  according  to  one ; 
i.c ,  individuaUy,  severally.  Compare,  for  a  similar  phrase, 
Mark  xiv.  19;  John  viii.  9. 

6.  Prophecy.  See  on  jyr&phet,  Luke  vii.  26.  In  tlie  New 
TcBtsmeiit,  as  in  the  Old,  the  prominent  idea  is  wot  prediction, 
but  the  inspired  delivery  of  warning,  exiiortation,  instruction, 
judging,  and  making  manifest  the  secieta  of  the  heart.  See  1 
Cor.  xiv.  3,  24,  25.  The  New-Testament  prophets  are  distin- 
guished from  teaclters,  by  speaking  under  direct  divine  inspira- 
tion. 

Let  us  prophesy.     Not  in  the  Greek. 

According  to  the  proportion  of  faith  (kotA  T.7C  avaXoylap 
T^?  TTWTTews).  'AvaKoyia  proportion,  occurs  only  here  in  tlio 
New  Testament.  In  i-hiesiiial  Greek  it  is  used  as  a  inatiieniat- 
ical  term.  Thus  Plato:  "The  fairest  bond  is  that  which  iiiot^t 
completely  fuses  and  is  fused  into  the  things  which  are  bound ; 
and  proportion  {uvaKoyla)  is  best  adapted  to  effect  such  a 
fusion"  ("Timaeus,"  31).  "Out  of  such  elements,  which  are 
in  number  four,  the  body  o£  the  world  was  created  in  harmony 
&nA proportion  "  ("  Timaeua,"  32).  Compare  "  Politicus,"  257 
The  phrase  here  is  related  to  t^^  measure  of  faith  (ver.  3).  It 
signifies,  according  to  the  jiroj'ortlon  defined  hy  faith.  The 
meaning  is  not  the  technical  meaning  expressed  by  the  theo- 
logical phrase  analogy  of  faith,  eometimos  called  analogy  of 
scripture,  i.e.,  tlie  correspondence  of  the  several  parts  of  divine 
revelation  in  one  consistent  whole.  This  would  require  tj  wlaTK 
the  faith,  to  be  taken  as  the  objectkie  rule  of  faith,  or  system 
of  doctrine  (see  on  Acts  vi.  7),  and  is  not  in  harmony  witli  ver. 
3,  nor  with  according  to  the  grace  given.  Those  who  propliesy 
are  to  interpret  the  divine  revelation  "  according  to  the  strength, 
clearnesB,  fervor,  and  other  qualities  of  the  faith  bestowed  upon 
them  ;  eo  that  the  character  aucI  mode  of  their  speaking  is  con- 
formed to  the  rules  and  limits  which  are  implied  in  the  propor- 
tion of  their  individual  degree  of  faith  "  (Meyer). 


Cb.  XIL]  THB  epistle  to  the  ROMAN&  157 

7.  Ministering  (Sia4coy/a).  Zet  tis  tocM  on  is  supplied.  Lit, 
or  ministry  in  our  ministry.  The  word  appears  in  the  New 
Testament  always  in  connection  with  the  service  of  the  Christ- 
ian Church,  except  Luke  x.  40,  of  Martha's  serving ;  Heb.  i.  14, 
of  the  ministry  of  angels,  and  2  Cor.  iii.  7,  of  the  ministry  of 
Moses.  Within  this  limit  it  is  used,  1.  Of  service  in  general^ 
including  all  forms  of  christian  ministration  tending  to  the 
good  of  the  christian  body  (1  Cor.  xii.  5  ;  £ph.  iv.  13 ;  2  Tim. 
iv.  11).  Hence,  2.  Of  the  apostolic  office  and  its  administra- 
tion; (a)  generally  (Acts  xx.  24;  2  Cor.  iv.  1;  1  Tim.  i.  12); 
or  (b)  defined  as  a  ministry  of  reconciliation,  of  the  word,  of  the 
Spirit,  of  righteousness  (2  Cor.  v.  18  ;  Acts  vi.  4 ;  2  Cor.  iiL  8, 
9).  It  is  not  used  of  the  specific  office  of  a  deacon ;  but  tlie 
kindred  word  Sid/covo^  occurs  in  that  sense  (Philip,  i.  1 ;  1  Tim. 
iii.  8,  12).  As  the  word  is  employed  in  connection  with  both 
the  higher  and  lower  ministrations  in  the  Church  (see  Acts  vi. 
1,  4),  it  is  difficult  to  fix  its  precise  meaning  here ;  yet  as  it  is 
distinguished  here  from  prophecy,  exhortation,  and  teaching,  it 
may  refer  to  some  more  practical,  and,  possibly,  minor  form  of 
ministry.  Moule  says :  ^'  Almost  any  work  other  than  that  of 
inspired  utterance  or  miracle-working  may  be  included  in  it 
here."  So  Godet :  "  An  activity  of  a  practical  nature  exerted 
in  action,  not  in  word."     Some  limit  it  to  the  office  of  deacon. 

Teaching.    Aimed  at  the  understanding. 

8.  Exhortation.  Aimed  at  the  heart  and  will.  See  on  oon^ 
solaiioTiy  Luke  vi.  24.  Compare  1  Cor.  xiv.  3 ;  Acts  iv.  86, 
where  Kev.  gives  son  of  exhortation. 

He  that  giveth  (o  fieroBiBoif^).  Earthly  possessions.  The 
preposition  /iera  indicates  sharing  with.  He  that  imparteth. 
Compare  Eph.  iv.  28  ;  Luke  iii.  11. 

Simplicity  {airXorriTi).  See  on  singlsj  Matt.  vi.  22,  and 
compare  Jas.  i.  5,  where  it  is  said  that  God  gives  amXA^  simply. 
See  note  there.  In  2  Cor.  viii.  2  ;  ix.  11,  13,  the  A.  V.  gives 
liberality  ;  and  in  Jas.  i.  5,  liberally.  Rev.  accepts  this  in  the 
last-named  passage,  but  gives  singleness  in  margin.  In  all  the 
others  liberality  is,  at  best,  very  doubtf uL    The  sense  is  unusual, 


WORD  BTUDIKS  IM  THK  NEW  TBSTAMKNT, 


mplicity  or  tinglenaa  Ib  defensible  in  all 


and  the  rendering  « 
the  passages. 

He  that  ruleth  (o  irpoltrrdftevK).  Lit.,  he  that  is  placed  in 
front.  Tiie  reference  is  to  any  position  involving  superin- 
tendence. ^0  special  ecclesiastical  office  is  meant.  Compar 
Tit.  iii.  8,  to  maintain  good  works ;  the  ides  of  presiding  over 
running  into  that  of  carrying  on  ot practising.  See  note  there. 
Compare  also  irpoaraTK  auccorer,  Rom.  xvi.  2,  and  see  note. 

With  dillgencfi  {hi  <nrf>v^).  See  on  Jude  3.  In  Mark  vL 
25 ;  Luke  i.  39,  it  is  rendered  haste.  In  2  Cor.  vii.  11,  care- 
fulness (Rev.,  earnest  care).  In  2  Cor,  vii.  12,  care  (Rev.,  earn- 
est care).  In  2  Cor.  viii.  d^forwa/rdneaa  (Rev., «ame8fntfs<].  In 
2  Cor.  viii.  16,  earnest  care. 

With  cheerfulness  (ev  iKapor^t).  Only  here  in  the  New 
Testament.  It  reappears  in  the  Latin  hilaritas;  English,  hi- 
larity, exhilarate.  "  The  jojfnl  eagerness,  the  amiable  grace, 
the  affability  going  the  length  of  gayety,  which  make  the  visitor 
a  sunbeam  penetrating  into  the  Bick-chamber,  and  to  the  heart 
of  the  affiicted." 

9.  Love  (ff  aydin]).  The  article  has  the  force  of  your.  See 
en  lovethf  John  v.  20. 

Without  dissimulation  {awiroKpurtx;).  Rev.,  without  Ky- 
pocrisy.     See  on  hypocrites^  Matt,  xxiii.  13. 

Abhor  (avoffTvyovvTe';).  Lit.,  abhorring.  The  only  simple 
verb  for  hate  in  the  New  Testament  is  fuaita.  Srvyea,  quite 
frequent  in  the  classics,  does  not  occnr  except  in  this  compound, 
wiiieh  is  found  only  here.  The  kindred  adjective  arvyt}T6<t 
hateful,  is  found  1  Tim.  iii.  3.  The  original  distinction  be- 
tween fiurita  and  arvyiot  is  that  the  former  denotes  concealed 
and  cherished  hatred,  and  the  latter  hatred  expressed.  Tlie 
preposition  ano  awayfrom^  may  either  denote  separation  or  be 
merely  intensive.     An  intense  sentiment  is  meant:  loathivg. 

Cleave  (KoXKcaiicvot).  See  on  Joined  himself,  Luke  zv.  !&, 
Compare  Acts  xvii.  34;  1  Cor.  vi.  Iti. 


ch.  xu.}  thb  epistlb  to  THB  ROliAira.  151> 

10.  Be  kindly  afFectioned  {<^tXo<rropyoi).  Only  here  in  the 
New  Testament.  From  <rripym  to  love^  which  denotes  pecali- 
arlj  a  no^ro^  aJBFection,  a  sentiment  innate  and  peculiar  to  men 
as  men,  as  distingaished  from  the  love  of  desire^  called  out  by 
circamstance.  Hence  of  the  natural  love  of  kindred,  of  people 
and  king  (the  relation  being  regarded  as  founded  in  nature),  of 
a  tutelary  god  for  a  people.  The  word  here  represents  Christ- 
ians as  bound  by  a  family  tie.  It  is  intended  to  define  more 
specifically  the  character  of  ^iXo&X^^  brotherly  love^  which 
follows,  so  that  the  exhortation  is  *^  love  the  brethren  in  the 
faith  as  though  they  were  brethren  in  blood  "  (Farrar).  Bev.^ 
be  tenderly  afectianed;  but  the  A.  Y.,  in  the  word  kindly^ 
gives  the  real  sense,  since  kind  is  originally  tinned;  and 
kindly  affectioned  is  having  the  affection  of  kindred. 

In  honor  preferring  one  another  (t^  rifi^  dXXifXov?  trpo- 
fiyovfievoi).  The  verb  occurs  only  here.  It  means  to  go  before 
as  a  guide.  Honor  is  the  honor  due  from  each  to  all.  Com- 
pare Philip,  ii.  3 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  17 ;  v.  5.  Hence,  leading  the  way 
vn  showing  the  honor  thai  is  due.  Others  render  anticipating 
and  excelling. 

11.  Slothful  {oKVfipot).    From  otcvia  to  delay. 

In  business  {t§  oirouS^).  Wrong.  Render,  as  Rev.,  in  dH- 
igence  /  see  on  ver.  8.    Luther,  **  in  r^ard  to  zeal  be  not  lazy." 

fervent  {^eovre;).     See  on  Acts  xviii.  25. 

The  Lord  (r^  Kvpl(p).  Some  texts  read  tcaip^  the  time  or 
cpportunityj  but  the  best  authorities  give  Lord. 

12.  Continuing  instant  (7rpoo-ica/>r€potW€9).  Compare  Acts 
i.  4 ;  vi.  4.  Rev.,  steadfastly  for  instant^  which  has  lost  its 
original  sense  of  urgent  (Latin,  instare  to  press  upon).  Thus 
Latimer:  "I  preached  at  the  instant  request  of  a  curate.'* 
Compare  A.  V.,  Luke  vii.  4 ;  Acts  xxvi.  7. 

13.  Distributing  {icoivwvovvTe^).  Rev.,  communicating  to. 
The  meaning  is  sharing  in  tlie  necessities  /  taking  part  in  them 
as  one's  own.  So  Rom.  xv.  27 ;  1  Tim.  v.  22 ;  2  John  11 ; 
Heb.  ii.  14;  1  Pet.  iv.  13.  See  on  partners^  Luke  v.  \Q\fdr 
lowshipj  Acts  ii.  42 ;  1  John  i.  3 ;  2  John  11. 


160  WORD  STCUIES  IS  THE  HEW  TBHTAMENT.        (Co.  XU. 

Given  to  hospitality  (i^Xo^em'oi'  hui»eopTe<t).  \At., pursuing 
liDspitalitf.  For  a  similar  use  of  the  verb  compare  1  Cor.  xiv. 
1 ;  1  These,  v.  15 ;  llcb.  xii.  14 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  U.  A  iiecest.ary 
injunction  wlien  so  many  Christians  were  baniahed  an<l  perse- 
cuted. The  verb  indicates  not  only  that  hospitality  ia  to  be 
furnished  when  sougbt,  but  that  Christians  are  to  aeek  oppor- 
tunities of  exercising  it. 


14.  Bless  (eiXoyilTe).     See  on  hleaaed,  1  Pet.  i.  3. 

Them  that  persecute  (tol'?  hiancourat:).  See  on  John  v.  16. 
It  has  been  suggested  that  the  verh  pursuing  in  ver.  13  may 
have  suggested  the peraeeniiors  here.  Pursue  hospitality  toward 
the  brethren  ns  the  vf icked pitrstie  theiu. 

Curse  not.  Plutarch  relates  that  when  a  decree  was  issued 
that  Alcibiadcs  should  be  solemnly  cursed  by  all  the  priests  and 
priesteBses,  one  of  the  latter  declared  that  Iter  holy  office  obliged 
her  to  make  prayers,  but  not  execrations  ("  Alcibiades"). 

IC).  Condescend  to  men  of  low  estate  (toU  ratreivoK 
a-uvawarfo/ietfoi).  Tiev.,  to  i/iiiigs  that  are  lowly.  Toii  ratreiv- 
o«  to  £/ie  lowlij  may  moan  either  lowly  men  or  lowly  things. 
The  verb  literally  means  being  carried  off  along  with;  hence 
yielding  or  auhmitting  to,  and  so  condescending.  Compare 
Gal.  ii.  13,  and  see  on  2  Pet.  iii.  17,  in  which  passages  it  has  s 
bud  sense  from  the  context.  According  to  the  original  sense, 
the  meaning  will  be,  being  led  awaywith  loicly  things  or  people  ; 
i.e.,  being  drawn  into  sympathy  with  them.  Farrar  suggests 
letting  the  lowly  lead  you  by  the  Jiand.  Meyer,  who  maintains 
the  neuter,  explains:  "  The  lowly  things  ought  to  have  for  the 
Christian  a  force  of  attraction,  in  virtue  of  which  he  yields 
himself  to  fellowship  with  them,  and  allows  himself  to  be 
guided  by  them  in  the  determination  of  his  conduct.  Thus 
Paul  felt  himself  compelled  to  enter  into  humble  situations." 
On  the  other  liand,  Godet,  maintaining  the  masculine,  says: 
"The  reference  is  to  the  most  indigent  and  ignorant  and  least 
influential  in  the  Chnrch.  It  ia  to  them  the  believer  ought  to 
feel  most  drawn.  The  antipathy  felt  by  the  apostle  to  every 
sort  of  spiritual  aristocracy,   to  every  caste-distinction  withia 


k 


Ch.  Xn.]  THB  BPISTLB  TO  THB  ROMANS.  161 

tlie  Cborcby  breaks  oat  again  in  the  last  word."  Condescend 
is  a  feeble  and  inferential  rendering,  open  to  construction  in 
a  patronizing  sense ;  jet  it  is  not  easy  to  f  nmish  a  better  in  a 
single  word.^  The  idea,  then,  fully  expressed  is,  ^'  set  not  your 
mind  on  lofty  tbings,  but  be  borne  away  (inro)  from  these  by 
the  current  of  your  Christian  sympathy  along  wUh  {avv)  things 
which  are  humble." 

in  your  own  conceits  {irap  kavrok).  Lit.,  wUh  yoursel/oes; 
in  your  own  opinion.  See  ch.  xi.  25,  and  compare  Acts  xxvi. 
8,  '^  incredible  with  you^^  i.e.,  in  your  judgment. 

17.  Provide  {wpovoovfjLevoi),  The  A.  Y.  lues  provide  in  its 
earlier  and  more  literal  meaning  of  taking  t/u>ught  in  advance. 
This  has  been  mostly  merged  in  the  later  meaning  oifumiahy 
so  that  the  translation  conveys  the  sense  of  providing  honestly 
for  ourselves  and  our  families.  Better,  as  Be  v.,  take  ihougld 
for.\  The  citation  is  from  Prov.  iii.  4,  and  varies  from  both 
llebrew  and  Septuagint.  Hebrew :  And  thou  shaU  find  favor 
and  good  understanding  in  the  eyes  of  God  and  man.  Septua- 
gint :  And  thou  shall  find  favor  and  devise  excellent  things  in 
the  sight  of  the  Lord  and  of  men.  Compare  2  Cor.  viii.  21. 
Construe  in  the  sight  of  all  m^en  with  the  verb,  not  with  honor- 
able.   Men's  estimate  of  what  is  Iionorable  is  not  the  standard. 


*  There  are  strong  aathorities  for  both  the  mMouline  and  the  neater  sense. 
For  the  neuter  are  Fritache,  Meyer,  De  Wette,  Philippi,  Calvin,  Shedd.  Bev. 
For  the  mascnline,  Alford,  Riddle,  Moale,  Farrar,  Godet  The  main  arga- 
inent  In  faror  of  the  masculine  is  that  ravciyit  is  nerer  used  as  neater  in  the 
New  Testament ;  but  the  word  occurs  onlj  eight  times  in  all,  and  onlj  three 
times  in  Paul,  and  in  classical  Greek  is  often  used  of  things,  as  places,  rivers, 
clothing,  etc. ;  and  similar  instances  occur  in  the  Septuagint.  See  Eocl.  x.  6 ; 
Ezek.  xTii.  24.  Alford's  argument  is  too  fine-spun,  though  ingenious.  I  in- 
cline to  the  neuter,  mostly  on  the  ground  of  the  natural  antithesis  between 
high  things  {(i^xk)  and  low  things.  On  the  verb,  T.  K.  Chejne  (**  Exposi- 
tor,'* second  series,  yi.,  469),  argues  for  the  meaning  (iocusU>m  yowndrtM  to  or 
famHiarize  jf<mr9dve»  withf  on  the  basis  of  Hebrew  usage.  He  cites  Delitisch's 
two  Hebrew  translations  of  the  Epistle,  in  the  earlier  of  which  he  renders 
famUianee  yatirteltes^  and  in  the  later,  make  frieruU  mth^  in  both  oases  evi- 
dentlj  regarding  the  adjective  as  masculine. 

t  Godot's  explanation,  preoccupaUan  toith  goad^  as  an  antidote  to  ecU  thoughU 
4mdprqjeeU,  is  fanciful. 
Vol.  ra.— 11 


102  WOUO  STUDIEb  tH   THE  NHW   TESTAMENT.         [Uh.  ZIL 

18.  If  it  be  possible.  Not  if  you  can,  but  if  others  will 
allow.  The  phiase  is  explained  b^'  as  vi-ueh  as  lieih  in  you 
(to  e'f  v/iMi'),  lit.,  as  Co  t/uU  w kick  proceeds  frorn  you,  or  d<:- 
pends  on  you.     "  All  your  part  is  to  be  peai^e  "  (Alford). 

19.  Give  place  unto  wrath  i^SOtc  ri-rrov  rg  o/ryp).  WraiA 
lias  the  artick- :  t/ic  wrath,  referring  to  the  divine  wrath.  Oive 
place  is  give  rtwrn  for  it  to  work.  Do  not  get  in  its  way,  as 
you  will  do  hy  taking  vengeance  into  your  own  hands.  Hence 
as  Rev.,  in  margin,  and  Auiericati  Rev,,  in  text,  give  place  unto 
t/ie  wratU  of  God. 

Vengeance  is  mine  {ifiol  iKBlia]<TK).  Lit.,  unto  Me  is  ven- 
ffeance.  The  Rev,  brings  out  better  the  force  of  tlie  original : 
VenffeoTice  beUnigetk  unto  Me.  The  quotation  is  from  DeuL 
xxxii.  35.  Hebrew,  To  7ne  belongs  vengearKe  and  requital. 
Septuagint,  In  Vie  day  of  vengeance  I  will  requite.  The  an- 
tithesis between  vengeance  by  God  and  by  men  is  not  found  in 
Deuteronomy.  Compare  Ileb.  x.  30.  Dante,  listening  to  Peter 
Darniano,  who  describes  the  abuses  of  the  Church,  hears  a  great 
cry.     Beatrice  says : 

"  The  erj  hai  startled  thee  to  mnoh, 
In  which,  i(  thou  hwUt  ondeniUioil  ita  prayers, 

Alrewl;  would  be  known  to  Ihtie  the  vangeauoe 
Which  lliou  abalt  look  upon  before  thoa  dlcst. 
The  iHord  above  here  smStoth  oot  in  hute, 
_  Nor  tardil  J,  howe'er  it  aecm  to  him 

Who,  fearing  or  desiring,  wails  (or  It," 

"Pu-adiEo,"xxii.,  13-18. 

Compare  Plato :  Socrates,  "  And  what  of  doing  evil  in  return 
for  evil,  which  is  the  morality  of  the  many — is  that  just  or  not  \ 
Orito.  Not  just.  Soerates,  For  doing  evil  to  another  is  the  same 
as  injnrtng  him?  Crito,  Very  true.  Socrates,  Then  we  ought 
not  to  retaliate  or  render  evil  for  evil  to  any  one,  whatever  evil 
we  may  have  suffered  from  him.  .  .  .  This  opinion  has 
never  been  held,  and  never  will  be  held  by  any  considerable 
number  of  persons  "  ("  Crilo,"  49).  Epictetus,  being  asked  how 
a  roan  could  injure  his  enemy,  replied,  "  By  living  the  best  life 
himself."     The  idea  oi  personal  vindiciioeness  raust  be  elirain- 


Oh.  Xm.]  THE  BPI8TLB  TO  THE  BOMAN&  163 

ated  from  the  word  here.     It  is  rather  ^/t^  meting  <yut  of 
jvstice  to  aUjpa/rties. 

20.  Feed  {^>^fu^€).  See  on  sop^  John  xiii.  26.  The  citation 
from  Prov.  xxv.  21,  22,  closely  follows  both  Hebrew  and  Sep- 
taagint. 

Shalt  heap  (aapevaei^).     Onlj  hei*e  and  2  Tim.  iii.  6. 

Coals  of  fire.  Many  explain:  The  memory  of  the  wrong 
awakened  in  your  enemy  by  your  kindness,  shall  sting  him  with 
penitence.  This,  however,  might  be  open  to  the  objection  that 
the  enemy's  pain  might  gratify  the  instinct  of  revenge.  Per- 
haps  it  is  better  to  take  it,  that  kindness  is  as  effectual  as  coals 
of  fire.  Among  the  Arabs  and  Hebrews  the  figure  of  ^*  coals 
of  fire ''  is  common  as  a  symbol  of  divine  punishment  (Ps.  xviii. 
13).  ^^  The  Arabians  call  things  which  cause  very  acute  mental 
pain,  humtnff  coals  of  the  heart  aruijwe  in  the  liver  *'  (Thayer, 
*^  Lexicon  ").  Thomas  De  Quincey,  referring  to  an  author  who 
calls  this  ^^  a  fiendish  idea,''  says:  "  I  acknowledge  that  to  myself, 
in  one  part  of  my  boyhood,  it  did  seem  a  refinement  of  malice. 
My  subtilizing  habits,  however,  even  in  those  days,  soon  sug- 
gested to  me  that  this  aggravation  of  guilt  in  the  object  of  our 
forgiveness  was  not  held  out  as  the  motvoe  to  the  forgiveness, 
but  as  the  result  of  it ;  secondly,  that  perhaps  no  aggravation 
of  his  guilt  was  the  point  contemplated,  but  the  salutary  sting- 
ing  into  life  of  his  remorse  hitherto  sleeping  "  (^^  Essays  on  the 
Poets"). 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

On  the  circumstances  which  are  supposed  to  have  called  out 
the  first  part  of  this  chapter,  see  Farrar,  ^^  Life  and  Work  of 
Paul,"  ii.,  260  sqq. 

1.  Every  soul.     Every  man.     See  on  ch.  xi.  3. 

Higher  powers  (i^vcUu^  uirepexpwraisi).  Lit.,  andhorities 
which  have  themselves  over.     See  on  Mark  ii.  10  ;  John  i.  12. 


1(J4  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW    TESTAMENT.       (Cn,  XIII 

The  powers  that  be  {ai  Se  ova-at).  Lit.,  (Ae  existing.  J'oio- 
«"8  16  not  in  the  text,  and  \f,  6iip)>lied  fi-oiu  the  preceding  clause. 

Are  ordained  {reray/ievai  daiv).  Perfect  teuse  :  Have  been 
ordained,  and  the  ordinance  remains  in  foi-ce.  See  on  set  un- 
iUf  aiUkority,  Lnke  vii.  8. 

2.  He  that  resisteth  (o  avriTaa^aofievo';).  l.iL,  setieth  him- 
se(f  in  'ii-ra-j  a<jii'imt.     See  on  1  Pet,  v.  5  ;  Acts  xviii.  C. 

Resisteth  {av^<rriiicfv).  Rev.,  better,  withsiandeth.  See 
on  ch.  ix.  19. 

Ordinance  {huntvyf).     From  Ta<r<ra>  to  jttti  in  place,  wliicli 

appenrB  in  the  first  resisteth.     He  setteth  Iiimself  agginet  that 
wliicli  is  divinely  set. 

Damnation  (xpifMi).     Judicial  sentence.     Rev.,  better, ^Wy- 

4.  Beareth  (<^pet).  Befireth  and  h'c«/WA.  A  frequentative 
form  of  tpipm  to  bear. 

Sword  (jjAj(atpav).  See  on  Apoc.  vi.  i.  Borne  as  the  sym- 
bol of  the  magistrate's  right  to  inilict  capital  punishment.  Thus 
Ulpian :  "  They  who  rule  whole  provinces  liave  the  right  of  the 
eword  {Jua  ffladii).''  The  Emperor  Trajan  presented  to  a 
provincial  governor,  on  starting  for  his  province,  a  dagger,  with 
the  words,  "  For  me.     It  I  deserve  it,  -iti  me." 

6.  Pay  ye  tribute  {if>opov<!  reketTe).  TeXeZre  ye  pay  is,  liter- 
ally, 'i/e  accomplijth  or  _fidjil,  carryiog  the  sense  of  the  fulfil- 
ment of  an  obligation,  ^opotn  tribute  is  from  if>epa  to  bring , 
something  brought.     Rev.  malics  the  verb  indicative,  ye  pay. 

God's  ministers  (XetToi/p7ol  Q^ou).  See  on  ininistratian, 
Luke  i.  23,  and  ministered,  Acts  xiii.  2.  In  vcr.  4,  hidtcovoi  is 
used  for  minister.  The  word  here  brings  out  more  fully  the 
fact  that  the  mler,  like  the  priest,  discharges  a  divinely  or- 
dained service.  Government  is  thns  elevated  into  the  sphere 
of  religion.     Hence  Rev.,  ministers  of  OwVs  service. 

Attending  continually.  The  same  word  as  continuing 
steadfastly  in  ch.  xii.  12. 


k 


Ch.  XUL]  the  EPISTLB  to  the  ROHAN&  105 

7.  To  all.  Probablj  all  magistrates^  tlioagh  some  explain 
all  men. 

Tribute — custom  {tf>6pov — riXo^).  TribtUe  on  j/ersons:  cud 
torn  on  goods. 

8.  Another  (tov  h-epov).  Lit,  the  other,  or  the  different 
one,  the  word  einpliasizing  more  strongly  the  distinction  be- 
tween the  two  parties.     Rev.,  his  neighbor. 

9.  Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery,  etc.  Omit  thou  shalt 
not  hear  false  witness.  The  seventh  commandment  precedes 
the  sixth,  as  in  Mark  x.  19;  Lake  xviii.  20;  Jas.  ii.  11. 

it  is  briefly  comprehended  {avaK^^o^Kmoxnax).  Onlj  here 
and  Eph.  i.  10.  Rev.,  it  is  summed  up.  *Avd  has  the  force  of 
again  in  the  sense  of  i*ecapitulation.  Compare  Lev.  xix.  18. 
The  law  is  normally  a  unit  in  which  there  is  no  real  separation 
between  the  commandments.  '*  Summed  up  in  one  word." 
The  verb  is  compounded,  not  with  K€<f>aXii  head,  but  with  its 
derivative  K€<f)dXau}v  the  mmn  point. 

Namely  thou  shalt  love,  etc.  {iv  r£  arfo/irriaev;).  The 
Greek  idiom  is,  it  is  summed  up  in  thethou  shaU  love,  the  whole 
commandment  being  taken  as  a  substantive  with  the  definite 
article. 

Neighbor  {tov  irkriaCov).     See  on  Matt.  vi.  43. 

11.  And  that  knowing  the  time  — now.  Referring  to 
the  injunction  of  ver.  8.  Knowing,  seeing  that  ye  know.  The 
time  (jov  Koipov),  the  particular  season  or  juncture.  Rev., 
season.     See  on  Matt.  xii.  1.     ^ow  (^Siy),  better,  already. 

Our  salvation  {'^fi&v  17  a-aynfpia).  Others,  however,  anc* 
better,  as  Rev.,  construe  ^fi&v  of  us  (salvation  qftis,  i.e.,  our} 
with  nearer,  and  render  salvation  is  nearer  to  us.  Tliis  is  fa- 
vored by  the  order  of  the  Greek  words.  The  other  rendering 
would  lay  an  unwarranted  emphasis  on  our.  Tlie  reference  is 
apparently  to  the  Lord's  second  coming,  rather  than  to  future 
glory. 

12.  Is  far  spent  {irpoiKa^).  The  A.  V.  gives  a  variety  of 
renderings  to  this  verb.     Luke  ii.  52,  increased ;  Gal.  i.  14, 


166  WORD  STDDIES   IN    THE   NEW   TESTAMENT.        [(.'H.  XIV 

profited ;  2  Tim.  iii,  9,proceed;  13,  max.  The  word  origiiiiilly 
means  to  beai/bncard  or  lentftlten  mit  by  hammen7ig.  Hence 
to  promote,  and  intransitively  to  go  forward  or  proceed. 

Let  us  cast  off  (un-a9(u/ie.9a).  As  one  puts  oS  the  garments 
of  tiie  night.  For  this  use  of  tlie  sioiple  rl^fu,  see  on  ffivelh 
his  life,  John  x.  11. 

13.  Honestly  {einT^fiovoK).  Iloriaet  ia  originally  hojwrahh, 
and  so  here.  Compare  Wyclifa  version  of  1  Cor,  xii.  23: 
"And  the  members  that  be  unhonest  have  more  lionesiy ;  for 
our  liOTvest  members  Lave  need  of  none,"  From  ey  well,  <rj(fl/ia 
faehion.  See  on  Matt,  xvii,  3.  Hence  becomingh/.  Compare 
1  Cor.  xiv.  40;  1  Thess.  iv.  12.  The  word  refers  more  partic- 
ularlj  to  the  ontward  life,  and  thus  accords  with  walk,  and  in 
the  day  the  time  of  observation. 

Rioting  {Kai[ioi<!).     Lit.,  retellings.     See  on  1  Pet.  iv.  3. 

Drunkenness  {}i.iSai<;).     See  on  Luke  xxi.  34;  John  ii.  10. 

Wantonness  {aae>>^eiaK).  See  on  liufciviousnesa,  Mark  vii. 
22.  All  these  three  are  plural :  riotingB,  drunkenTiestes,  wan- 
ioimessea. 

Envying  (^^X^).     Hev.,  Jealousy.     See  on  Jas.  iii.  14. 

14.  Provision  (iTfMiwMU').  £tymotogical]jakinto^a/;«M«>u^^ 
/or,  in  ch.  xiii.  17. 

Flesh.    In  the  moral  sense:  the  depraved  nature. 


CHAPTER  XIY. 

I.  Weak  in  the  faith.  Probably  referring  to  a  class  of 
Jewisti  Christians  with  Essenic  tendencies.*     Better,  as  Kev., 

*  The  EMenea  vera  odh  of  the  three  religtniu  putiea  irhlch  dirided  Juda- 
iam  at  the  lime  oF  Chriat'e  comiug,  the  Phoriseen  a^nd  SadducesR  being  tht  two 
others.  They  formed  a  atp&riite  oommunily,  harin;  all  thinga  in  common. 
They  were  celibate  and  aacelio,  living  chiefly  on  vegetablea,  %aA  aupphiriK  all 
their  nants  by  their  own  labor.  They  vera  the  atricteat  SabbaUrUnx.  even 
reitr«ioiDg  the  neoeBBittei  of  the  body  on  the  Ssbbatli'day.      Th«y  bad  a 


•JH.  XIV.]  THB  BPI8TLE  TO  THB  ROMAN&  161 

M/aithj  the  reference  being  to  faith  in  Christ,  not  to  christ- 
ian doctrine.     See  on  Acts  vi.  7. 

Receive  ye  {irpoaXafifidveaSe),  Into  fellowship.  See  on 
Kiatt.  xvi.  22. 

Doubtful  disputations  {BuuepUre^^  BuCKoyurfi&v).  litjjtulg* 
ings  of  i/umffhts.  The  primary  meaning  of  BuiKoyurfiS^  is  a 
thvnking'throxtgh  or  over.  Hence  of  those  specnlations  or  reas- 
)ning8  in  one's  mind  which  take  the  form  of  scruples.  See  on 
Mark  vii.  21.  Auucpun,^  has  the  same  sense  as  in  the  other 
two  passages  where  it  occurs  (1  Cor.  xii.  10 ;  Heb.  v.  14) ;  dis- 
ceming  with  a  view  to  forming  a  jndgment.  Hence  the  mean- 
ing is,  ^^  receive  these  weak  brethren,  bnt  not  for  the  purpose 
of  passing  judgment  upon  their  scruples." 

2.  Believeth  that  he  may  eat  (9r«<rreu6«  ^a7€!y).  TheA.y. 
conveys  the  sense  of  having  an  opiniony  thinking.  But  the 
point  is  the  strength  or  weakness  of  the  msLU^s  faith  (see  ver.  1) 
as  it  aJBFects  his  eating.  Hence  Bev.,  correctly,  hath  faith  to 
eat. 

Herbs  (Xa^^oya).  From  Xa^alvfa  to  dig.  Herbs  grown  on 
land  cultivated  by  digging:  garden-herbsj  vegetables.  See  on 
Mark  iv.  32 ;  Luke  xii.  42. 

3.  Despise  {i^ovSeveirai).  The  verb  means  literally  to  throw 
out  as  nothing.     Rev.,  better,  set  at  nought. 

Judge  (Kpwirw).  Judgment  is  assigned  to  the  toeak  brother, 
contempt  to  the  stronger.  Censoriousness  is  the  peculiar  error  of 
the  ascetic,  contemptuousness  of  the  liberal.  A  distinguished 
minister  once  remarked :  '^  Tlie  weak  brother  is  the  biggest 
bully  in  the  universe  I "  Both  extremes  are  allied  to  spiritual 
pride. 

Hath  received  {irpoa-eXafiero).  The  aorist  points  to  a  de- 
finite time — when  he  believed  on  Christ,  though  there  is  still 

tendenoj  to  san-wonhip,  and  addressed  prajera  to  the  son  at  daybreak. 
Thej  denied  the  resurrection  of  the  bodj,  but  believed  in  the  immortalitj  of 
the  soul.  See  Bishop  Lightfoot's  essaj  in  hia  '*  Commentarj  on  Coloi^aDS 
ana  Philemon.'* 


108  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAME.VT.       [Cu,  XIV. 

a  reference  to  liia  present  relation  to  God  aa  determined  hy  the 
fact  of  liie  reception  then,  which  may  warrant  llie  rendering 
hy  the  perfect. 

4.  Who  art  thou  ?  (cH)  t&  el)  Thou,  first  in  the  Greek  order 
and  peculiarly  emphatic.  Addressing  the  weak  brother,  since 
jvdgcst  corresponds  with _?'(i%a  in  ver.  3. 

Servant  (oUi-njv).  Strictly,  household  servant.  See  on  1 
Pet.  ii.  IS.  He  is  a  servant  in  Christ's  liousehold.  Hence  not 
another  man's,  as  A.  V.,  but  the  servant  of  another,  as  Rev. 
'A>iX6rptov  of  aiwther  is  an  adjective. 

Ho  shall  be  holden  up  (o-radijo-rrat).  Rev.,  sJtaU  he  madu 
to  stand  :  better,  both  because  the  rendering  is  moi-e  truthful, 
and  because  it  corresponds  with  the  kindred  verb  stand — he 
standeth,  make  kim  stand. 

Is  able  (BiwoTet).  Strongerthan  twarai  can.  The  sense  is, 
is  mighiy.     Hence  R«v,,  hath  power. 

5.  Esteemeth  every  day  alike  {Kpivei,  ■jraaap  ^fiipav). 
Alike  is  inserted.  Lit,  judgeth  every  day  •  subjects  every 
day  to  moral  scrntinv- 

Be  fully  persuaded  {vXrifto^peta^).  Better,  Rev.,  as- 
sured.    See  on  most  surely  heli-eved,  Luke  i.  1, 

In  his  own  mind.  ''As  a  boat  may  pursue  its  course  unin- 
jured either  in  a  narrow  canal  or  in  a  spacious  lake  "  (Bengel), 

6.  He  that  regardeth  not — doth  not  regard  it.    Omit. 

7.  To  himself.  But  unto  Christ.  See  ver.  8.  Ilcnce 
the  meaning  "a  Christian  should  live  for  others,"  so  often 
drawn  from  these  words,  is  not  tlie  teaching  of  the  passage. 

9.  Might  be  Lord  {levpievirr}).  Lit.,  inU/ht  lord  it  ovitr. 
Justifying  the  term  Lord  applied  to  Christ  in  vv.  6,  8. 

10.  Why  dost  thou  Judge  (a-ii  ri  xpiveK).  Thou  emphatic, 
in  contrast  with  the  Lord,  So  Rev.,  •'■thou,  why  dost  thou 
jndge  % "  Referring  to  the  weak  brother.  Compare  jttd'je  as 
in  ver.  4.     The  servant  of  another  is  liere  called  hroiher. 


Ch.  XiV.]  THB  BPISTLB  TO  THE  ROMANS.  169 

Judgment-seat  of  Christ  {t£  fii^fiari  rov  Xpurrov).  The 
best  texts  read  Beov  of  Ood.  So  Rev.  Yor  judgment-^eaty 
see  on  to  set  his  foot  on,  Acts  viL  5. 

11.  As  I  live,  etc.  From  Isa.  xlv.  23.  Hebrew  :  By  mysdf 
I  swear  .  .  .  that  to  me  every  knee  shall  bowy  every  tongtte 
shall  swear.     Septaagint  the  same,  except  shall  sioear  by  God. 

Shall  confess  {i^fioKoyiio'eTai).  Priinarilj,  to  acknowledge, 
confess,  or  profeBs  from  {i^  the  heart.  To  make  a  confession 
to  one's  honor ;  thence  to  praise.  So  Lnke  x.  21  (He v.,  in 
msLTgiUj  praise  for  thank)  ;  Bom.  xv.  9.  Here,  as  Bev.  in  mar- 
gin, shall  give  praise.     See  on  Matt.  xi.  25. 

13.  Stumbling-block  (TTpoo-ico/iffta).  Compare  cb.  ix.  32, 33 ; 
xiv.  20.  SiedvSaXov  occasion  of  falling  is  also  rendered  stumb- 
ling-block  in  other  passages.  Some  regard  the  two  as  synony- 
mous, others  as  related  to  different  results  in  tlie  case  of  the  in- 
jured brother.  So  Godet,  who  refers  stumbling-block  to  that 
which  results  in  a  wotmdy  and  ca/use  of  st^mhUng  to  that  which 
causes  afaU  or  sin. 

14.  I  know— am  persuaded  (oZSo — irhreurfim).  ^^A  rare 
conjunction  of  words,  but  fitted  here  to  confirm  against  ignor- 
ance and  doubt ''  (Bengel).  For  /  knowj  see  on  John  ii.  24. 
The  pei*suasion  is  not  the  result  of  his  own  reasoning,  but  of 
his  fellowship  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  So  Rev.,  for  by  the  Lord, 
etc. 

Unclean  {koivqv).  Lit,  common.  In  the  Levitical  sense,  as 
opposed  to  holy  or  pure.  Compare  Mark  vii.  2,  "  "With  defiled 
{koivoS,^  common)^  that  is  to  say,  with  unwashen  hands."  See 
Acts  X.  14. 

15.  Be  grieved  (Xt/TreZroi).  The  close  connection  with  destroy 
indicates  that  the  meaning  falls  short  of  be  destroyed^  but  is 
stronger  than  mxide  to  feel  pain.  It  is  a  huH  to  conscience, 
which,  while  not  necessarily  fatal,  may  lead  to  violation  or 
hardening  of  conscience,  and  finally  to  fall.  Compare  1  Cor 
viii.  9-12. 

Meat  {fip&fjui).     A  general  term  for  food. 


170  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THK  NEW  TESTAMENT.       (Ch,  XIV 

Charitably  [xari  arfatrnv).  Lit.,  according  to  love.  Rev., 
in  love.     See  on  2  Pet.  i.  6. 

Him  {(Keiuov).  The  pronouD  has  a  strongly  deGning  force, 
explained  by  the  foUowiag  phrase. 

16.  Your  good  {iifiotv  to  a7aSiii').  Referring,  most  probably, 
to  the  liberty  of  the  strong.  Others  think  that  tlie  whole 
Church  is  addressed,  in  wliich  case  good  would  refer  to  the  gos- 
pel doctj'ine.* 

Be  evil  spoken  of  (fiXcurifrritteiaSm).  See  on  hlaaphemij, 
Mark  vii.  22.  In  1  Cor.  x.  30,  it  is  used  of  evil-speaking  by 
laembere  of  the  Churcli,  which  favors  the  reference  of  good  to 
the  strong. 

17.  The  kingdom  of  God.  See  on  Lnke  vi,  20,  and  com- 
pare Matt,  iii-  2.  "The  heavenly  sphere  of  life  in  which  God's 
woi-d  and  Spirit  govern,  and  whose  organ  on  earth  is  the  Church  " 
(Lange).     Not  the  future,  messianic  kingdom. 

Meat  and  drink  (y9po«ris  koX  wdo-*?).  Rev.,  eating  and  drink- 
ing. Both  words,  however,  occur  frequently  in  the  sense  of 
A.  V.  Meat  (^p&iia),  that  which  is  eaten,  occurs  in  ver.  15. 
The  corresponding  word  for  that  which  is  drunk  {trmfia)  is  not 
found  in  the  New  Testament,  though  wofia  drink  occurs  1  Cor. 
X.  i;  lleb.  ix.  10,  and  both  in  classical  and  New-Testament 
Greek,  ir6iTi<!  the  act  of  drinking  is  used  also  for  that  which  is 
di-unk.  See  John  vi.  55.  A  somewhat  similar  interchange  of 
meaning  appears  in  the  popnlar  expression,  such  a  thing  is  good 
eating  f  also  in  the  use  of  living  for  that  by  which  one  lives. 

Righteousness  (tiKauxrvyt)).  On  its  practical,  ethical  side, 
as  shown  in  moral  rectitude  toward  men. 

Peace  {elp^vrj).  Not  peace  with  God,  reconciliation,  as  ch.  v, 
1,  but  mutual  concord  among  Christians. 

Joy  {-j^ap^).  Common  joy,  arising  out  of  the  prevalence  of 
rectitude  and  concord  in  the  Chnrch.     The  whole  chapter  is 


Ch.  XIV.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMAHa  171 

ooDceraed  with  the  mtUital  relations  of  ChristianB,  rather  than 
witli  their  relations  to  Ood. 

In  the  Holy  Ghost.  Most  commentators  constme  this  with 
joy  only.  Mejer  sajs  it  forms  one  phrase.  Compare  1  Thess. 
i.  6.  While  this  maj  be  correct,  I  see  no  objection  to  constru- 
ing the  words  with  all  these  terms.  So  Oodet :  ^^  It  is  this  di- 
vine guest  who,  by  His  presence,  produces  them  in  the  Church.^ 

19.  Things  which  make  for  peace  (tA  t^  cipiji^).  Lit., 
the  things  of  peace.  So  the  next  clause,  thmga  of  edification. 
See  on  buUd  you  %^,  Acts  xx.  32.     Edification  is  upbuilding. 

One  another  (r^  e^  oXXi^t/v).  The  Greek  phrase  has  a 
defining  force  which  is  lost  in  the  translations.  Lit,  things  of 
edification^  that^  namely ^  which  is  with  reference  to  one  another. 
The  definite  article  thus  points  Paul's  reference  to  individuals 
rather  than  to  the  Church  as  a  whole. 

20.  Destroy  {icaT£kue).  A  different  word  from  that  in  ver. 
15.  It  means  to  loosen  doum,  and  is  used  of  the  destruction  of 
buildings.  Hence  according  with  edification  in  ver.  19.  See 
on  Mark  xiii.  2 ;  Acts  v.  38. 

Work  of  God.  The  christian  brother,  whose  christian  per- 
sonality is  God's  work.  See  2  Cor.  v.  17;  Eph.  ii.  10  ;  Jas.  i. 
18. 

With  offence  (8i^  irpoa-ieofA/iaTo^).  Against  his  own  con- 
scientious scruple.     Lit,  through  or  amidst  offence. 

21.  To  eat  flesh— drink  wine.  The  two  points  of  the 
weak  brother's  special  scruple.  Omit  or  is  offended  or  is  made 
toeak. 

22.  Hast  thou  faith  (crv  iricrrtv  ^ei9).  The  best  texts  insert 
fjv  which.  ''  The  faith  which  thou  hast  have  thou  to  thyself," 
etc.     So  Rev. 

Condemneth  not  himself  (leplvav).  Rev.,  better,  judgeth. 
Who,  in  settled  conviction  of  the  rightness  of  his  action,  sub- 
jects liimself  to  no  self-judgment  after  it 


172 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TE8TAMEIST         [Ch.  XIV 


Alloweth  (SonH/Mi^ei).  Rev.,  approveth.  See  ori  1  Pot.  i.  7. 
"CiiriBtian  practice  ought  to  be  out  of  tlie  sphere  of  morbid 

introspection." 

23.  Faith.  lu  Christ.  "  So  far  as  it  brings  with  it  the 
moral  cotitideuce  as  to  what  in  general  and  under  given  ciri^nm- 
staneea  ia  the  right  christian  mode  of  action"  (Mever). 

Some  authoritiea  insert  here  tiie  doxology  at  cli.  xvi.  25-27. 
According  to  some,  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  closed  with  this 
chapter.  Chapter  xvi.  was  a  list  of  disciples  resident  at  differ- 
ent points  on  the  ronte,  who  were  to  bo  greeted.  Phoebe  ia 
first  named  because  Cenchreae  would  be  the  first  stage.  Eph- 
esiis  would  be  the  next  stage,  where  Aquila  and  Priscilla  would 
be  found.  Ciiapter  xv.  waa  a  sort  of  private  missive  to  be 
communicated  to  alt  whom  the  messengers  should  visit  on  tiie 
way,  The  question  seems  to  be  almost  wholly  due  to  the  men- 
tion of  Aquila  and  Priscilla  in  ch.  xvi.,  and  to  the  fact  that 
there  is  no  account  of  their  migration  from  Epheaiis  to  Rome, 
and  of  an  after- migration  again  to  Ephesus  (2  Tim.  iv.  19j, 
But  see  on  ch.  xvi.  14. 

OclierR  claim  that  chs.  i.-xi.,  xvi.,  wei-o  the  original  epistle ; 
that  Phoebe's  journey  waa  delayed,  and  that,  in  the  interval, 
news  from  Rome  led  Paul  to  add  xii.-xv. 

Others  agaiu,  that  ch.  xvi.  was  written  from  Rome  to  Eph- 

Againat  these  theories  is  the  stubborn  fact  that  of  the  known 
extant  MSS.  of  Paul  (about  three  hundred)  all  the  MSS.  hith- 
erto collated,  including  all  the  most  important,  give  these  chap- 
ters in  tiie  received  connection  and  order,  with  the  exception 
of  the  doxology,     tSee  ou  the  doxology,  ch.  xvi. 


Ob.  XV.l  THB  EPI3TLB  TO  THB  BOMAHEL  173 


CHAPTER  XV. 

1.  Infirmities  (d^rSei^/Aara).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment 

8.  Of  the  circunficision.  Of  those  circumcised.  See  on 
the  election^  ch.  xi.  7. 

9.  it  is  written.  The  citations  are  from  Ps.  xviiL  50 ;  com- 
pare 2  Sam.  xxii.  50 ;  Deut  xxxii.  43 ;  Ps.  cxvii  1 ;  Isa.  xL  10. 

Confess.    Rev.,  give  praise.    See  on  ch.  xiv.  11. 

Sing  (^XA).     See  on  Jas.  v.  13. 

10.  Rejoice  {€if^p6vBrrre).  Frequently  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment of  merry-maki/ng.  Lnke  xii.  19 ;  xv;  23,  24.  See  on 
fared  sumpttuyush/j  Luke  xvi.  19. 

12.  Root.  See  on  NazareiM^  Matt.  ii.  23.  Root  is  a  sprout 
from  the  root. 

He  that  shall  rise  to  reign.  Bev.,  that  ariseth  to  reign. 
Literally  from  the  Septuagint.  Ariseth  to  reign  is  a  paraphrase 
of  the  Hebrew  stands  as  banner.  Bengel  says  :  ^^  There  is  a 
pleasant  contrast :  the  root  is  in  the  lowest  place,  the  banner 
rises  highest,  so  as  to  be  seen  even  by  the  remotest  nations." 

Shall — hope.  So  Septuagint,  which  is  a  free  rendering  of 
the  Hebrew  seek  or  resort  to. 

14.  Here  the  Epilogue  of  the  Epistle  begins.  Bengel  says : 
^^  As  one  street  often  leads  men,  leaving  a  large  city,  through 
several  gates,  so  the  conclusion  of  this  Epistle  is  manifold." 

Goodness  (a7a3oHrtn^).     See  on  ch.  iii.  12. 
To  admonish  {vovSerelv).     See  on  Acts  xx.  31. 

15.  I  have  written  {eypa^).  Rev.,  Ivrrite.  The  epistol* 
ary  aorist.     See  on  1  John  ii.  13. 

The  more  boldly  {roXfi/nporepov).  Not  too  boldly^  but  the 
more  boldly  because  you  are  full  of  goodness. 


174  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  HEW  TESTAMENT.         [Cn.  XV. 

In  some  sort  {awb  /le/Mi/s).  See  on  cli.  xi.  25.  llev.,  in  mine 
msaaure,  qualifying  J  write,  and  referring  to  some  paesage  in 
wliicb  lie  liad  spoken  witli  especial  plainness;  as  cb.  vi.  13,  19  ; 
viii.  9  ;  xi.  17  ;  xiv.  3,  4,  10,  13,  15,  20,  etc. 

16.  Minister  {>jiirovpyov).    See  on  cb.  xiii.  6. 
Ministering  (ieoovpyovvTa).     Only  bere  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment.    Lit.,  ministering  as  apriest. 

Offering  up  (irpoatftopa).  Lit.,  ike  bringing  to,  i.e.,  to  the 
altar.     Compare  doeih  service,  John  xvi.  2. 

17,  Whereof  I  may  glory  (t^c  «ai^(TtfJ.  Katber,  as  Rev., 
my  glorying,  denoting  the  act.  The  ground  of  glorying  wonld 
be  Kau)(T}fia  as  in  cli.  iv.  3  ;  Gal.  vi.  4,  etc. 

Those  things  which  pertain  to  God  (r^  trpot  tqv  Seov). 
A  technical  phrase  in  Jewish  liturgical  language  to  denote  the 
functions  of  worship  {Ileb.  ii.  17;  v.  1).  According  with  the 
sacerdotal  ideas  of  the  previous  verse. 

19.   Signs — wonders.     See  on  Matt.  xi.  20. 

Round  about  («u«\y).  Not,  in  a  circuitons  track  to  lUyri- 
cuni,  bnt  Jerusalem  and  the  regions  round  it.  For  the  phrase, 
see  Mark  iii.  34 ;  vi.  6,  36 ;  Lake  ix.  12 ;  Apoc.  iv.  6.  For  the 
facts.  Acts  xiii.,  xix. 

Illyricum.  Lying  between  Italy,  Grermany,  Macedonia,  and 
Thrace,  bounded  by  the  Adriatic  and  the  Danube.  The  usual 
Greek  name  was  lllyris.  The  name  Illyria  occurs  in  botii 
Greek  and  Latin.  Though  the  shore  was  full  of  fine  harbors 
and  the  coast-land  fertile,  Greek  civilization  never  spread  on 
the  coast.  Dyrraehium  or  Epidamnos  was  almost  the  only 
Greek  colony,  and  its  history  for  centuries  was  a  continuous 
conflict  with  the  barbarous  nations.  In  the  lime  of  the  Roman 
Empire  the  name  spread  over  all  the  surrounding  districts.  In 
the  division  between  the  Eastern  and  Western  Empire  it  was 
divided  into  lllyris  Barbara,  annexed  to  the  Western  Empire, 
and  lllyris  Graeca,  to  the  Eastern,  including  Greece,  Epirns, 
and  Macedonia.  The  name  gradually  disappeared,  and  the 
country  was  divided  between  the  states  of  Bosnia,  Croatia. 


Ch.  XV.]  THB  BPI8TLB  TO  THB  ROMANa  175 

Servia,  Rascia,  and  Dalmatia.  Ko  mention  of  a  visit  of  Panl 
occars  in  the  Acts.  It  may  have  taken  place  in  the  joarney 
mentioned  Acts  xx.  1-8.* 

Fully  preached  {veirXaipc^tehHu),  lAty/ulfiUed,  Some  ex- 
plain, have  given  the  Gospel  its  fall  development  so  that  it  has 
reached  every  quarter. 

20.  Have  I  strived  {t^CKomfioviisvov).  The  verb  means  orig- 
inally to  be  fond  of  honor j  and  hence,  from  a  love  of  honor,  to 
strive^  he  ambitious.  Compare  2  Cor.  v.  9 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  11. 
The  correct  sense  is  to  prosecute  as  a  point  of  honor. 

Foundation  {Befi^Kiov).     See  on  settle^  1  Pet.  v.  10. 

22.  I  have  been  hindered  (iveteoTrrop/riv).  Imperfect  tense, 
denoting  continnoosness,  and  implying  a  succession  of  hin- 
drances.    Rev.,  toas  hindered.     Hence  these  many  times. 

23.  Place  {tottov).  Soope^  opportunity.  So  of  Esau,  Heb. 
xii.  17.     Compare  Bom.  xii.  19 ;  Eph.  iv.  27. 

Many  {Uav&v).  See  on  worthy^  Luke  vii.  6.  The  primary 
meaning  is  suffidenty  and  hence  comes  to  be  applied  to  number 
and  quantity ;  mamy^  eruyugh^  as  Mark  x.  46 ;  Luke  viii.  32 ; 
Acts  ix.  23,  etc.  So,  long^  of  time  (Acts  viii.  11 ;  xxvii.  9). 
yforthy^  i.e.,  sufficient  for  an  honor  or  a  place  (Mark  i  7 ;  Luke 
vii.  6 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  9).  Adequate  (2  Cor.  ii.  16 ;  iii.  5).  Qual- 
ified  (2  Tim.  ii.  2).  Here  the  sense  might  be  expressed  hyfor 
years  enough. 

24.  Spain.  The  usual  Greek  name  is  Iberia.  Paul  adopts 
a  modification  of  the  Boman  name,  JBispania. 

In  my  journey  {tuviropev6iA€iw;).  JAt.y  journeying  throughy 
or  as  I  pass  through. 

To  be  brought  on  my  way  {TrfHyrrefjuf^Stjvat).  Escorted. 
See  on  Acts  xv.  3. 

Filled  {ifiirXfia-BS).  Lit.,  JUled  ftdl:  satiated.  Compare 
Acts  xiv.  17 ;  Luke  i.  53.     Bev.,  satisfied. 


*  See  ProfeMor  R  A.  Freeman's  '*  Historical  Geographj  of  Europe.** 


176  WOHD  STUDIES   IN   THE  NBW  TESTAMENT.        [Um.  XVI 

26.  Contribution  {Kotimvlai').  See  oa  feUowahip,  Acts  ii. 
i2. 

Poor  saints  (Trrtii^fous  twk  a/^Uiv).  More  literally,  and  bet- 
ter, the  poor  of  tlie  aamis.  Bev.,  among  the  saiuts.  All  the 
saints  were  not  poor. 

27.  To  minister  (XetTovjjy^flt).  Seeon  ch.  xiii.  6.  By  using 
this  word  iov prlenUy  Bervice,  Paul  puts  the  ministry  of  alms- 
giving  on  the  footing  of  a  flacrideial  service.  It  expresses  the 
worship  of  giving. 

2S.  Sealed — this  fruit.  Secured  to  them  the  product  of 
the  contribution.     See  on  John  iii.  33  ;  Apoc.  xxii.  10. 

29.  Gospel.     Omit,  juul  read  klevs-uig  of  Christ. 

30.  Strive  together  (i7tfi'a7(i>iJ^ao-^i).  The  simple  verb  is 
used  of  contending  in  the  s^'nes,  and  implies  strenuous  efEort. 
Here  earnest  pr'ayer. 

31.  Thenn  that  do  not  believe  (twv  aiv^i^vvrwv).  See  on 
ch.  X.  21.     Bettor,  lit'v.,  them,  that  are  dUobeiileni. 

32.  With  you  be  refreshed  {trwavaTrawymfuu  vfiiv).  See 
on  ^e  rest,  Matt.  xi.  28. 


CHAPTER  XV I. 


1.  I  commend  (oTw&-nj/M),     See  on  ch.  iii.  5. 

Phoebe.  The  bearer  of  the  epistle.  The  word  means 
briifht.  In  classical  Greek  an  epithet  of  Artemis  (Diana)  the 
sister  of  Phoebns  Apollo. 

Servant  (Smucowv).  The  word  may  be  either  raascnlineor 
feminine.  Commonly  explained  as  deacotiesa.  The  term  Swwe- 
aviaaa  deaconess  is  found  only  in  ccctesiaBtical  Greek.  Tlie 
"  Apostolical  Constitutions  "  *  distinguish  deaconesses  from  wid- 


*  A  aolleotlon  at  oacloalsstlokl  prosoripts  in  eight  lioohB.  contninJiiK  Aoa- 
Iriutl,  llturgiMl,  ■□(!  moral  inatruolloiDi.  uid  dating  Iroin  the  third,  or  par, 
iibt/  from  the  oloM  of  the  Beoond,  oeDlur;. 


Ob.  XVL]  the  EPISTLB  TO  THE  ROMANS.  177 

OW8  and  virgins,  prescribe  their  daties,  and  a  form  for  their  ord- 
ination. Pliny  the  younger,  aboat  a.d.  104,  appears  to  refer 
to  them  in  his  letter  to  Trajan,  in  which  he  speaks  of  the  torture 
of  two  maids  who  were  called  ministrae  (female  ministers). 
The  office  seems  to  have  been  confined  mainly  to  widows, 
though  virgins  were  not  absolutely  excluded.  Their  duties 
were  to  take  care  of  the  sick  and  poor,  to  minister  to  martyrs 
and  confessors  in  prison,  to  instruct  catechumens,  to  assist  at 
the  baptism  of  women,  and  to  exercise  a  general  supervision 
over  the  female  church-members.  Tryphaena,  Tryphosa,  and 
Persis  (ver.  12)  may  have  belonged  to  this  class.  See  on  1  Tim 
V.  3-16.*  Conybeare  ("  Life  and  Epistles  of  St.  Paul ")  as- 
sumes  that  Phoebe  was  a  widow,  on  the  ground  that  she  could 
not,  according  to  Greek  manners,  have  been  mentioned  as  act- 
ing in  the  independent  manner  described,  either  if  her  husband 
had  been  living  or  she  had  been  unmarried.  Kenan  says: 
^'  Phoebe  carried  under  the  folds  of  her  robe  the  whole  future 
of  Christian  theology." 

Cenchrea.  More  correctly,  Cenchreae,  Compare  Acts  xviii. 
18.  Corinth,  from  which  the  epistle  was  sent,  was  situated  on 
an  isthmus,  and  had  three  ports,  Cenchreae  on  the  east  side, 
and  Lechaeum  on  the  west  of  the  isthmus,  with  Schoenus,  a 
smaller  port,  also  on  the  eastern  side,  at  the  narrowest  point  of 
the  isthmus.  Cenchreae  was  nine  miles  from  Corinth.  It  was 
a  thriving  town,  commanding  a  large  trade  with  Alexandria, 
Antioch,  Ephesus,  Thessalonica,  and  the  other  cities  of  the 
Aegean.  It  contained  temples  of  Venus,  Aesculapius,  and  Isis. 
The  church  there  was  perhaps  a  branch  of  that  at  Corinth. 

2.  Assist  {irapcurrrfrC).  See  on  Acts  i.  3.  It  is  used  as  a 
legal  term,  of  jpresenting  culprits  or  witnesses  in  a  court  of 
justice.  Compare  jyrove.  Acts  xxiv.  13.  From  this,  and  from 
the  term  irpoariTL^i  succorer^  it  has  been  inferred  that  Phoebe 
was  going  to  Home  on  private  legal  business  (see  Conybeare 
and  Ilowson).     This  is  a  mere  fancy. 


*SeeSchar8  **  Apostolic  Charoh,**  knd  Bingham*8  **ChrtotUm  Antiqai- 
ti<«.  ' 

Vol    ILL— 12 


178  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TBSTAMENT,       fCa  XVI 

Succorer  (ir/swrraTts).  Only  here  in  the  New  Teatament. 
The  word  me&na  pairofiess.  It  may  refer  to  her  official  duties. 
The  word  is  an  honorable  one,  and  accords  with  her  official 

pOBltioD. 

3.  Prisca  and  Aquila.  PrisciUa  is  the  diminutive  of 
Prisaa.  See  Acts  xviii.  2,  18,  26  ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  19 ;  2  Tim.  iv. 
19.  It  is  argued  by  some  that  Aquila  and  Priacilla  must  have 
been  at  Epheeua  at  this  time,  since  they  were  there  when  Paul 
wrote  I  Cor.  xvi.  19,  and  again  wlien  he  wrote  2  Tim.  iv,  19, 
"  It  is  strange  to  find  tiicm  settled  at  Rome  with  a  church  in 
their  house  between  these  two  dates"  (Farrar).  But,  as  Bishop 
Lightfoot  remarks  ("  Commentary  on  Pliilippians."  p.  176), "  As 
Rome  was  their  lieadquariers,  and  they  had  been  driven  thence 
by  an  imperial  edict  (Acts  xviii.  2),  it  is  natural  enough  that 
they  should  have  returned  thither  as  soon  as  it  waa  convenient 
and  safe  to  do  so.  The  year  which  elapses  between  the  two 
notices,  allows  ample  time  for  them  to  transfer  themselves  from 
Ephesua  to  Rome,  and  for  the  apostle  to  hear  of  their  return 
to  their  old  abode."  Notice  that  the  name  of  Priscilla  precedes 
that  of  her  husbaud.  So  Acts  xviii,  2.  Probably  she  waa  the 
more  prominent  of  the  two  in  christian  activity. 

Fellow*workers.  In  christian  labor,  as  they  had  been  in 
tent-making. 

4.  Who  (oirn^).  The  double  relative,  with  an  explanatory 
force :  seeing  that  they. 

Laid  down  their  own  necks  {rov  eavrStv  Tpdxr}\ov  irrriSi}- 
Kov).  Laid  down  is^WterMy,  placed  under  {\.hG&,x.ti).  Whether 
the  expression  is  literal  or  figurative,  or  if  literal,  when  the  in- 
cident occurred,  cannot  be  determined. 

5.  The  church  that  is  in  their  house  (t^c  kot  oUovavr&v 
iKKKijaUtv).  The  phrase  church  tliat  is  in  their  (or  his)  house 
occurs  1  Cor.  xvi.  19,  of  Aquila  and  Priscilla;  Col.  iv.  15.  of 
Nymphas  ;  Philem.  2,  of  Philemon.  A  similar  gathering  may 
be  implied  in  Rom.  xvi.  I'l,  15.  Bishop  Lightfoot  says  there 
is  no  clear  example  of  a  separate  building  set  apart  for  christ> 
ian  worship  within  the  limits  of  the  Roman  Empire  before  tlie 


Oh.  XVL]  the  epistle  TO  THE  ROMANS.  179 

third  century.  The  Christian  congregations  were,  therefore, 
dependent  upon  the  hospitality  of  prominent  chnrch  members 
who  famished  their  own  houses  for  this  purpose.  Hence  their 
places  of  assembly  were  not  called  templea  until  late ;  but  houses 
of  God;  houses  of  the  churches  ;  Iiouses  of  prayer. 

Numerous  guilds  or  clubs  existed  at  Home  for  furnishing 
proper  burial  rites  to  the  poor.  Extant  inscriptions  testify  to 
the  existence  of  nearly  eighty  of  these,  each  consisting  of  the 
members  of  a  different  trade. or  profession,  or  united  in  the 
worship  of  some  deity.  The  Christians  availed  themselves  of 
this  practice  in  order  to  evade  Trajan's  edict  against  clubs, 
which  included  their  own  ordinary  assemblies,  but  which  made 
a  special  exception  in  favor  of  associations  consisting  of  poorer 
members  of  society,  who  met  to  contribute  to  funeral  expenses. 
This  led  to  the  use  of  the  catacombs,  or  of  buildings  erected 
over  them  for  this  purpose.* 

The  expression  here  denotes,  not  the  whole  church,  but  that 
portion  of  it  which  met  at  Aquila's  house. 

Epaenetus.  A  Greek  name,  meaning  praised.  It  is,  how- 
ever, impossible  to  infer  the  nationality  from  the  name  with 
any  certainty,  since  it  was  common  for  the  Jews  to  have  a  sec- 
ond name,  which  they  adopted  during  their  residence  in  heathen 
countries.  Compare  John  Mark  (Acts  xii.  12) ;  Justus  (Acts  i. 
23) ;  Niger  (Acts  xiii.  1) ;  Cri»pus  (Acts  xviii.  8). 

The  first-fruits  of  Achaia.  The  best  texts  read  of  Asia. 
An  early  convert  of  the  Roman  province  of  Asia.  See  on  Acts 
ii.  9.  This  is  adduced  as  an  argument  that  this  chapter  was 
addressed  to  Ephesus.f 

6.  Mary  {Mapid/i  Mariam).  Westcott  and  Hort  read  Ma- 
pCav.  A  Jewish  name,  the  same  as  Miriamj  meaning  obstinacy^ 
rebelliousness. 

Bestowed  labor  {itconrCaaev).     See  on  Luke  v.  5. 

7.  Andronicus  and  Junia.  The  latter  name  may  be  either 
masculine  or  feminine.     If  the  latter,  the  person  was  probably 


*  See  Northoote  and  Brownlow :  "  Roma  Sotterranea.** 
t  See  Farrar,  **  Expoeitor,"  flrat  series,  iz.,  212. 


WORD   STUDIES   IN   THE   NEW   TESTAMENT.         [Ch,  XVL 

the  wife  oE  Andronicae.  If  the  funner,  tlie  ntiiiiG  ie  tu  be  rend- 
ered Juntas,  as  Rev.  The  following  words  point  to  tliis  con- 
clusion. 

Kinsmen  {atrfyeveK).  Tlie  primary  meaning  is  related  by 
blood;  but  it  is  used  iu  the  wider  sense  of  feUow-coaiUrymen. 
So  oh.  ix.  3. 

Of  note  (iirtoTj/Mx).  A  good  rendering  etymological ly,  the 
word  meaning,  literally,  bearing  a  mark  (trijiia,  nota). 

Fellow'prisoners  {{Twai-jyiMKiiiTavi).  See  on  captives,  Luke 
iv.  18. 

S.  Amplias.  A  contraction  of  Ampliatua,  which  ie  the 
reading  of  the  best  texts. 

9.  Urbane.     The  correct  reading  is  Vrbanus,  city-bred. 
Stachys.     Meaning  an  ear  of  corn. 

10.  ApeKes.  It  occurs  in  Horace  as  the  name  of  a  Jew,un- 
der  the  form  ApeWi  ("Satire,"  i.,  5,  100). 

Thenn  which  are  of  Aristobulus'  household.  Possibly 
household  slaves.  They  might  have  borne  the  name  of  Aristo- 
bulus even  if  they  had  passed  into  tlie  service  of  another  master, 
since  household  slaves  thus  transferred,  continued  to  hear  the 
name  of  their  former  proprietor.  Liglitfoot  thinks  that  this 
Aristobulus  may  have  been  the  grandson  of  Herod  the  Great, 
who  was  still  living  in  the  time  of  Claudius. 

11.  Narcissus.  This  name  was  borue  by  a  distinguished 
freedman,  wJio  was  secretary  of  letters  to  Claudius.  Juvenal 
alludes  to  his  wealth  and  iiis  influence  over  Claudius,  and  says 
that  Measalina,  the  wife  of  Claudius,  was  put  to  death  by  his 
order  ("  Satire,"  xiv.,  330).  His  household  slaves,  passing  into 
the  hands  of  the  emperor  or  of  some  other  master,  would  con- 
tinue to  boiir  his  name, 

12.  Tryphaena  and  Tryphosa.  From  Tpv^oM  to  live  lvx~ 
uriattsly.  See  on  riot,  2  Pet.  ii.  13.  Perhaps  sisters.  Farra.' 
says  they  are  slave-names. 

13.  Rufus.  Meaning  red.  Possibly  the  son  of  Gimoii  of 
Cyrene,  Mark  xv.  21.    Mark  probably  wrote  in  Kome. 


Ch.  XVI.]  THE  EPI8TLB  TO  THE  BOMAN&  181 

And  mine.  Delicately  intimating  her  materaal  care  foi 
him. 

14.  Hermes.  Or  Hermaa.  A  common  slave-name,  a  con- 
traction of  several  different  names,  as  Herma>goraSj  HermogeneSy 
etc.* 

16.  Kiss.  Compare  1  Cor.  xvi.  20;  2  Cor.  xiii.  12;  1  Thess. 
V.  26 ;  1  Pet.  v.  14. 

17.  Divisions — ofFences  (r^  Zvxptrrafflwi — r^  (j/rciv&iXa). 
The  article  with  each  noun  points  to  some  well-known  disturb- 
ances.    The  former  nonn  occars  only  in  Panl. 

Avoid  (^iVicX/i/are).  Better,  as  Rev.,  turn  aside.  Not  onlj 
keep  oat  of  their  way,  but  remove  from  it  if  you  fall  in  with 
them. 

18.  Belly.    Compare  Philip.  iiL  19. 

Good  words  (^^pi7<rroXo7/a9).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. Lit,  good  speaking.  The  compounded  adjective  XP^' 
t6^  is  used  rather  in  its  secondary  sense  of  mildj  plectscmt  So 
Kev.,  smooth  speech. 

Deceive  {i^airaTSHnv).  Better,  as  Rev.,  heguUe,  It  is  not 
merely  making  a  false  impression,  but  practically  leading  astray. 


*  The  student  should  read  Bishop  Lightfoot's  note  on  Cftesar^s  household, 
in  his  **  Commentary  on  Philippians,"  p.  169.  He  claims  that  the  Philippian 
epistle  Ik  the  earliest  of  the  Epistles  of  the  Captirit/ ;  that  the  members  of 
Caesar's  household  who  sent  greetings  to  the  Philippian  Church  (iv.  22)  were 
converts  before  Paul  s  arriyal  in  Rome,  and  were  known  to  the  Philippian 
Christians,  and  that  therefore  these  persons  are  to  be  looked  for  in  the  list  at 
the  close  of  the  Roman  Epistle.  In  the  inscriptions  in  the  columbaria,  or 
dove-cot  tombSf  one  of  which,  exhumed  in  1764,  was  espeoialljr  devoted  to 
freedmen  or  slaves  of  the  imperial  household,  and  which  is  assigned  to  about 
the  time  of  Nero,  are  found  moet  of  the  names  recorded  in  this  list.  The 
names,  indeed,  do  not,  in  any  case  perhaps,  represent  the  actual  persons  al- 
luded to  in  the  epistle,  but  they  establish  the  presumption  that  members  of 
the  imperial  household  are  included  in  thene  salutations,  and  go  to  show  that 
the  names  and  allusions  in  the  Roman  epistle  are  in  keeping  with  the  circum- 
stances of  the  metropolis  in  Paul's  day.  Thus  they  furnish  an  answer  to  the 
attacks  on  the  genuineness  of  the  last  two  chapters,  and  to  the  view  which 
detaches  the  salutations  from  the  main  epistle. 


182  WORD  STUDIES   IN  THE   NEW   TESTAMENT.        [Cn.  XVL 

Simple  (dKOKtav).  Only  Iiore  and  Ileb.  vii.  26.  Lit.,  not 
evil.  Ilev.,  innocent.  Bengel  aaja :  "An  indifferent  woid. 
They  are  called  so  who  are  merely  without  positive  wicltedneas, 
wlien  they  ought  to  abound  also  in  prudence,  and  to  guard 
ap:ainst  otJier  men's  wickedness." 

19.  Simple  (aKepaiovs).     See  on  karvdegs,  Matt.  x.  16. 

20.  Shall  bruise  {awrpl-^ei).  See  on  Mark  v.  4;  Luke  is. 
39. 

21.  Lucius  and  Jason— Sosipater.  For  Lucius,  see  on 
Acts  xiii.  1.  Jason,  possibly  the  Jason  of  Acta  xvii.  5.  Sosi- 
pater, possibly  the  Sopater  of  Acts  xx.  4.  Both  names  were 
common. 

22.  I  Tertius.    Paul's  amanuensis.     See  on  Gal.  vi.  11. 

Wrote  {7/)a^s).  Better  Rov.,  write.  The  epistolary  aonst. 
See  on  1  John  ii.  13.  Godet  remarks  upon  Paul's  exquisite 
courtesy  in  leaving  Tertius  to  salute  iu  liis  own  name.  To 
dictate  to  him  bis  own  salutation  would  he  to  treat  him  as  a 
machine. 

23.  Gaius.  See  Acta  six.  29;  xx.  4;  1  Cor.  i.  14.  Possibly 
the  same  in  all  three  refejenceB. 

Chamberlain  {oltcova/ioi).  See  on  Luke  xvi.  1.  The  word 
appears  in  the  NewTestament  in  two  senses:  1.  The  slave  who 
waa  employed  to  give  the  other  slaves  tlieir  rations.  So  Lnkc 
xii.  42.  2.  The  land-steward,  as  Luke  xvi,  1.  Probably  here 
the  admin istratov  of  the  city  lands. 

25.  This  is  the  only  epistle  of  Paul  which  closes  with  a  dox- 
ology.  The  do.tology  (see  on  ch.  xiv.  23)  stands  at  the  close  of 
this  chapter  in  most  of  the  very  oldest  MSS.,  and  in  the  Peshito 
or  Syriac  and  Vulgate  versions.  In  a  very  few  MSS.  it  is 
omitted  or  erased  by  a  later  hand.  In  many  MSS.  including 
moat  of  the  cursives,  it  is  found  at  the  close  of  ch.  xiv.,  and  in 
a  very  few,  at  the  close  of  both  xiv.  and  xvi.*     Weiss  ("Intro- 

*  See  tbe  diMiuaian  io  Vleyer'e  textasl  note  *l  tb«  begiaaliifi  of  oh.  x*l., 
and  Famr'B  "  Paal,"  ii.,  I7n.  Also  Llglitfoot'a  artiole  "  Romuis,"  iu  SmHli'i 
"  Dictionarj  of  the  Bible,"  aud  supplement  by  ProfesBur  Eira  AbboL 


Ch.  XVI.]  THE  EPISTLB  TO  THB  BOMANa  183 

duction  to  the  New  Testament ")  says  that  the  attempt  to  prove 
its  un-Pauline  character  has  only  been  the  result  of  extreme  in- 
genuity. 

Stablish  {arripi^).     See  on  1  Pet  v.  10. 

Mystery.  See  on  cli.  xi.  25.  The  divine  plan  of  redemption. 
The  particular  mystery  of  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles,  which 
is  emphasized  in  Eph.  iii.  3-9 ;  Col.  i.  26,  is  included,  but  the 
reference  is  not  to  be  limited  to  this. 

Kept  secret  {aeairpiiAhav),  JEiev.,  more  accurately,  kqfft  in 
silence.  In  Eph.  iii.  9;  Col.  i.  26,  airotce/cpvfJkfLipop  hidden 
awaj/y  is  used. 

27.  To  whom.  GK)d,  who,  through  Christ,  appears  as  ^^the 
only  wise.'' 


THE 

FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS. 


CHAPTER  I. 

1.  Called  to  be  an  apostle.  See  on  Rom.  i.  1.  Compare 
1  Tim.  i.  1.  Not  diBtiiigtiisliiiig  him  from  other  apostles. 
Compare  Matt  iv.  21  ;  Jolm  vi,  70;  but  Paid  was  called  no  less 
directly  than  these  hy  Jeans  Christ,  GraJ,  i.  12-16.  John  does 
not  use  the  word  ajTosUoy  but  gives  the  idea,  John  xiii.  18. 

2.  Corinth.  The  Corinth  of  this  period  owed  the  beginning 
of  its  prosperity  to  Julius  Caesar,  who,  a  hundred  years  after  its 
destruction  by  Mummius  (B,  c.  146),  rebuilt  and  peopled  it  with 
a  colony  of  veterans  and  freednien.  It  was  situated  on  the 
isthmus  which  divided  Northern  Greece  from  the  Peloponnesus. 
It  had  three  harbors,  Cenchreae  and  Schoenus  on  the  east,  and 
Lechaeum  on  the  west.  The  isthmus,  forming  the  only  line  of 
march  for  an  invading  or  retreating  army,  was  of  the  greatest 
military  importance.  It  was  known  as  "  the  eye  of  Greece." 
By  Pindar  it  was  called  "  the  bridge  of  the  sea ;"  by  Xenophon, 
"the  gate  of  the  Peioponnesua;"  and  by  Strabo,  "the  acropo- 
lis of  Greece."  In  uiure  modern  times  it  was  known  ae  "  the 
Gibraltar  of  Greece."  Hence,  at  least  as  early  as  the  march  of 
Xerses  into  Greece,  it  was  crossed  by  a  wall,  which,  in  later 
times,  became  a  massive  and  important  fortification,  especially 
in  the  decline  of  the  Roman  Empire.  Justinian  fortified  it 
with  an  hundred  and  fifty  towers.  The  citadel  ruse  two  thons- 
and  feet  above  the  sea-level,  on  a  rock  with  precipitous  sides. 


d 


Ch.  L  ]  THB  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OOBINTUIAKa  185 

In  the  days  of  the  Achaean  league  it  was  called  one  of  the 
**  fetters "  of  Greece.  "  It  runs  out  boldly  from  the  surging 
mountain  chains  of  the  Peninsula,  like  an  outpost  or  sentry, 
guarding  the  approach  from  the  north.  In  days  when  news  was 
transmitted  by  fire-signals,*  we  can  imagine  how  all  the  south- 
ern country  must  have  depended  on  the  watch  upon  the  rock  of 
Corinth  "  (Mahaffy,  '^  Rambles  and  Studies  in  Oreece  "). 

At  its  narrowest  part  the  isthmus  was  crossed  by  a  level  track 
called  the  diolcuSy  over  which  vessels  were  dragged  on  rollers 
from  one  port  to  the  other.  Tliis  was  in  constant  use,  because 
seamen  were  thus  enabled  to  avoid  sailing  round  the  dangerous 
promontory  of  Malea,  the  southern  extremity  of  the  Pelopon- 
nesus. A  canal  was  projected  and  begun  by  Nero,  but  was 
abandoned.  The  common  title  of  the  city  in  the  poets  was 
himarisy  "the  city  qft/ts  two  wa«." 

The  commercial  position  of  Corinth  was,  therefore,  most  im- 
portant, communicating  with  the  eastern  and  the  western  world, 
with  the  north  and  the  south.  The  isthmus  was  one  of  the 
four  principal  points  for  the  celebration  of  the  Grecian  games ; 
and  in  PauPs  day  great  numbers  flocked  to  these  contests  from 
all  parts  of  the  Mediterranean. 

On  the  restoration  of  the  city  by  Julius  Caesar,  both  Greek 
and  Jewish  merchants  settled  in  Corinth  in  such  numbers  as 
probably  to  outnumber  the  Romans.  In  Paul's  time  it  was  dis- 
tinctively a  commercial  centre,  marked  by  wealth  and  luxury. 
"It  was  the  'Vanity  Fair'  of  the  Roman  Empire,  at  once  the 
London  and  the  Paris  of  the  first  century  after  Christ"  (Farrar). 
It  was  conspicuous  for  its  immorality.  To  "corinthianize" 
was  the  term  for  reckless  debauchery.  Juvenal  sarcastically  al- 
ludes to  it  as  "  perfumed  Corinth  ; "  and  Martial  pictures  an 
effeminate  fellow  boasting  of  being  a  Corinthian  citizen.  The 
temple  of  Aphrodite  (Yenus)  employed  a  thousand  ministers. 
Drunkenness  rivalled  licentiousness,  and  Corintliians,  when  in- 
troduced on  the  stage,  were  commonly  represented  as  drunk. 


*  Every  olassical  ttndent  wiU  recaU  the  magnificent  description  of  the 
traDsmissioD  of  the  fire-signal  announcing  the  fall  of  Troj,  in  the  "Agamem- 
non "  of  Aeschylua,  272  eqq. 


186  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  {Cit  I. 

Paul's  impresbioTi  of  its  profligacy  may  be  seen  in  his  descrip- 
tion of  heathenism  in  the  first  of  Romans,  and  in  his  stern 
words  concerning  sensual  sin  in  the  two  Corinthian  Epistles. 
"Politically  Roman,  socially  Greek,  religiously  it  was  Roman, 
Greek,  Oriental,  all  in  one.  When,  therefore,  the  apostle 
preached  to  the  Corinthians,  the  Gospel  spoke  to  the  whole 
world  and  to  the  living  present"  (Edwards). 
Called  to  be  saints.     See  on  Uoni.  i.  7. 

Call  upon  the  name  {eTrtKaXav/j.fvoit  to  Svo/ia).  Oompare 
Rom.  X.  12;  Acts  ii.  21.  The  formula  is  from  the  Septuagint. 
See  Zech.  siii.  9  ;  Gen.  xii.  S  ;  xiii.  i  ;  Ps.  cxv.  17.  It  is  used 
of  worship,  and  here  implies  prayer  to  Christ.  The  first  christ- 
ian prayer  recorded  as  heard  hy  Siiul  of  Tarsus,  was  Stephen's 
prayer  to  Christ,  Acts  vii.  59.  The  name  of  Chriat  occurs  nine 
times  in  the  first  nine  verses  of  this  epistle. 

Theirs  and  ours.  A.  V.  and  Rev.  connect  with  Jestts 
Christ  our  Lord.  Better  with  in  every  place.  Every  place  in 
the  jirovince  where  Christiana  ai-e  is  our  place  also.  The  ex- 
pi-cssion  emphasizes  the  position  of  PanI  as  the  founder  and 
apostolic  head  of  Christianity  in  Corinth  and  in  all  Achaia. 

3.  Grace — peace.  Grace  is  the  Greek  sahitation./wace  the 
Jewish,  Both  in  the  spiritual  sense.  Compare  Num.  vi.  25, 
26.  This  form  of  salutation  is  common  to  all  Paul's  epistles  to 
the  churches.  In  Timothy  and  Titus,  mercy  is  added.  James 
alone  has  the  ordinary  conventional  salutation,  ^aijseti'r^'azf^, 
hail,  greeting. 

4.  I  thank  (e^a/Mor^).  Found  in  the  Gospels,  Acts,  and 
Apocalypse,  but  most  frequently  in  Paul. 

My  God.  Some  very  high  authorities  omit.  The  pronoun 
iinpliea  close  personal  relationship.  Compare  Acts  xxvii.  23 : 
Philip,  i.  3;  iii.  8. 

By  Christ  Jesus  {ev).  Better,  as  Rev.,  in  ;  in  fellowship 
with.     The  element  or  sphere  in  which  the  grace  is  manifested. 

5.  Ve  are  enriched  (en-Xovria-SiiTe).  Rev.,  more  literally, 
"umv  enriched."    Compare  Col.  iii.  16;  and  see  on  Rom.  ii.  4. 


Oil  L]  THB  FIRST  BPISTLB  TO  THB  CORINTHIANS.  187 

Utterance — knowledge  (Xoy^ — ytnoaei).  The  two  wor(l» 
are  fonud  together,  ch.  xii.  8  ;  2  Cor.  xi.  6 ;  viii  7.  For  hnowl^ 
edge^  see  on  Bom.  xi.  33.  VUeranoe^  aptitude  in  speech.  Paal 
gives  thanks  for  speech  as  a  means  of  testifying  for  Christ. 
^'  The  saints  have  never  been  silent  '^  (Pascal). 

6.  Witness  of  Christ  {/jLOfyrvpnov  rou  Xpurrov).  Testimony 
concerning  Christ.  See  on  John  i.  7.  Compare  Acts  i.  8  ;  2 
Tim.  i.  8. 

7.  Come  behind  {iHrrepetaStu).  See  on  Lake  xv.  14,  and 
compare  Rom.  iii.  23.     Contrast  with  toere  enriched. 

Gift  (;^ap^/AaTi).  See  on  Bom.  L  11.  Its  prevailing  sense 
in  this  epistle  is  that  of  special  spiritual  endowments,  snch  as 
tongnes,  prophecy,  etc.    Here  of  spiritnal  blessings  generally. 

Waiting  (am-eicSexofiivovs:).  See  on  Bom.  viii.  19.  Denoting 
assiduotu  waiting.    Dr.  Thayer  compares  the  phrase  vxiit  it 

otit  {i/e). 

Revelation  {airoKoXw^uf).     See  on  Apoc.  i.  1. 

8.  Confirm.    Compare  ver.  6. 

Unto  the  end.  Of  the  present  cieon  or  period.  See  on  end 
of  the  worldj  Matt,  xxviii.  20. 

Blameless  (cof^KkriTovsi),  Used  by  Paul  only.  In  apposi- 
tion with  you.  Bev.,  v/nrepromble.  The  kindred  verb  ^«eaX- 
€01  occurs  only  in  Acts  and  Bomans.  See  on  Bom.  viii.  33.  It 
means  to  accuse  publidy^  but  not  necessarily  before  a  tribunal. 
See  Acts  xxiii.  28,  29 ;  xxvi.  2,  7.  Hence  the  word  here  points 
to  appearance  at  God's  bar. 

9.  Faithful  {irurrhsi).  Emphatic,  and  therefore  first  in  the 
sentence.  See  on  1  John  i.  9  ;  Apoc.  i.  5;  iii.  14.  Compare  2 
Tim.  ii.  13. 

Ye  were  called  (eVXiPirre).     See  on  Bom.  iv.  17. 

Fellowship  (jcoivwfCaif).  See  on  1  John  L  3;  Acts  ii.  42; 
Luke  V.  10. 


188  WORD  STUDIES   IN    THE   NEW   TBSTAMEHT.  fCn.  I 

10.  I  beseech  {TrapoKaXai).  See  on  consolation,  Luke  vi.  ii4. 
The  word  occurs  moie  than   one   liuudred  timea  iii  the  Kew 

Testameiit. 

Divisions  {irxifTftaTd).  See  oa  John  x.  19.  In  classical 
Gri-eek  used  only  of  actual  reiits  in  material.  So  in  Matt.  ix. 
16 ;  Mark  ii.  21.  In  the  sense  of  diacord,  see  John  vii.  43  ;  ix. 
16 ;  X,  19.  Here,yorfKrti,  tor  which  the  classical  word  is  a-ida- 
(;:  dirisioQ  within  the  christian  comiuunit}-.  The  divisions 
of  the  Corinthian  church  arose  on  questions  of  marriage  and 
food  (vii,  3,  5,  12} ;  on  eating  meat  offered  to  idols  (viii.  7 ;  x. 
20);  on  the  comparative  value  of  spiritual  endowiaents,  such 
as  speaking  with  "  tongues "  ^xiv.) ;  on  the  privileges  and  de- 
meanor of  women  in  the  assemblies  for  worsliip  {xi.  5-15);  on 
the  relations  of  the  rich  and  the  poor  in  the  agajxie  or  love- 
feasts  (xi.  17-22) ;  and  on  the  prerogatives  of  the  different 
christian  teachers  (i.  12,  13;  iii.  3-22). 

Perfectly  joined  together  {/caTrjprtaftevoC^.  Rev.,  perfected 
together.  See  on  Matt.  xxi.  16;  Luke  vi.  40 ;  1  Pet.  v.  10. 
Carrying  on  the  metaphor  in  divUioiis.  Not  of  individual  and 
absolute  perfection,  but  of  perfection  in  the  unity  of  the 
Church. 

Mind  (voi).     See  on  Rom.  vii.  23. 

Judgment  (tvw/ii;).  See  on  Apoc.  xvii.  13.  The  distinc- 
tion between  mind  and  judgment  is  not  between  theoretical 
and  practical,  since  vovt  mind,  includes  the  practical  reasun, 
while  yvaifi7}ju(lgmenty  has  a  tlieoretical  aide.  Rather  between 
undemianding  and  qpitiioii.;  pow  regarding  the  thing  from  the 
side  of  the  subject,  yvrnfiaj  from  the  side  of  the  object.  Being 
in  the  same  realm  of  thought,  they  would  judge  questions  ffom 
the  same  christian  stand-point,  and  formulate  their  judgment 
accordingly. 

11.  It  hath  been  declared  (e^Xw-dTj).  Rev.,  gignijied, 
which  is  hardly  strong  enough.  The  word  means  to  make  dear, 
or  manifest  (S^Xos).  Compare  ch.  iii.  13.  It  may  imply  that 
Paul  was  reluctant  to  believe  the  reports,  but  was  convinced  by 
unimpeachable  testimony. 


Ch.  I.]  THB  FIRST  EPI8TLB  TO  THE  CORINTHIANa  189 

Of  the  household  of  Chloe  {r&v  XKify:).  See  on  Bom. 
2vi.  10  for  the  form  of  expression.  The  persons  may  have 
been  slaves  who  liad  come  to  Ephesns  on  business  for  their 
mistress,  or  members  of  her  family.  Chloe  means  tender  verd- 
urcj  and  was  an  epithet  of  Demeter  (Geres),  the  goddess  of 
iigricultnre  and  mral  life.  It  is  uncertain  whether  she  belonged 
to  the  Corinthian  or  to  the  Ephesian  church. 

Contentions  {epiZe;).  Socrates  in  Plato's  ^^  Republic  "  dis- 
tinguishes between  diynUing  (ipO^uv)  and  diacuasing  (fiuLkirf' 
^aSai),  and  identifies  canterUion  {epi^)  with  gainsaying  {am^ 
Xoyia),  "Republic,"  v.,  454.     Compare  Titus  iii.  9. 

12.  Now  this  I  say  (Xeyco  Si  tovto).  A  familiar  classical 
formula :  What  I  mecm  is  this.  Rev.,  Now  this  I  mean.  This 
usually  refers  to  what  follows.  Compare  Gtil.  iii.  17;  Eph. 
iv.  17. 

I  am  of  Paul  and  I  of  Apollos.  The  repeated  Zk  andj  ex- 
presses the  opposition  between  the  respective  parties.  The 
followers  of  Apollos  preferred  his  more  philosophical  and  rhet- 
orical preaching  to  the  simpler  and  more  direct  utterances  of 
Paul.     Others  ranged  themselves  under  the  name  of  Peter. 

Cephas.  Aramaic  for  IHrpo^  Peter.  See  on  John  i.  42. 
It  is  Paul's  usual  name  for  Peter,  Ilerpo^  occurring  only  Qal. 
ii.  7,  8.  Peter  would  be  the  rallying-point  for  the  Judaizing 
Christians,  who  claimed  him  as  the  apostle  of  the  circumcision. 
The  state  of  the  Corinthian  church  offered  the  most  favorable 
ground  for  Paul's  Jewish-Christian  adversaries,  who  took  ad- 
vantage of  the  reaction  created  by  the  looser  views  and  practice 
of  Gentile  Christians,  and  by  the  differences  of  opinion  on  im- 
portant questions,  to  press  the  necessity  of  legal  r^ulation,  and 
of  ceremonial  observances  in  non-essentials. 

Of  Christ.  Many  modern  authorities  hold  that  Paul  thus 
designates  a  fourth  and  quite  distinct  party.  This  view  rests 
mainly  on  the  form  of  statement  in  this  verse,  and  has  no  sup- 
port in  the  epistle.  The  peculiar  characteristics  of  this  party, 
if  it  were  such,  can  only  be  conjectured.  It  seems  more  prob- 
able that  those  who  were  ^'of  Christ"  belonged  to  the  party  of 


190 


WOftD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


ICr.1 


Peter;  that  they  were  native  Jews,  coming  from  abroad  with 
letters  of  recommendation  to  Cormth,  representing  tliemselvcs 
as  ministers  and  apostles  of  Oirtst,  and  using  Ilia  name  as  tlit? 
watchword  under  whidi  they  conld  most  snccesefiiMy  prosecnte 
their  opposition  to  Paul  and  llie  gospel  which  lie  preached. 
The  allusion  in  this  verse  would  therefore  link  itself  with  those 
in  the  tenth  and  eleventh  chapters  of  the  second  epistle.* 

13.  Is  Christ  divided  ?  (fiefUpurrtu  6  Xpitrro^).  Some  of 
the  best  expositors  render  as  an  assertion.  Christ  has  been  di- 
vided by  your  corUroveraies.  lie  is  broken  np  into  different 
party  Christs.  This  gives  a  perfectly  good  and  forcible  sense, 
and  is  favored  by  tlie  absence  of  the  interrogative  particle  fiif, 
which  introduces  the  next  clause.t  Divided:  so  portioned  up 
that  one  party  may  claim  Him  more  than  another,  Cfirist  has 
the  article.     See  on  Matt.  i.  1. 

Was  Paul  crucified  for  you?  (/*7  HavKot  i<rTavpto5^  inrep 
vfi^v).  A  negative  answer  is  implied.  Paid  snrely  wo*  not, 
etc.  For  is  virip  on  behalf  of  ,  not  trepL  on  acoouni  of,  ss  some 
texts. 

In  the  name  (£i;  to  Svopa).  Rev.,  correctly,  into  the  name. 
See  on  Matt,  xxviii.  19.  Of  Paul  as  the  name  of  him  whom 
you  were  to  confess.  The  order  of  the  original  is ;  Was  it  into 
the  Tiame  of  Paul  that  ye  toere  baptised  f 

15.  1  had  baptized  {effdirrura).  The  correct  reading  is 
i^atrrla^^e  ye  were  baptised.  So  Rev.  Paul's  commission 
contains  no  mention  of  baptism.  Compare  Acta  ix,  15,  with 
Matt,  xxviii.  15.  From  his  peculiar  position  as  the  inangurator 
of  a  second  epoch  of  Christianity,  many  would  be  tempted  to 


*  On  this  very  oomplicAted  snd  difficult  sabject  the  student  maj  profltably 
consult  WeiM,  " Introduotlou  lo  ILe  New  Testaroent  i"  SoUaff,  ■■History  of 
tlie  Apostolic  Ohurch  ;"  Hejer's  Introduction  aud  note  on  this  pusagp  ;  nud 
Oodet*B  note  on  the  uuue. 

fSo  Heyer.  Stanioj.  Westcott  and  Hort  The  intem^ative  la  maintained 
by  De  Wette,  Alford.  Elllcott,  Edvards.  <;odet.  Aa  to  tlio  inl«rrogatiTR  par- 
ticle, these  latter  refer  to  1  Cor.  x.  3Q.  and  2  Cor.  KI.  2.  as  parallel,  and  nrge 
that  the  iih  introdaces  a  new  form  of  iutcrrogiUou  reapectiug  a  new  individual 
—Paul. 


Cu.  I.]  THB  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIAN&  191 

regard  him  as  the  real  founder  of  the  Church,  and  to  boast  of 
having  been  baptized  into  his  name.  ''No  outward  initiation 
of  converts  entered  into  his  ministry  "  (Edwards). 

16.  And  I  baptized  also.  Another  exceptional  case  oc- 
curs to  him  which  he  conscientiously  adds.  The  Bi  and  has  a 
slightly  corrective  force. 

17.  Should  be  made  of  none  effect  {xepfoSy).  Lit.,  emp- 
tied. Bev.,  made  void  Compare  is  made  voidj  Rom.  iv.  14, 
and  the  kindred  adjective  tcevov,  tca^  vain,  ch.  xv.  14.  The 
nucleus  of  the  apostolic  preaching  was  a  fact — Christ  crucified. 
To  preach  it  as  a  pliilosophic  system  would  be  to  empty  it  of 
its  saving  power,  a  truth  which  finds  abundant  and  lamentable 
illustration  in  the  history  of  the  Church. 

18.  The  word  of  the  cross  (o  Xoyty:  6  rov  oTovpov).  Lit., 
the  wordj  that^  namely ^  of  the  cross.  The  second  article  is  de- 
finitive and  emphatic.  The  word  of  which  tlie  substance  and 
purport  is  the  cross. 

To  them  that  perish  {Tol^i  airoKKviikvoisi).  Lit.,  that  are 
perishing.  So  Rev.  The  present  participle  denotes  process : 
they  who  are  on  tfie  way  to  destruction.     Compare  2  Cor.  ii.  15. 

Foolishness  (jia^pia).  Only  in  this  epistle.  See  on  have 
lost  his  savor y  Matt.  v.  13. 

Which  are  saved  {toU  aa^^ofievois:).  Rev.,  being  saved:  in 
process  of  salvation. 

19.  I  will  destroy,  etc.  Cited  literally  from  the  Septua- 
gint,  Isa.  xxix.  14,  except  that  the  Septuagint  has  Kpxn^  I  will 
conceal^  instead  of  /  will  reject.  The  Hebrew  reads :  "  The 
wisdom  of  its  (Judah's)  wise  men  shall  perish,  and  the  sagacity 
of  its  sagacious  men  shall  hide  itself." 

Wisdom  —  prudence  {ao<l>lav — avvetrw).  The  two  words 
are  often  found  together,  as  Exod.  xxxi.  3 ;  Deut.  iv.  6 ;  Col.  i. 
9.  Compare  <to<\>o\  koX  avv€Tol  vnse  and  prudent^  Matt  xi.  25. 
For  the  distinction,  see,  as  to  ao<i>la  wisdom^  on  Rom.  xi.  33 ; 
as  to  avveai^ prudence^  on  Mark  xii.  33 ;  Luke  ii.  47.  Wisdom 
is  the  more  general;  mental  excellence  in  its  highest  and  full- 


1&2  WORD  aXUDIBB  IN  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Co.  L 

est  BenEe,     Prudence  is  tiie  special  application  of  wiBdoiii ;  its 
ci'iticul  adjuBtiiieiit  to  particular  cages. 

Will  bring  to  nothing  (a3eT?i(rw).  See  on  Luke  vii.  30. 
Ox\^m9k\^-,to  malu  dli&tUibliehedKa^eTQv)  soiuetliiiig  wliicli  is 
estahliahed  or  j}rescrihed  {^erovj.  Hence  to  nullify,  make  void, 
fni8tratf,  and,  in  a  milder  senBo,  to  despise  or  reject,  as  Gal.  ii. 
21,  The  stronger  eenae  ia  better  here,  so  that  Rev.,  reject  is 
not  an  improvement  on  the  A.  V.  The  American  reviEere 
render:  And  the  dlscertiinent  of  the  disceminr/  will  I  hrimj  to 
nought. 

20.  Scribe  (ypafiftaTeu^).  Always  in  the  New  Testament  in 
the  Jewish  sense,  an  interpreter  of  the  law,  except  Acts  six.  33, 
ifie  iown-clerlc. 

Disputar  {av^tj-rqTrf'i).  Only  here.  Compare  the  kindred 
verb  £ru£j;T€w  to  question  with,  Mark  i.  37;  Luke  xxii.  23;  Acts 
vi.  9  ;  and  truf^Tijfftf  disputation.  Acts  xv.  2,  7.  Referring  to 
Grecian  sophistical  reaaonere,  while  scribe  refers  to  rabbinical 
liair- splitters. 

World  (atwiww).  See  on  John  i.  9.  More  correctly,  age  or 
j)erfod. 

Made  foolish  {einapavev).  Proved  it  to  be  practical  folly; 
stupefied  it.  Coiripai-e  Uom.  i.  22.  Possibly  with  a  latent  sug- 
gestion of  the  judicial  power  of  God  to  make  it  foolish. 

21.  After  that  {4wetS/}).     Rev.,  correctly,  seeiu;/  that. 

By  wisdom    (Sia  t^9  eroifiia'i).      Better,  as  Rev.,  giving  the 

force  of  the  article,  "  through  its  wisdom." 

Preaching  {lojpvyfuirot).  Not  the  act,  but  the  substance  of 
preaching.     Compare  ver.  23. 

To  save  {ama-ai).  The  word  was  technically  used  in  the 
Old  Testament  of  deliverance  at  the  Messiah's  coming ;  of 
salvation  from  the  penalties  of  the  messianic  judgment,  or  from 
the  evils  which  obstruct  the  meBsianic  deliverance.  See  Joel 
ii.  32 ;  Matt.  i.  21 ;  compare  Acts  ii.  40.  Paul  uses  it  in  the 
«tliical  sense,  to  make  one  a  partaker  of  the  salvation  which  is 


Cu.  L]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLB  TO  THE  CORINTHIANa  193 

tkrodgh  Christ.  Edwards  calls  attention  to  the  foregleam  of 
this  christian  conception  of  the  word  in  the  closing  paragraph 
of  Plato's  '^  Kepublic : ''  ^^  And  thus,  Glancon,  the  tale  has  been 
fiaved,  and  has  not  perished,  and  will  8at)e  (aaHre^ep)  ns  if  we  are 
obedient  to  the  word  spoken,  and  we  shall  pass  safely  over  the 
river  of  forgetfulness  and  our  soul  will  not  be  defiled." 

22.  The  Jews.  Omit  the  article.  Among  the  Jews  many 
had  become  Christians. 

Require  {oItovo-ip).  Rev.,  ask.  But  it  is  questionable 
whether  the  A.  Y.  is  not  preferable.  The  word  sometimes 
takes  the  sense  of  demand^  as  Luke  xii.  48 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  15 ;  and 
this  sense  accords  well  with  the  haughty  attitude  of  the  Jews, 
demanding  of  all  apostolic  religions  their  proofs  and  credentials. 
See  Matt.  xii.  38 ;  xvi.  1 ;  John  vi.  30. 

Greeks.    See  on  Acts  vi.  1. 

Seek  after  {^rirovatp).  Appropriate  to  the  Greeks  in  con- 
trast with  the  Jews.  The  Jews  claimed  to  jpoasesa  the  truth : 
the  Greeks  were  aeekers^  speculators  (compare  Acts  xvii.  23) 
after  what  they  called  by  the  general  name  of  vnadom. 

2^  Christ  crucified  {Xpurrop  iaravpeofjUvov).  Not  the  crucified 
Christy  but  Christ  as  crucified^  not  a  sign-shower  nor  a  philo- 
sopher ;  and  consequently  a  scandal  to  the  Jew  and  folly  to 
the  Gentile. 

Unto  the  Greeks  i^E>Xf\aC).  The  correct  reading  is  t^v^cw 
to  the  Gentiles,  So  Rev.  Though  "'EAA.iyj^?  Cheeks^  is  equiva- 
lent to  OentUes  in  the  New  Testament  when  used  in  antithesis 
to  JewSy  yet  in  this  passage  Paul  seems  to  have  in  mind  the 
Greeks  as  representing  gentile  wisdom  and  culture. 

25.  The  foolishness  {to  fimpov).  Lit.,  the  foolish  thing. 
More  specific  than  the  abstract  fjuopla  foolishness  (vv.  18,  21), 
and  pointing  to  the  fact  of  Christ  crucified. 

26.  Calling  {KXriaiv).  Not  condition  of  life,  but  your  calling 
hy  Ood ;  not  depending  on  wisdom,  power,  or  lineage. 

Noble  (evyeveU).    Of  high  birth.     So  originally,  though  as 
Greece  became  democratic,  it  came  to  signify  merely  the  better 
Vol.  m.— 18 


194 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


Eort  of  freemen.  Flato  applies  it  to  the  children  of  native 
Athenians  ("Menexeuus,"  237).  Aeechjlue  makes  Ctjtaeiu- 
iiemra  saj^  to  tlie  cuptive  Cassandra  that  if  slavery  niuxt  befall 
one  there  is  an  advantage  in  liaviiig  masters  of  ancient  family 
property  instead  of  those  who  have  become  unexpectedly  rieli 
("Agamemnon,"  1010). 

37.  Hath  chosen.  The  threefold  repetition  of  the  woid 
emphasizes  the  deliberate  and  free  action  of  God's  gracious 
will. 

28.  Base  (u7«^).  Of  no  family.  The  reverse  of  evyevelv 
noble. 

Despised  {e^ovdevi)/iiva),  LiL,  set  at  nougfU.  Not  merely 
despised,  but  expressly  branded  with  contempt.  See  Luke 
xxiii.  11. 

30.  Wisdom  and  righteousness  and  sanctifi cation  and 
redemption.  The  last  three  terms  illustrate  and  exemplify 
the  first —UJWi^tww.  The  wisdom  impersonated  in  Christ  mani- 
fests itself  as  righteousness,  sanctitication,  and  redemption.* 
For  hiKotoawTf  righteousness,  see  on  Rom.  i.  17.  For  ar/icurfim 
nanctification,  on  Kom.  vi.  19.  For  airoKvrptiMTK  redevipOoriy 
Rom.  iii.  24. 

31.  He  that  glorieth,  etc.  From  Jer.  ix.  23,  24,  abridged 
after  the  Septuagint 


CHAPTER  II. 


1.  With  excellency  (koS'  vn-epo-)(i)v).  Lit,,  according  to  ele- 
vaiion  or  superiority.  The  noun  occurs  only  here  and  1  Tiiil 
ii.  3,  where  it  is  rendered  authority.  Tiie  phrase  expresses  the 
mode  of  his  preaching.  For  similar  adverbial  phrases,  see  koS^" 
Imep^oKiiu  exceedlmjly  or  according  to  excess,  Kom.  viii,  13; 
KOT^  KpaTiK  mighilh/  or  according  to  might,  Acts  xix.  20.  Con- 
strue with  declaring. 


Ch.  IL]         the  first  EPISTLB  to  the  CORINTHIANS.  195 

Declaring  (tcarajyiXXnp).  Rev.,  jn'odaiming.  See  oq  1 
John  i.  5;  Acts  xvii.  23.  Anthoritative  proclamation  is  im- 
plied.    The  word  is  found  only  in  the  Acts  and  in  Panl. 

Testimony  (jAOfyrvpiop).  Some  of  the  best  texts  read  /auctti^. 
u)v  mystery.     So  Rev.     See  on  Rom.  xi.  25. 

2.  Crucified.  Emphatic.  That  which  woald  be  the  mam 
stnmbling-block  to  the  Corinthians  he  woold  emphasize. 

3.  I  was  with  you  {iyepofirfv  vpo^  vfia^).  Itoas  is  rather  / 
hecame.  I  fell  into  a  state  of  weakness,  etc.,  after  I  had  come 
among  jou.  With  you,  i.e.,  in  intercourse  with.  See  on  with 
Oody  John  i.  1.  The  implication  is  that  his  condition  grew  out 
of  the  circumstances  in  which  he  found  himself  in  Corinth. 

4.  In  demonstration  (h  avoM^i).  Only  here  in  the  New 
Testament.     Lit,  a  ehowing  forth. 

6.  Wisdom*  Emphatic.  Lest  his  depreciation  of  worldly 
wisdom  should  expose  him  and  his  companions  to  the  charge  of 
not  preaching  wisdom  at  all,  he  shows  that  they  do  preach  wis- 
dom, though  not  of  a  worldly  kind,  among  matured  Christians. 

Them  that  are  perfect  {jol^  reXc/oi?).  American  Rev., 
them  that  are  full-grown.  Paul's  term  for  matured  Christians. 
See  Eph.  iv.  13,  where  a  perfect  (reXcioy)  man  is  contrasted 
with  children  {vqirioi,  ver.  14).  So  1  Cor.  xiv.  20 :  "  Li  malice 
children^  in  understanding  m^n  Qit.j perfect) \^^  Philip,  iii.  15. 
'^  This  wisdom  is  the  Christian  analogue  to  philosophy  in  the 
ordinary  sense  of  the  word  "  (Meyer),  and  ^q  perfect  to  whom 
lie  delivered  it  would  recognize  it  as  such. 

That  come  to  nought  (KarafyyovfihHov).  The  A.  Y.  states  a 
general  proposition,  but  the  Greek  present  participle  a  fact  in 
process  of  accomplishment:  which  are  coming  to  not^ht.  So 
Rev. 

7.  In  a  mystery.  Connect  with  we  speak.  See  on  Matt, 
xiii.  11;  Rom.  xi.  25.*    The  in  {hi)  has  a  kind  of  instrumental 


*  There  Is  a  pleasant  disouasion  of  the  word  in  Vaughan's  *^  Houra  with  thu 
Hjitics/*  oh.  iii. 


196  WORD  STUDIB8  IN   THE  NEW    TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IL 

force:  hy  mearit  of  a  mystery;  i.e.,  by  delivering  a  doctrine 
hidden  from  the  human  understanding  and  revealed  to  iis  by 
God. 

8.  Lord  of  glory.  The  Lord  whoBe  attribute  is  glory.  Com* 
pare  Ps.  xxix.  1 ;  Acts  vii.  2;  Epli.  i.  17;  Jas.  ii.  1, 

9.  Eye  hath  not  seen,  etc.  From  laa.  Ixiv.  +,  freely  rend- 
ered by  Septnagint.  The  Hebrew  reads:  "  From  of  old  men 
liave  not  heard,  not  perceived  with  the  eai',  eye  has  not  Been  a 
God  beside  Thee  who  does  (gloriously)  for  him  who  waite  on 
Him."  Septnagint,  "From  of  old  we  have  not  heard,  nor  have 
our  eyes  eeen  a  God  beside  Thee,  and  Thy  works  which  Thou 
wilt  do  for  those  who  wait  for  mercy."  Paul  takeg  only  the 
general  idea  from  the  Old-Testament  passage.  The  words  are 
not  to  be  limited  to  future  blessings  in  iieaveu.  They  are  true 
of  the  present. 

Have  entered  {eweQi}).  Lit,,  wsnt  up.  See  on  Acts  vii.  23. 
Compare  Dan.  ii.  29,  Sept. 

Heart  {icap&iav).     See  on  Rom.  i.  21. 

10.  Searcheth  (epewa).  See  on  John  v.  39.  !Not,  searcheth 
in  order  to  discover;  but  of  the  ever  active,  accurate,  careful 
sounding  of  the  depths  of  God  by  the  Spirit. 

11.  Spirit  {-jnievfuij.  See  on  Kom.  viii,  i.  The  things  of 
God  can  bo  recognized  only  by  the  highest  element  of  the 
human  personality.  They  have  not  entered  into  iAe  /leart 
{KapSia.  see  on  liom.  i.  21),  but  into  l/ie  spirit,  which  is  the 
fiighest  and  principal  point  of  contact  with  the  Spirit  of  God. 

12.  The  spirit  of  the  world  (to  -n-vevfia  ^oO  xotr/iou).  For 
this  use  of  trvevfta,  see  on  Rom.  viii.  4,  under  7.  KiitrfiiK  loarld, 
is  used  with  the  ethical  sense.  See  on  John  i.  9,  under  4,  e. 
The  phrase  means  the  principle  of  evil  which  animates  the  un- 
regenerate  world;  not  the  personal  spirit  of  evil  or  Satan, since 
Paul  does  not  use  wvevfia  spirit,  elsewhere  in  the  personal  sense 
of  an  evil  spirit.     See  note  on  Eph.  ii.  2. 

Of  God  (en:  Tofi  dEoS).  "LM^froin.  God :  proceeding  forth 
from  Him.    "God  in  us  reveals  God  in  our  nature"  (Edwards). 


Ch.  II.]         THK  FIRST  EPI8TLB  TO  THE  CORINTHIAN&  197 

13.  Not  in  the  words  which  man's  wisdom  teacheth. 
Lit.,  not  in  the  taught  words  of  humcm  wisdom.  Compare 
Plato :  ^'  Through  love  all  the  intercourse  and  speech  of  God 
with  man,  whether  awake  or  asleep,  is  carried  on.  The  wisdom 
which  understands  this  is  spiritual ;  all  otlier  wisdom,  such  as 
that  of  arts  and  handicrafts,  is  mean  and  vulgar "  ('^  Sympos- 
ium," 203). 

Which  the  Spirit  teacheth  {jh  hiZodcroiii  irvevfiaTosi).  Lit, 
in  the  ta/ught  {words)  of  the  Spirit.  Taught;  not  mechanically 
uttered,  but  communicated  by  a  living  Spirit 

Comparing  spiritual  things  with  spiritual  {wevfuiTucov; 
irvevfiATuck  avyteplvavresi).  Notice  the  paronomasia.  See  on 
Bom.  i.  29,  31.  The  dispute  on  this  verse  arises  over  the 
meanings  of  avy/epiiwpre^,  A.  V.,  comparingj  and  irvevfutrucoU 
spiritual.  As  to  the  latter,  whether  the  reference  is  to  spiritual 
men^  things^  or  words  ;  as  to  the  former,  whether  the  meaning 
is  adapting^  interpreting^  proving^  or  comparing.  The  princi- 
pal interpretations  are :  adapting  spirittud  words  to  spiritual 
things  ;  adapting  spiritual  things  to  spiritual  men  ;  interpret- 
i7ig  spiritual  things  to  spiritual  men/  interpreting  spiritual 
things  by  spiritual  words.  Svy/eplvovre^  occurs  only  here  and 
2  Cor.  X.  12,  where  the  meaning  is  clearly  compare.  In  classic- 
al Greek  the  original  meaning  is  to  compoundj  and  later,  to 
compare^  as  in  Aristotle  and  Plutarch,  and  to  interpret,  used 
of  dreams,  and  mainly  in  Septuagint  See  Gen.  xl.  8.  The 
most  satisfactory  interpretation  is  comiining  spiritiud  things 
with  spiritiud  words.  After  speaking  of  spiritual  things  (vv.  11, 
12,  13),  Paul  now  speaks  of  the  forms  in  which  they  are  con- 
veyed— spiritual  forms  or  words  answering  to  spiritual  matters, 
and  says,  we  combine  spiritual  things  with  spiritual  forms  of 
expression.  This  would  not  be  the  case  if  we  uttered  the  rev- 
elations of  the  Spirit  in  the  speech  of  human  wisdom.* 

14.  The  natural  man  {'^^vx^o^  apSponro^).  See  on  Bom. 
xi.  4,  on  the  distinction  between  y^v^n  soul,  life^  and  irvevfjta 

*So  Ellicott,  Brown,  Mejer,  Thajer,  De  Wette,  Alford,  and  Ameriomn 
Rev.  Edwards  holds  bj  the  A.  Y.  Oodei,  **  adapting  spiritual  teachings  to 
spiritaal  men.'* 


198  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  (Ca  O. 

spirit.  The  contrast  ie  between  a  innn  governed  by  tiie  divine 
Spirit  and  one  from  whom  that  Spirit  is  abeent.  But  ^i;^'*^' 
natural,  is  not  equivalent  to  aapKuca^  Jleshly.  Paul  is  speaking 
of  natural  as  contrasted  witii  spiritual  cognition  applied  to 
spiritual  tnith,  and  therefore  of  the  ^u;^i;  soid,  as  the  orgim  of 
human  cognition,  contrasted  with  the  irvevfia^rit,&»i\\e  organ 
of  spiritual  cognition.  The  man,  tlierefore,  whose  cognition  of 
truth  depends  sole);  upon  his  natural  insight  is  -^v^iKOf;  nat- 
ural, as  contrasted  with  the  spiritual  man  (n-fcu/^rucof)  to 
whom  divine  insight  is  imparted.  In  other  words,  the  organ 
employed  in  the  apprehension  of  spiritual  truth  characterizes 
the  man.  Paul  therefore  "characterizes  the  man  who  is  not 
yet  capable  of  understanding  divine  wisdom  as  ^rv^'*"''  ^•^■^  ^ 
one  who  possesses  in  his  -^^^  soul,  simply  the  organ  of  purely 
human  cognition,  but  has  not  yet  the  oi^an  of  religious  cogni- 
tion in  the  irveO/ui  npini"  (Dickson).*  It  is  jwrhaps  impoBsible 
to  find  an  English  word  which  will  accurately  render  i^v)^ik6s. 
Psychic  is  simply  the  Greek  transcribed.  We  can  do  no  better 
than  hold  by  the  A.  V.  naiural.\ 

Receiveth  not  {ov  Ux^rai).  Not,  does  not  understand,  but 
iloes  not  admit  them  into  his  lieart ;  tlins,  according  to  New- 
Testament  usage,  when  the  word  is  nsed  in  connection  with 
teaching.  See  Luke  viii.  13;  Acts  viii,  11;  xi.  1;  1  Theea.  i. 
6;  Jas.  i.  21. 

Are  foolishness.     Not  merely  seem,.     To  him  they  are. 

Neither  can  he  know  (ncal  ov  Suvarai  yimivai).     Rev.,  more 

str'ititly,  aiid  he  can7tot  know.  "It  is  an  utter  perversion  of 
such  statements  to  maintain  that  there  is  in  the  natural  man 
any  organic,  constitutional  incapacity  of  spiritual  {terception  re- 
quiring to  be  created  in  tlieni  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  ,  .  .  Tlie 
uniform  teaching  of  Scripture  is  that  tiie  change  effected  in  ro- 
generation  is  a  purely  moral  and  spiritual  one  "  (Brown). 


*  Sne  Ibe  »bt«  Krtiole  bj  Jobn  HHde,  "  A  S»w  TaBtuoent  AuUthaels." 
"Expoaitor."  lint  BsrieH,  t 


f  See  TrBiicli,  "  SynonytnB,"  p.  2 


Ch.  II.}         THB  FIRST  EPISTLB  TO  THE  CORINTHIANa.  199 

Discerned  {avatepCyerai).  Bev.,  judged.  Used  only  by 
Lnke  and  Paul,  and  by  the  latter  in  this  epistle  only.  By 
Lnke,  mostly  of  judicial  examination :  Lnke  xxiii.  14;  Acts  iv. 
9 ;  xii.  19  ;  xxiv.  8  ;  xxviii.  18.  Of  examining  the  Scriptures, 
Acts  xvii.  11,  but  with  the  sense  of  j)roving  or  coming  to  a 
jiuigment  on.  The  fundamental  idea  of  the  word  is  exarnvnO' 
tion,  acnUiny,  following  up  {avd)  a  series  of  objects  or  particu- 
lars in  order  to  distiyiguiah  {/eplvcai).  This  is  its  almost  universal 
meaning  in  classical  Oreek.  At  Athens  it  was  used  technically 
in  two  senses :  to  examine  magistrates  with  a  view  to  proving 
their  qualifications ;  and  to  examine  j)ereona  concerned  in  a  suit, 
so  as  to  prepare  the  matter  for  trial,  as  a  grand  jury.  The 
mesixAag  judged  is,  at  best,  inferential,  and  the  Rev.  inserts  ex- 
amined in  the  margin.  Bishop  Lightf oot  says :  '^  ^Avamplv^w  is 
neither  to  judge  nor  to  diecem  ;  but  to  eoMminCj  inveetigatej  in- 
quire into,  question,  as  it  is  rightly  translated,  1  Cor.  ix.  3 ;  X. 
25,  27.  The  apostle  condemns  all  these  impatient  human  ^prcM- 
judicia  which  anticipate  the  final  judgment,  reserving  his  case 
for  the  great  tribunal,  where  at  length  all  the  evidence  will  be 
forthcoming  and  a  satisfactory  verdict  can  be  given.  Mean- 
while the  process  of  gathering  evidence  has  begun ;  an  avdxpia'^ 
investigation  is  indeed  being  held,  not,  however,  by  these  self-ap- 
pointed magistrates,  but  by  one  who  alone  has  the  authority  to 
institute  the  inquiry,  and  the  ability  to  sift  the  facts  "  (^^  On  a 
Fresh  Bevision  of  the  New  Testament ").  See,  further,  on  oh. 
iv.  3,  4. 

16.  Mind  (youv).  See  on  Bem.  vii.  23.  The  understanding 
of  the  Lord.  The  divine  counsels  or  purposes  which  are  the 
results  of  the  divine  thought.     See  on  Boul  xL  84. 

Instruct  (ovfAfiifiwm).    See  on  jnwvngy  Acts  ix.  23. 


I 


WORD  STUDIES  LN   THE  NEW   TB8TA1IENT. 


CHAPTER  III. 

1.  Carnal  (aapKivovi).  Made  of  flesh.  See  on  Kom.  vii 
14,  and  oajteah,  Koiu.  vii.  5. 

Babes  {ytjirloK).  From  trtj  not,  aad  evo^  a  v)Or<l.  Strictlj, 
non-speakers.  Compare  the  Latin  infant.  Strongly  contrasted 
with  j>erfeci;  see  on  cL.  ii.  6. 

2.  I  fed  {twoTura).  LiL,  /  gave  you  to  drini:.  An  inetance 
of  the  rhetorical  figure  seit^ma,  by  which  one  verb  is  attached 
to  two  nouns,  of  which  it  only  suits  the  meaning  of  one,  but 
siiggesta  a  verb  snitable  for  the  other.  Tliua  "gave  to  drink" 
is  applied  to  m^at  as  well  as  to  7iiUk.  For  another  illustration 
see  hindering  (A.  V.  and  'Rjsv.,  forbidding),  1  Tim.  iv.  3. 

5.  Carnal  {aapKiKol).  Here  the  milder  word  is  nsed  (see 
ver,  1),  having  the  nature  of  jleah.  In  ver.  1.  Puul  would  eay 
that  he  was  compelled  to  address  the  Corinthians  as  unspiritnal, 
mad£  of  flesh.  Here  he  eays  that  though  they  liave  received  tlie 
Spirit  in  some  measnre,  they  are  yet  under  the  influence  of  the 
flesh. 

i.  Another  {h-epv;).  See  on  Matt.  vi.  24.  Not  merely 
another,  numerically,  but  another  of  different  affinities  and  pre- 
possessioDS. 

Carnal.  The  best  texts  read  av^pawot  men.  Are  ye  nut 
mere  men? 

tf>  But  ministers.  Omit  hut,  and  place  the  interrogations  after 
Paul  and  ApoUos,  respectively,  as  Rev.  For  ministers  see  on 
Matt  XX,  26 ;  Mark  ix.  35.     Servants,  not  he<ids  of  parties. 

6.  Planted  —  watered — ^ave  the  increase  (e^vrevcra  — 
etroTiaev — i]v^avev).  The  first  two  verbs  are  in  the  aoriat  tense, 
marking  definite  acts;  the  third  is  in  the  imperfect,  marking 
the  continued  gracious  agency  of  Ood,  and  possibly  the  simul- 
taneousness  of  His  work  with  that  of  the  two  preachers.     God 


Cb.  IIL  ]       THE  FIBST  BPISTLB  TO  THB  CORINTHIAN&  201 

toas  giving  the  increase  while  we  planted  and  watered.  There 
is  a  parallel  in  the  simultaneouB  work  of  Satan  with  that  of  the 
preachers  of  the  word  as  indicated  bj  the  oontinuous  presents 
in  Matt.  xiii.  19.     See  note  there. 

7.  Anything.  The  devoted  Angelique  Amauld,  of  Port 
Koyal,  when  her  sister  condoled  with  her  on  the  absence  of  her 
confessor,  Singlier,  replied :  ^^  I  have  never  pat  a  man  in  God's 
place.  Ue  can  have  only  what  Gk>d  gives  him ;  and  Gk)d  gives 
him  something  for  us  onlj  when  it  is  His  will  that  we  shoald 
receive  it  through  him." 

9.  God's.  In  this  and  the  two  following  claases,  Oad  is  em- 
phatic.    ^*  It  is  of  God  that  ye  are  the  fellow-workers." 

Husbandry  (ywpyiov).  Bev.,  in  margin,  tilled  land.  Only 
here  in  the  New  Testament  Bengel  says :  '^  EmbraeiDg  field, 
garden,  and  vineyard." 

Building  {oUoBofjLif).  Paul's  metaphors  are  drawn  from  the 
works  and  customs  of  men  rather  than  from  the  works  of  nat- 
ure. "  In  his  epistles,"  says  Archdeacon  Farrar,  "  we  only 
breathe  the  air  of  cities  and  synagogues."  The  abundance  of 
architectural  metaphors  is  not  strange  in  view  of  the  magnifi- 
cent temples  and  public  buildings  which  he  was  continually 
seeing  at  Antioch,  Athens,  Corinth,  and  Ephesus.  His  frequent 
use  of  to  build  and  building  in  a  moral  and  spiritual  sense  is 
noteworthy.  In  this  sense  the  two  words  oUoBofUm  and  oUoSo' 
/Ai;  occur  twenty-six  times  in  the  Kew  Testament,  and  in  all 
but  two  cases  in  Paul's  writings.*  Peter  uses  build  in  a  similar 
sense ;  1  Pet.  ii.  5.  See  edify,  edification,  build,  Acts  ix.  31 ; 
Rom.  XV.  20 ;  1  Cor.  viii.  1 ;  1  Cor.  viii.  10,  where  emboldened  i^ 
literally  buiU  up,  and  is  used  ironically.  Also  Eom.  xiv.  19 ;  xv. 
2 ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  3  ;  Eph.  ii.  21,  etc.  It  is  worth  noting  that  in  the 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  while  the  same  metaphor  occurs,  differ- 
ent words  are  used.  Thus  in  ch.  iii.  3,  4,  buiU,  builded,  represent 
tcaToa-icevd^to  to  prepare.  In  ch.  xi.  10,  r^yyvnfi  artifi^cer,  and 
Sfffiiovpyb^,  lit,  a  workman  for  the  public :  A.  V.,  builder  and 

*  Dean  How8on*8  sUtement,  in  his  '*  MeUphon  of  81  Plkiil,'*  p.  24,  if  care- 
lew  And  open  to  misapprehension. 


202  WORD  8TDDIK3  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT,  (Cu  lit 

maker.  This  fact  has  a  bearing  on  the  authorsiiip  of  the 
epistle.  Id  earlier  English,  edify  was  used  for  buUd  in  the  lit- 
eral sense.  Thus  Piers  Ploughman :  "  I  shal  overturne  thia 
temple  and  a-down  throwe  it,  and  in  thre  daiee  after  edifie  it 
newe."  See  on  Acts  xx.  32.  In  the  double  metaphor  of  the 
field  and  the  building,  the  former  f  iirnishes  the  mould  of  Paul's 
thought  in  vv.  6-9,  and  the  latter  in  vv,  10-17.  Edwards  i-e- 
marks  that  the  field  describee  llie  raw  material  on  which  God 
works,  t/ie  house  the  result  of  the  work. 

10.  Grace.  The  special  endowment  for  his  apostolic  work. 
Compare  Roin.  i.  5,  grace  aud  apoaUesAip :  Rom.  xii.  3,6; 
Eph.  iii.  7,  8. 

Wise  (<ro^t).     Skilful.     See  on  Jas.  iii.  13. 

Master-builder  {apj^iTiicrtev).  Only  liere  in  the  New  Test- 
ament. "  The  architect  does  not  work  himself,  but  is  the  ruler 
of  workmen  "  (Plato,  "  Statesman,"  259). 

Foundation.  The  importance  which  Paul  attached  to  the 
foundation  waa  figured  hy  the  care  employed  in  laying  the 
foundation  of  the  great  Ephesian  temple.  "  To  avoid  the  dan- 
ger of  earthquakes,  its  foundations  were  built  at  vast  cost  on 
artificial  foundations  of  skin  sod  charcoal  laid  over  the  marsh  " 
(Farrar). 

12.  If  any  man  build,  etc.  It  is  important  to  have  a  clear 
conception  of  Paul's  figure,  which  must  be  taken  in  a  large  and 
free  sense,  and  not  pressed  into  detail,  lie  speaks  of  the  body 
of  truth  and  doctrine  which  different  teachers  may  erect  on  the 
one  true  foundation — Jesus  Christ.  This  body  is  the  building. 
The  reference  is  to  a  tingle  building,  as  is  shown  by  ver.  16; 
not  to  a  dty  with  different  buildings  of  different  materials. 
The  figure  of  Christ  as  the  foundation  of  a  city  does  not  occur 
in  the  New  Testament,  To  this  structure  different  teachers 
{builders)  bring  contributions  of  more  or  less  value,  represented 
by  gold,  wood,  hay,  etc.  These  are  not  intended  to  represent 
specific  forms  of  truth  or  of  error,  but  none  of  them  are  to  be 
regarded  as  anti-Christian,  which  would  be  inconsistent  wicli 
building  00  the  true  foundation.    It  is  plainly  implied  that 


Ch.  UL]       THB  FIB8T  BPI8TLB  TO  THB  CORINTHIANa  203 

teachers  may  baild  upon  the  true  foandation  with  perishable 
or  worthless  materials.  This  appears  in  the  history  of  the 
Church  in  the  false  interpretations  of  scripture,  and  the  crude 
or  fanatical  preaching  of  sincere  but  ignorant  men.  The  whole 
structure  will  be  brought  to  a  final  and  decisive  test  at  the  day 
of  judgment,  when  the  true  value  of  each  teacher's  work  shall 
be  manifested,  and  that  which  is  worthless  shall  be  destroyed. 
The  distinction  is  clearly  made  between  the  teacher  and  the 
matter  of  his  teaching.  The  sincere  but  mistaken  teacher's 
work  will  be  shown  to  be  worthless  in  itself,  but  the  teacher 
himself  will  be  saved  and  will  receive  the  reward  of  personal 
character,  and  not  of  good  building.  Luther  alluded  to  this 
verse  in  his  unfortunate  description  of  the  Epistle  of  James  as 
"  an  epistle  of  straw." 

Stubble  {KdXifi/qv),  Not  the  same  as  icJXajjM^  a  reed.  See 
Apoc.  xi.  1 ;  xxi.  15 ;  and  on  3  John  13.  This  word  means  a 
stalk  of  grain  after  the  ears  have  been  cut  ofF.  It  was  used  for 
thatch  in  building.  Virgil,  ^^Aeneid,"  654,  alludes  to  the 
temple  of  Jupiter  Capitolinus  with  its  roof  bristling  with 
stubble. 

15.  Shall  sufFer  loss  (XiiiJLuo^riaeTfu).  He  shall  be  tmdctedj 
not  punished.     See  on  Matt.  xvi.  26  *;  Luke  ix.  25. 

He  himself  shall  be  saved.  Compare  Dante  of  Constan- 
tine: 

'*  The  next  who  follows,  with  the  laws  and  me, 
Under  the  good  intent  that  bore  bad  frait 
Became  a  Qreek  bj  ceding  to  the  pastor ; 
Now  knoweth  he  how  all  the  ill  dedaced 
From  his  gooicl  action  is  not  harmful  to  him, 
Although  the  world  thereby  maj  be  destroyed.  ** 

*«  Paradise/' zz.,S5-60. 


By  fire  (&A  irvpi^).  Better,  Rev.,  through  ftre.  He  will 
escape  as  through  the  fire  that  consumes  his  work,  as  one  does 
through  the  flames  which  destroy  his  house. 

16.  Temple  (1/009).  Or  sanctuary.  See  on  Matt  iv.  5. 
Compare  Eph.  ii.  21.;  2  Cor.  vi.  16. 


204  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  (Co  UI 

17.  Defile  (ifiSeipei).  Rev.,  more  correctly,  destroy.  Tiiis 
ia  the  primary  and  almoBt  universal  meaning  in  classical  Greek, 
lu  a  fragment  of  Euripides  it  occurs  of  dishonoring  a  female. 
Sopiiocles  uses  it  of  women  pining  away  in  barrenness,  and 
Piutarcli  of  mixing  pure  colors.  The  phrase  seetns  to  be  used 
hei-e  according  to  the  Jewish  idea  that  the  temple  was  destroyed 
or  corrupted  by  the  sligliteat  defilement  or  damage,  oi-  by  neg- 
lect on  the  part  of  its  gnardians.  Ignatius  saya :  "  oi  oixotf)- 
$6pot  violators  of  the  house  (of  God)  shall  not  inherit  the  king- 
dom of  God  "  (To  the  Ephesians,  xvi.). 

Which  temple  (omi^?).  TempU  ia  not  in  the  Greek.  The 
double  relative  which  refers  to  the  epithet  Aw^y /  "of  which 
holy  character  or  cIbbh  ye  are."* 

19.  He  taketh  (o  hpaafr6tixvo<t).  Cited  from  Job  v.  13,  but 
not  following  the  Septuagiut  verbally.  The  verb  occurs  only 
here,  meaning  to  grasp  with  the  hand.  Rev.,  more  accurately, 
gives  the  force  of  the  participle  with  the  article,  he  thai  takith. 
This  is  the  only  allusion  to  the  book  of  Job  in  the  Kew  Testa- 
ment, except  Jas.  v.  11. 

21.  All  things  are  yours.  The  categories  which  follow 
form  an  inventory  of  the  possessions  of  the  Church  and  of  the 
individual  Christian.  This  includes:  the  christian  teachers 
with  different  gifts;  the  world,  life,  and  things  present;  death 
and  things  to  come.  In  Christ,  death  becomes  a  possession,  as 
the  right  of  way  between  things  present  and  things  to  come, 

22.  Things  present  {eveerrS^Ta).     See  on  Rom.  viii.  38. 

23.  Ye  are  Christ's.  A  summary  of  fha  titis  following  the 
inventory.     Compare  Rom.  viii,  17. 

■Others  follow  the  A.  V.,  Knd  refer  to  lemjh  :  but.  ta  Ellicott  remarkl^ 
Bucli  a  oonaection  'Duld  aimpl;  be  n  reiteration  of  ver.  16,  and  would  hint  at 
a  pluralilj  of  tumples,  Hev.  puts  and  tuck  kjv  yn  In  margin,  and  this  is  the 
explanation  of  Ellicott,  Meyer,  Broirn,  Alford,  Do  Wette.  Qodet  r«fen  t4 
both  words,  /wig  tempU.    Edward*  foUawi  A.  7. 


Oil  IY.]        THB  FIRST  BPI8TLB  TO  THB  OORINTHIAN&  205 


CHAPTER 

1.  Ministers  (vinyp^a?).  See  on  officer ^  Matt  v.  25.  Only 
here  in  Paul's  epistles. 

Stewards.    See  on  Luke  xvi.  1. 

2.  It  is  required  {tSqTelrcu),  Lit.,  U  is  sought  for;  thui 
agreeing  vrithfov/nd  in  the  following  clause. 

3.  A  very  small  thing  (ew  ikix'^arov).  Lit.,  unto  a  verj 
small  thing :  it  amowrUa  to  verj  little. 

Judged.    See  on  ch.  ii.  14.     Rev.,  in  margin,  examined. 

Man's  judgment  {apSpwn-any:  ^fiiptK).  Lit,  man's  d!ay,  in 
contrast  with  the  day  of  the  Lord  (ver.  5). 

6.  Judge  (Kpivere).  See  on  ch.  iL  14.  The  change  of  the 
verb  favors  the  rendering  examine  for  iuKuepuw,  The  Lord  is 
the  only  competent  examiner^  therefore  do  notjvdge  until  He 
comes  to  judgment.  Even  I  myself  am  not  competent  to  insti- 
tute a  conclusive  examination,  for  the  absence  of  condemnation 
from  my  conscience  does  not  absolutely  acquit  me.  See  the 
critical  note  on  1  John  iii.  19-22. 

6.  I  have  in  a  figure  transferred  (jieratrxij/J^Tia'a).  From 
fierd,  denoting  exchange^  and  o^fjta  outward  fashion.  Here 
the  fashion  in  which  Paul  expresses  himself.  See  on  tran^fig* 
ured,  Matt.  xvii.  2. 

Not  to  go  beyond  the  things  which  are  written  (to  ^ii 

inrkp  &  yiypairrai).  Lit.  (that  ye  might  learn)  the  not  beyond 
what  stands  written.  The  article  the  introduces  a  proverbial 
expression.  The  impersonal  it  is  written  is  commonly  used  of 
Old-Testament  references. 

Be  puffed  up  {(f^vauwa-!^).  Used  only  by  Paul  in  Corinth* 
ians  and  Colossians.     From  <l>iHra  a  pair  ofheUows, 

8.  Now  ye  are  full  (^  tc€Kop€a-fjLhn}i  itrri).  Rev.,  better, 
JiUed.    Ii'onical  contrast  between  their  attitude  and  that  of  the 


206  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  (Ch.  IV 

apostle  in  vv.  3,  4.     We  are  hungering  for  further  revelatione , 
ye  are  alreadj'  filled  without  waiting  for  the  Lord's  coming. 

Ve  have  reigned  (e/Sao-iXcwroTe).  American  Rev.,  better, 
ye  have  come  to  reign/  attained  to  dominion,  that  kingship 
which  will  bo  bestowed  on  Christians  only  at  Christ's  coming. 

Without  us.  Though  it  is  through  us  that  you  are  Christ- 
ians at  ail. 

9.  For.  Introdncing  a  contrast  between  the  inflated  self-sat- 
isfactiou  of  the  Corinthians  and  the  actual  condition  of  their 
teachers.  Ton  have  come  to  reign,  but  the  case  is  very  differ- 
ent with  \i6,for  I  think,  etc. 

Hath  set  forth  {awkZet^).  Only  twice  in  Paul's  writings ; 
here,  and  2  Thess.  ii.  4,  See  on  approved,  Acta  ii.  22.  In 
classical  Qreek  used  of  pviliahiTig  a  law ;  shewing  forthf  and 
therefore  naming  or  creating  a  king  or  military  leader ;  hrijuj- 
ing  forward  testimony ;  displaying  treasure,  etc.  So  here,  ex- 
hibiting. 

Last  {itrxaTov^.  As  in  Mark  i.\.  35,  of  relative  rank  and 
condition:  as  having  in  men's  eyes  the  basest  lot  of  all. 

Appointed  to  death  (eVt^SacaTwiN).  Rev.,  doomed.  Only 
here  in  the  New  Testament.  Probably  an  allusion  to  the  prac- 
tice of  exposing  condemned  cfiminaU  in  the  amphitheatre  to 
fight  with  beasts  or  with  one  another  as  gladiators.  The  glad- 
iators, on  entering  the  arena,  saluted  the  presiding  officer  with 
the  words  No8  morituri  salaiam.'us,  We  who  are  to  die  greet 
you.  Tertullian  paraphrases  this  passage,  God  haih  chosen  ua 
apostles  last  as  heaat-Jighters.  "  The  vast  range  of  an  amphi- 
theatre nnder  the  open  sky,  well  represents  the  magnificent 
vision  of  all  created  things,  from  men  up  to  angels,  gazing  on 
the  dreadful  death-struggle;  and  then  the  contrast  of  the  self- 
ish Corinthians  sitting  by  tinconcerned  and  unmoved  by  the 
awful  spectacle"  (Stanley).  For  a  similar  image  of  spectators 
watching  the  contest  in  the  arena,  see  lleb.  xii,  1.  Compare 
also  1  Cor.  xv.  32. 


Oh.  IV.]        THB  FIRST  EPISTLB  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  207 

Spectacle  {l^arpop).  Primarily,  a  theatre;  theu  t/icU  whit  a 
is  exhibited.  Compare  the  kindred  verb  S€aTpi^6fi€Po&  hein^ 
made  a  gaaingstocJc^  Ileb.  x.  33. 

Unto  the  world  (r^  xaa-fA^),  The  imiversej  a  sense  not 
usual  with  Paul ;  compare  eh.  viii.  4.  The  words  to  angels  and 
to  men  define  world;  so  that  the  rendering  of  the  American 
Bev.  is  pi*eferable,  hoth  to  angels  and  men.  Principal  Edwards 
remarks :  ^^  This  comprehensive  use  of  the  word  kosmos  is  re- 
markable, because,  on  the  one  hand,  it  is  an  advance  on  the 
Old-Testament  conception  of  two  separate  spheres  of  existence, 
heaven  and  earth,  not  comprehended  under  anj  wider  designa- 
tion ;  and,  on  the  other,  because  it  differs  from  the  meaning 
attached  to  the  word  among  the  Greeks;  inasmuch  as  the 
apostle  uses  it  of  the  spiritual  as  well  as  the  physical  totality 
of  existence."  The  spiritual  oneness  of  the  universe  is  a  con- 
ception eminently  characteristic  of  St.  Paul ;  but  it  is  fore- 
shadowed by  Plato.  ^^  Communion  and  friendship  and  orderli- 
ness and  temperance  and  justice  bind  together  heaven  and  earth 
and  gods  and  men ;  and  this  universe  is  therefore  called  kosmos 
or  order  ;  not  disorder  or  misrule  "  ("  Gorgias,".  608). 


10.  For  Christ's  sake— in  Christ  (Sih  Xpurrop—iv  Xpur- 
r^).  We  apostles  are  fools  in  the  world's  eyes  on  aocatmt  of 
(Si^)  Christ,  because  we  know  and  preach  nothing  but  Christ : 
You  are  wise  in  Christ,  as  Christians,  making  your  Christianity 
A  means  to  yourworldly  greatness— union  with  Christ  the  basis 
of  worldly  wisdom.  "  Wise  men  are  ye  in  your  connection  with 
Christ !     Sagacious,  enlightened  Christians ! "  (Meyer). 

Honorable  (&&>^i).  With  a  suggestion  of  display  and 
splendor.     Kight  honorable  are  ye  I 

11.  We  have  no  certain  dwelling-place  (atrraroOfAep). 
From  aararo^  unstable,  strolling  about.  Only  here  in  the  New 
Testament.    Compare  Matt.  viii.  20 ;  x.  23 ;  Heb.  xi.  37.    Wye, 

we  hen  unstable. 

12.  Labor  {icoiri&fi^).  Bev.,  toil.  Unto  weariness.  See  on 
Luke  V.  5. 


208  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THK  NEW  TESTAMENT.  ICa.  IV. 

Reviled  yXoiSopovfievoi).     See  oa  Acts  xxiii,  i. 
We  bless  {euXoyoOftev).     See  oa  blessed,  Jolio  xii.  13. 
We  suffer  (dv€x°^'■^■^'^)■     t-'^-i  *""  ^^  or  bear  up. 
13    Defamed  {Sua-ff)i}fiovfievot).     Pyhlicly  slaadered ;  while 
reoiUd  refers  lo  jyeraoiud  abuse. 

Intreat  {vapaKaXovfi^eii).  See  on  cotisolation,  Luke  vi,  2i, 
and  comfort.  Acts  i.\.  31.  The  sense  is,  we  strive  to  appeane  bij 
eiitreaiy. 

Fitth  —  offscouring  {irepiKa^piiaTa  —  irepi'^fia).  Tlie 
former  word  is  from  irepiKoSaipaj  to  cleanse  all  round.  Hence 
that  whick  is  thrown  off  in  cUanMing ;  refttse.  KdSapfui  the 
refuse  of  a  sacrtjice.  So  Aeschylus.  Electra  says :  "Should 
I,  like  one  who  has  carried  away  vf-i-^e  {Ka^dpfiaS^)  from  a 
purification,  after  tossing  awiiy  the  urn,  go  back  again  with  un- 
turned eyes?"  {"  ChoeplionE,"  90).  In  Prov.  xsi.  18,  Sept., 
it  occurs  in  the  sense  of  ransom.  Some  find  an  alhision 
here  to  an  ancient  Athenian  custom  of  tlirowing  certain  worth- 
less persons  into  the  sea  in  case  of  plague  or  famine,  saying  Be 
our  offscouring!  These  persons  were  called  -TreptKaSdp/uiTa 
offscourings,  or  vepitjnipMTa  scrapings,  in  the  belief  that  they 
would  wipe  away  the  nation's  guilt.  Ignatius  says  to  the  Eplies- 
ians,  irepl'^fia  vfiSiv  I  am  your  offscouring.  The  senso  is 
twofold :  /  am  as  the  meanest  among  you  ;  and  /  devote  iny 
life  for  you.  In  the  middle  of  the  tliird  century,  Trepl-^pA  <rov 
had  become  a  common  expression  of  formal  compliment :  your 
humble  servant.  See  Lightfoot,  "Apostolic  Fathers,"  on  Ig- 
natius to  the  Ephesians,  viii.  Compare  Lam.  iii.  45,  and  Tohit 
V.  18.  tlepli^fia  that  which  is  scraped  or  scoured  off.  Both 
words  only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 

This  tremendous  piece  of  irony  justifies  the  numerous  alhis- 
ions  which  have  been  made  to  Paui's  vehemence  and  severity. 
Thus  Dante,  in  his  vision  of  the  Earthly  Paradise,  pictures 
Paul: 

"  Two  old  men  I  belield,  uiilika  io  h»bit, 

But  like  in  gait,  eub  dignified  and  grtvD. 

One  (Luke)  showed  himself  as  one  of  the  diwiplea 

Of  thai  supreme  Hippocrates  wbotn  Nataro 


Ch.  17.]       THB  FIRST  BPISVLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIAirS.  209 

Made  for  the  animals  she  holds  most  dear ; 
Contrarj  care  the  other  (Paal)  manifested, 
With  sword  so  shining  and  so  sharp,  it  caosed 
Terror  to  me  on  this  side  of  the  river." 

'^Purgatorio/*  xxix.,  134-141. 

^^  His  words,  indeed,  seem  to  be  those  of  a  simple,  and,  as  it 
were,  an  innocent  and  rastic  man,  who  knows  neither  how  to 
frame  nor  to  avoid  wiles;  but  whithersoever  jou  look,  there 
are  thnuderbolts  "  (Jerome).  ^^  Paul  thunders,  lightens,  utters 
pure  flames"  (Erasmus).  See  a  collection  of  quotations  in 
Farrar's  "  Life  and  Work  of  St.  Paul,"  L,  619.* 

14.  To  shame  {hnpeirtov).  Lit,  as  shaming.  See  on  Matt, 
xxi.  37.  The  verb  means  to  turn  alotUj  hf^nce  to  turn  one  vpon 
himsdf ;  jnU  him  to  sham>e.  Compare  2  Thess.  iii.  14 ;  Tit. 
ii.  8.  Also,  in  the  middle  voice,  in  the  sense  of  reverence;  to 
turn  on^8  self  toward  another.  See  Mark  xii.  6 ;  Luke  xviii.  2. 
The  kindred  noun  ivrpowij  occurs  twice :  1  Cor.  vi.  5 ;  xv.  84. 
Compare  Sophocles:  "Think  you  he  will  have  any  regard 
{hnponriiv)  for  the  blind  man  "  ("  Oedipus  at  Colonos,'^  299). 

15.  Tutors  (^cuZar>f<orfoifsi).  From  irak  hoy  and  arftoyo^ 
leader.  The  Paedagogus  was  a  slave  to  whom  boys  were  en- 
trusted on  leaving  the  care  of  the  females,  which  was  some- 
where about  their  sixteenth  year.  He  was  often  a  foreigner, 
sometimes  educated  and  refined,  but  often  otherwise  ;  for  Plu- 
tarch complains  that  seamen,  traders,  usurers,  and  farmers  are 
engaged  in  this  capacity.  The  office  was  one  of  general  guar- 
dianship, not  of  instruction,  though  sometimes  the  paedagogus 
acted  as  teacher.  He  accompanied  the  boy  to  school,  carrying 
his  books,  etc.,  and  attended  him  to  the  gymnasium  and  else- 
where.f     See,  further,  on  Gal.  iii.  24. 

*  See  an  article  on  **  The  Ironj  of  St.  Panl,**  bj  John  Maasie,  **  Bzpodtor," 
•econd  series,  viii.,  92. 

f  See  a  livelj  description  in  Plautos*  *< Baoohides,**  Act  ia,  Sc  8L 
Vol.  IIL-.14 


WOttD  STUDIES  IM  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


CHAPTER    r. 


1.  Commonly  (oAi»«). 
Rev. 


Better,  absolutely  or  actually,  as 


Should  have>  Opinions  are  divided  as  to  whether  the  rela- 
tion was  that  of  niarrriage  or  concubinage.  The  former  is 
urged  oil  the  ground  that  ex^iv  to  have  is  commonly  used  in  the 
New  TtiBtament  of  marriage ;  iind  that  the  aorist  participles 
TTotTjoait  (eo  Tex.  Rec.J  luul  done,  and  KaTepyaadfi,evov  hath 
wrought,  imply  that  an  incestuons  marriage  liad  already  taken 
place.  It  is  urged,  on  tlie  other  band,  that  ej^eii*  to  have  is 
used  of  concubinage,  John  iv.  18 ;  but  it  takes  its  meaning 
there  from  the  sense  of  marriage  in  the  preceding  clanse,  and 
is  really  a  kind  of  play  on  the  word.  "  He  who  now  stands 
for  thy  hnsband  is  not  thy  husband."  The  indications  seem 
to  be  in  favor  of  marriage.  Notwithstanding  the  facilities  for 
divorce  afforded  by  the  Roman  law,  am!  the  loose  morals  of 
the  Corinthians,  for  a  man  to  marry  his  stepmother  was  re- 
garded as  a  Bcandal. 

5.  To  deliver — unto  Satan  for  the  destruction  of  the 
flesh.  On  this  very  obscure  and  nmch  controverted  passage  it 
may  be  observed :  1.  That  it  implies  excommunication  from 
the  Church.  2.  That  it  implies  something  more,  the  nature  of 
which  is  not  clearly  known.  3.  That  casting  the  offender  out 
of  the  Chnrch  involved  casting  him  back  into  the  heathen 
world,  which  Paul  habitually  conceives  as  under  the  power  of 
Satan.  4.  That  Paul  has  in  view  the  reformation  of  the  of- 
fender :  "  that  the  spirit  may  be  saved,"  etc.  This  reformation 
is  to  he  through  affliction,  disease,  pain,  or  loss,  which  also  lie 
ia  wont  to  conceive  as  Satan's  work.  See  1  Thess.  ii.  18;  2 
Cor.  xii.  7.  Compare  Luke  xiii.  16.  Hence  in  delivering  him 
over  to  these  he  uses  the  phrase  deliver  utUo  Saian.  Compare 
1  Tim.  i.  20.* 

*  A  yetj  Mnslble  diBcuuion  of  thii  pasaige  ii  given  b;  Dr.  Bunoel  Coi,  in 
bliutlela,  "Thftt  Wioked  Person,"  ■' EzpoBitor."  fint  uries,  iii.,  3G6. 


Ob.  v.]         the  first  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORIKTHIAN&  211 

6.  Glorying  {/cavxnM^)-  ^o^  ^^®  ^  ^"^  ^he  subject  of 
boasting;  namely,  the  condition  of  the  Corinthian  church. 

Lump  (<f>vpa/ui).  See  on  Rom.  xii.  21.  A  significant  term, 
suggesting  the  oneness  of  the  Church,  and  the  consequent  dan- 
ger from  evil-doers. 

7.  Leaven.  Not  the  sinful  man,  but  evil  of  everj  kind,  in 
accordance  with  the  more  general  statement  of  the  leavening 
power  of  evil  in  ver.  6.  The  apostle's  metaphor  is  shaped  by 
the  commands  concerning  the  removal  of  leaven  at  the  pass- 
over  :  Exod.  xii.  19 ;  xiiL  7.  Compare  Ignatius ;  *^  Dispense, 
therefore,  with  the  evil  leaven  that  has  grown  old  (iraXcuaiSeta'' 
av)  and  that  has  gone  sour  {ho^laturav),  and  be  changed  into 
new  leaven  which  is  Jesus  Christ "  (Epistle  to  Magnesians,  x.). 

New  iyiov).     See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  29. 

Passover  {ro  iraayti)*  "^^^  Paschal  lamb,  as  Mark  xiv.  12; 
Luke  xxii.  7. 

8.  Let  us  keep  the  feast  (iofyrd^tofuv).  Only  here  in  the 
ffow  Testament.  The  epistle  was  probably  written  a  short 
time  before  the  Passover.     See  ch.  xvi.  8. 

Sincerity  {etkitepLveuK).    See  oujmre  mindsj  2  Pet  iii.  1. 

Truth.  Bengel  observes:  ^^ Sincerity  takes  care  not  to  ad- 
mit evil  with  the  good ;  truth,  not  to  admit  evif  instead  of 
good." 

9.  I  write—in  my  epistle.  American  ^v.^  as  it  is  I  wrote. 
The  reference  is  probably  to  a  former  letter  now  lost.  Some 
explain  eypa^  I  wrote  as  the  epistolary  aorist  (see  on  1  John 
ii.  13) ;  but  the  words  in  my  epistle  seem  to  favor  the  other 
view. 

To  company  {avpowifjklyinHrSai).  Only  here  and  2  Thees. 
iii.  14.  The  translation  cofnpcmy  is  inadequate,  but  cannot 
perhaps  be  bettered.  The  word  is  compounded  of  avv  togetherj 
iva  up  and  down  amonffj  and  fjtiywfu  to  mingle.  It  denotee, 
therefore,  not  only  close,  but  habitual,  intercourse. 

10.  Idolaters  (elBtoXoXdrpai^).  Only  twice  outside  of  Paul's 
writings :  Apoc.  xxi.  8 ;  xxii.  15.     This  is  the  earliest  known 


213 


WOBD  BTDDIE8  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  ICa  VL 


iiiBtance  of  the  nee  of  the  word.  For  the  collocation  of  tha 
covetonH  and  idolaters,  coinpai-e  Col  iii.  15  ;  Epli,  v.  5.  Kew- 
TeetHnient  usage  does  nut  confine  the  term  to  the  worBhip  of 
images,  bnt  extencie  it  to  the  eoul's  devotion  to  any  object  which 

uBiirps  the  place  of  God. 

13.  Wicked  (irovripop).  Mischievous  to  the  Church.  See 
on  Luke  iii.  19.  Tlie  usage  of  the  Septnagint  emphasizes  tlie 
idea  of  active  harmfnlness.  The  word  has,  Iiowever,  in  some 
passages,  Ilie  sense  of  nig<jardly  or  ffrud^inff,  and  the  Hebrew 
word  which  is  usually  translated  by  Trovrfpot  mischievous,  ia 
sometimes  rendered  by  ^d^Kavot  malignant,  with  a  distinct 
reference  to  tlie  "  evil  "  or  *'  grudging  eye."  Thia  sense  may 
go  to  explain  Matt.  xx.  15,  and  pusaibly  Matt.  vi.  19,  and 
vii.  11. 


CHAPTER  VL 


1.  Dare.  "T!ie  insulted  majesty  of  Christians  is  denoted 
by  a  grand  word"  (Bengel). 

2.  Matters  {Kpi-rripiav).  The  word  means,  1,  T/ie  inairu- 
meni  or  rtde  of  judging  ;  2,  the  trihuntU  of  a  Judge,  It  oc- 
curs only  here,  ver.  4,  and  Jas.  ii.  6,  where  it  nieiina  Judgnn^]it- 
seats.  This  latter  gives  a  good  sense  here  witliout  Laving  re- 
course to  the  meaning  suit  or  case,  wliich  lacks  warrant.  So 
Rev.,  in  margin,  "  are  ye  unworthy  of  the  smallest  tribunals  f" 
That  is,  are  ye  unworthy  of  holding  or  passing  judgment  in 
Buch  inferior  courts) 

3.  How  much  more  ij*i}Tvye).  It  is  hard  to  render  the 
word  accuiately.  Sow  much  more  follows  the  Vulgate  quanta 
•nagis.    It  is  rather,  not  to  speak  of ;  or  to  say  nothing  at  aU  of. 

Things  that  pertain  to  this  life  (fiiMnucd).  See  on  Luke 
xxi.  34. 

4.  Judgments  {Kpir^pia).  Better,  tr^utuUa  or  courts,  as 
ver.  2.  If  you  have  to  hold  courts  for  the  settlement  of  private 
matters. 


Ch.  VL]        the  first  epistle  to  the  CORINTHIANa  213 

Set  {tcaSi^ere).  Seat  Uiein  as  judges  on  tbe  tribunal.  It  is 
disputed  whether  leaSi^ere  is  to  be  taken  as  imperative,  set 
(A.  v.),  or  as  interrogative,  do  ye  set  (Rev.).*  The  A.  V. 
seems,  on  the  whole,  preferable.  The  passage  is  well  para- 
phrased by  Farrar.  '^  Dare  they,  the  destined  judges  of  the 
world  and  of  angels,  go  to  law  about  mere  earthly  trifles,  and 
that  before  the  heathen  ?  Why  did  they  not  rather  set  up  the 
very  humblest  uiembers  of  the  Church  to  act  as  judges  in  such 
matters  ? "  f 

5.  To  your  shame  (irp^  ivrpoTrifp  vfuv).  Lit.,  /  speak  to 
you  with  a  view  to  shame  /  ie.,  to  move  you  to  shamsj  as  I^y. 
See  on  ch.  iv.  14. 

To  judge  {Suucptvai).    fiev.,  better,  decide  ;  by  arbitration. 

6.  Goeth  to  law  {icp^verai).  As  in  ver.  1,  and  Matt  v.  40. 
Instead  of  accepting  arbitration. 

7.  Now  therefore  (^f&y  fih  oiv).  Mev  oip  nay^  as  in  ver.  4, 
at  once  looks  back  to  the  preceding  thought,  and  continues  it, 
bringing  under  special  consideration  tlie  fact  that  brotlier  goes 
to  law  with  brother.  "Hifq  already  or  a^  once  is  a  temporal  ad- 
verb, but  with  a  logical  force  and  enliancing  the  nay.  The 
connection  of  thought  is :  Is  there  not  one  wise  man  among  you 
who  is  competent  to  act  as  an  arbitrator  between  l)rethren,  so 
that  christian  brethren  must  needs  take  their  di£Perences  into 
the  civil  courts  and  before  heathen  judges!  Nay ;  such  a 
proceeding  ai  otice  implies  the  existence  of  a  litigious  spirit 
generally,  which  is  unchristian,  and  detrimental  to  you. 

Fault  anfiong  you  {ij-mffia  iv  vfuv).  Only  here  and  Rom. 
xi.  12.  See  note.  ^Hrrqiia  favU^  is  from  fjprrfAv  less.  Lit., 
dimintUion^  decrease.  Hence  used  in  the  sense  of  defeat,  Isa. 
xxxi.  8 :  "  Young  men  shall  be  discomfited^  lit.,  shall  be  for 
dhninutionJ'^  Similarly  the  kindred  verb  ffrrdofuu,  in  2  Cor. 
xii.  13,  made  inferi^yr  ;  and  in  2  Pet.  ii.  19,  20,  overcome.  See 
note  there.     Compare  2  Mac.  x.  24.     In  classical  Greek  l^a 

*  Bo  Westoott  and  Hort,  and  Tischendorf 

f  So  £llicott,  Edwards,  Brown,  Alford,  Godet,  Rev.,  in  margin. 


214  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  VL 

iiieHiia  defeaty  and  is  contrasted  witli  vLkt^  mi:tary  bjr  Pluto  and 
Tiiuc^'dides.  The  meaning  here  is  loss.  'Ev  amony  is  omitted 
by  tlie  best  texts,  so  that  we  should  read  a  loss  to  you,  wliich 
Kev,  gives  in  margin,  reading  in  tlie  text  a  defect  in  you.  The 
spirit  of  litigation  which  runs  into  wrong  aud  fraud  (ver.  S)  is 
a  source  of  danuiye,  resulting  in  forfeiture  of  the  kingdom  of 
God  (ver.  9),  and  in  loaa  of  spiritual  power. 

Ye  go  to  law  {KpifiM7a  e^^ere).  liev.,  more  correctly,  ye 
/nice  lawsuits.  Not  the  same  phrase  as  in  ver.  6.  Kplf*a  in 
the  New  Testament  almost  universally  means  judymeiU  or  de- 
cree, as  Rom.  v.  16.  See  on  2  Pet.  ii.  3.  In  claflfiical  Greek 
it  has  also  the  meaning  of  t/ie  matter  ofjudijTitent,  the  question 
in  litigation.  So  Aeschylus:  " The  matter  {x^i/ta)  is  not  easy 
to  jadge.  Cliooee  me  not  as  judge"  ("Suppliants,"  391).  Here 
the  meaning  is  legal  jtroceedliigs,  lawsuits.  So  in  Septuagint, 
Job  xxxi.  13  ;  Exod.  x.xiii.  6. 

Suffer  yourselves  to  be  defrauded  {awotrrepftaSe).  Gev., 
more  literally,  "why  not  rather  he  defrauded f"  In  classical 
Oreek  the  woi-d  means,  1,  to  rob  or  despoil:  2,  to  detach  or 
withdraw  one^S  self  from  a  person  or  thing.  'Atroinepeiv  iavrov 
was  a  regular  phrase  for  separation  from  civic  life.  So  Oedipus 
says ;  '■  I,  noblest  of  the  sons  of  Thebes,  have  cvi  inyseJf  off 
(uireoT^pijff'  ifiavTov."  Sophocles,  "  Oodipna  Tyrannus,"  1381). 
3.  To  withhold  or  avert.  So  lo  to  Proinetheua :  "  Do  not, 
after  proffering  ine  a  benefit,  withhold  it "  ("  Pi-omethens,"  796). 
The  maidens  say:  "May  King  Zeus  avert  the  hateful  mar- 
riage" (Aeschylus,  "Suppliants,"  1063).  In  the  New  Testa- 
ment the  word  occurs  five  times.  In  Mark  x.  19,  defraud  not 
is  apparently  Mark'u  rendering  of  the  tenth  commandment. 
According  to  the  inner  meaning  of  the  commandment  as  con- 
ceived by  Jesus,  the  coveting  of  another's  goods  is,  in  heart,  a 
depriving  him  of  them.  In  1  Cor.  vii.  5  it  is  used  of  connubial 
relations.  In  1  Tim.  vt.  5,  of  those  who  are  deprived  or  desti- 
tute of  the  truth.*    Dr.  Morison,  on  Mark  x.  19,  jostly  observes 

*  In  Ju.  T.  4,  tlie  reading  Is  l^uim^^^m  kept  bntik  for  immpiwiVai 
fw&M  ladaptnUd. 


Ch.  YL]        THB  FIB8T  BPI8TLB  TO  THB  OOBINTHIAN&  215 

that  defraud  is  too  narrow  a  rendering.  The  word  means 
rather  ^^  to  deprive  of  what  is  one's  due,  whether  bj  ^  hook,^ 
^  crook,'  or  force,  or  in  any  other  way." 

9.  Kingdom  of  God.    See  on  Lnke  yi.  20. 

Fornicators.  The  besetting  sin  of  Corinth.  Hence  tlie 
namerous  solemn  and  emphatic  allosions  to  it  in  this  epistle. 
See  ch.  v.  11 ;  vi.  15-18 ;  x.  8. 

EfFeminate  (fiaXa«ol).  Loxnrions  and  dainty.  The  word 
was  used  in  a  darker  and  more  horrible  sense,  to  which  there 
may  be  an  allusion  here.* 

Abusers,  etc.     See  on  Bom.  i.  7. 

11.  Washed — sanctified— justified.  According  to  fact  the 
order  would  he  jiuAiJiedj  tixished  (baptism),  sanotf^fied;  but  as 
Ellicott  justly  remarks,  *Mn  this  epistle  this  order  is  not  set 
forth  with  any  studied  precision,  since  its  ^pain  purpose  is  cor- 
rective." 

Ye  were  justified  (iBiseauiSfiTe).  Emphasizing  the  actual 
moral  renewal,  which  is  the  true  idea  of  justification.  This  is 
shown  by  the  words  *^  by  tiie  Spirit,"  etc.,  for  the  Spirit  is  not 
concerned  in  mere  forensic  justification. 

12.  Are  lawful  {e^eanv).  There  is  a  play  between  this 
word  and  i^vaiaaSjiirofuu  he  br(yught  under  tiie  power y  which 
can  hardly  be  accurately  conveyed  to  the  English  reader.  The 
nearest  approach  to  it  is :  ^^  o^  things  are  in  myjpaioerj  but  I 
shall  not  be  brought  under  the  power  of  any." 

Will—be  brought  under  the  power  (i^awruMiorBti^roiAai). 
From  i^ovcla  power  of  choice^  permissive  authority.  See  on 
Mark  ii.  10.  This  in  turn  is  derived  from  ifyar^  it  is  per^ 
mitted.  See  above  on  are  lawful.  This  kinship  of  the  two 
words  explains  the  play  upon  them. 

13.  Meats  for  the  belly,  etc.  Paul  is  arguing  against  forn- 
ication. His  argument  is  that  there  is  a  law  of  adaptation 
running  through  nature,  illustrated  by  the  mutual  adaptation 

*  «W  Wetstein  and  Kjpke. 


216  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Cu.  VL 

of  food  and  the  digeetive  organs ;  but  tine  law  is  violated  bv 
tlie  prostitution  of  the  body  to  fornication,  for  which,  in  God's 
order,  it  was  not  adapted. 

Shall  destroy  {jcaTapy^tru).  Hev.,  better,  s^ali  bring  to 
nought.  See  on  Horn.  iii.  3.  The  nintual  ph^'sical  adaptation 
is  only  temporary,  as  the  body  and  its  nourishment  are  aliliu 
perishable. 

14.  Will  raise  up  us.  The  body  being  destined  to  share 
with  the  body  of  Christ  in  resurrection,  and  to  be  raised  up  in- 
corruptible, is  the  subject  of  a  higher  adaptation,  with  which 
fornication  is  incompatible. 

15.  Members  of  Christ.  The  body  ia  notonlyyor  the  Lord 
{ver.  13),  adapted  for  Ilim :  it  is  also  united  with  Him.  See 
Eph.  iv.  16. 

Members  of  a  harlot.  The  union  of  man  and  woman, 
whether  lawful  or  unlawful,  confers  a  donble  personality.  Forn- 
ication effects  this  result  in  an  immoral  way. 

16.  He  that  is  joined  (o  KoXKiliftepcK).  See  on  Luke  xv.  15. 
Compare  Aeschylus :  "  Tlie  family  has  been  glued  {KeKoXX.ijTaL) 
to  misfortane"  ("Agamemnon,"  1543).  The  verb  ia  used  Gen. 
ii.  24,  Sept.,  of  the  relation  of  husband  and  wife :  shall  cleave. 
In  Deut.  X.  20 ;  xi.  22 ;  Jer.  xiii.  11,  of  man's  cleaving  to  God. 

To  a  harlot  (tj  wopvi}).  Lit.,  the  harlot.  The  article  is 
significant :  his  harlot,  or  that  one  with  whom  he  ia  ainning  at 
the  time. 

Shall  be  one  flesh  {eaatnoi  eli  a-dpica  fitav).  Lit.,  shall  be 
unto  one  flesh :  i.e.,  from  being  two,  shall  pass  into  one. 
Hence  Rev.,  rightly,  shall  becom-e.     Compare  Eph.  ii.  15. 

18.  Flee.  See  Gen.  xxxix.  12.  Socrates,  in  Plato's  "  Re- 
public," relates  how  the  poet  Sophocles,  in  answer  to  the  quest- 
ion "How  does  love  suit  with  age?"  replied:  "Most  gladly 
have  I  escaped  that,  and  I  feel  as  if  I  had  escaped  from  a  mad 
and  furious  master"  (329). 

Sin  {a/idpTrj/M).     See  on  Rora.  iii.  25. 


Ch.  VU]      the  first  epistle  to  the  CORIKTHIAlia  217 

Without  the  body  {ixro^  rou  a-d/jLaro^).  Lit,  oiUaide.  The 
body  is  not  the  instrument,  bnt  the  subject  But  in  fornication 
the  body  is  the  instrument  of  the  sin,  and  ^^  inwardly  as  well  as 
outwardly  is  made  over  to  another." 

19.  Temple  (1^009).  Better,  as  Rev.,  in  margin,  sanctuary. 
It  is  not  only  a  temple,  but  the  very  shrine.     See  on  ch.  iii.  16. 

Glorify.  See  on  John  vii.  39.  Omit  and  in  yourapirUj 
which  are  OodPs. 


CHAPTER  VIL 

1.  It  is  good  (icaKhv).  See  on  John  x.  11.  Not  merely  ex- 
pedient, but  morally  salutary.  The  statement,  however,  is 
made  in  the  light  of  circumstances,  see  ver.  26,  and  is  to  be  read 
with  others,  such  as  2  Cor.  xi.  2 ;  Rom.  vii.  4 ;  Eph.  v.  28-33,  in 
all  which  marriage  is  made  the  type  of  the  union  between  Christ 
and  His  Church.     See  also  Heb.  xiii.  4.* 

5.  May  give  yourselves  (axoXdariTe).  Lit,  may  have  leisure. 
Like  the  Latin  phrase  vacare  rei  to  he  free  far  a  thing^  and  so 
to  devote  on^s  self  to  it. 

Incontinency  {cucpaaUjai).  Only  here  and  Matt  xxiii.  ^^ 
on  which  see  note. 

7.  As  I  myself.  Not  unmarried,  but  continent.  It  is  not 
necessary  to  assume  that  Paul  had  never  been  married.  Mar- 
riage was  regarded  as  a  duty  among  the  Jews,  so  that  a  man 
was  considered  to  have  sinned  if  he  had  reached  the  age  of 
twenty  without  marrying.  The  Mishna  fixed  the  age  of  mar- 
riage at  seventeen  or  eighteen,  and  the  Babylonish  Jews  as  early 
as  fourteen.  A  rabbinical  precept  declared  that  a  Jew  who 
has  no  wife  is  not  a  man.  It  is  not  certain,  but  most  probable, 
tliat  Saul  was  a  member  of  the  Sanhedrim  (Acts  xxvi.  10). 


*  On  the  whole  question,  see  Sohaif.  "  Historj  of  the  Apostolic  Chnrch,**  p. 
448  sqq.  ;  *' Historj  of  the  Christian  Chnrch/'  ii.,  868  sqq.  On  marriage  in 
Greek  and  Roman  societj,  Dollinger.  **The  Gentile  and  the  Jew.**  ii.,  284, 
2^8  sqq  ,  315  sqq.,  889.     Leckj,  «*  History  of  European  Morals,*'  i.,  246,  27a 


218  WORD  STDDIEa  IN  THB  NBW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  Vll 

If  BO,  lie  must  have  been  married,  as  marriage  was  a  coiiditiua 
of  membership.  From  ver.  8  it  is  plausibly  inferred  tlint  he 
classed  himself  among  widowers.  Farrar  ("  Life  and  Work  of 
St.  Paul,"  i.,  80)  has  some  beaiitifnl  remarks  apon  the  evidence 
for  his  marriage  afforded  bj  the  wisdom  and  tenderness  of  his 
words  concerning  it,* 

Gift  {yapurfio).  See  on  Rom.  i.  11.  As  regards  the  matter 
of  continence,  fitting  some  for  marriage  and  some  for  celibacy. 

9.  Cannot  contain  [ovtc  i^Kparevotntu).  Rev.,  hwve  iiot 
ooniinenoe.  Only  here,  and  ch.  ix.  25,  of  athletes  abataining 
from  sensual  indulgences  when  preparing  for  the  games. 

To  burn.  Continuous  present:  to  burn  on:  continuance  in 
unsatisfied  deeire. 

10.  Not  1,  but  the  Lord.  Referring  to  Christ's  declarations 
respecting  divorce,  Matt,  v,  31,  33  ;  \ix.  3-12.  Not  a  distinct- 
ion between  an  inspired  and  an  uninspired  saying.  Pan! 
means  that  his  readers  had  no  need  to  apply  to  him  for  instruct- 
ion in  the  matter  of  divorce,  since  they  had  the  words  of 
Christ  himself. 

12.  To  tha  rest.  He  has  been  speaking  to  the  unmarried 
(ver.  8)  and  to  married  parties,  both  of  whom  were  Christiana 
(ver.  10).  By  the  rest  he  means  married  couples,  one  of  which 
remained  a  heathen. 

I,  not  the  Lord.  These  cases  ard  not  included  in  Christ's 
declarations. 

Be  pleased  {mpevSoKel).  ^^v.,  be  oonUnt.  Better,  con^^i/. 
Both  the  other  renderings  fail  to  express  the  OffreemeTU  indi- 
cated by  aw  ioget/ier. 

14.  Is  sanctified  {^iatrrat).  Not,  made  morally  holy,  but 
afBliated  to  the  Christian  community — tlie  family  of  the  Syioi 
gairUs — in  virtue  of  his  being  "  one  flesh  "  with  hia  Christian 
wife. 

'SMilMSahaS,  "HUor^of  UwClu4itluiChnroh,"  L,  aOS. 


Ob.  VU.]       THB  first  BPI8TLB  TO  THB  GOHINTUIAK&  219 

15.  Is  not  under  bondaige  (ov  BeBovKomu).  A  strong  word, 
indicating  that  Christianity  has  not  made  marriage  a  state  of 
slavery  to  believers.  Compare  SiBerai  is  haundj  ver.  39,  a 
milder  word.  The  meaning  clearly  is  that  wilful  desertion  on 
the  part  of  the  unbelieving  husband  or  wife  sets  the  other 
party  free.  Such  cases  are  not  comprehended  in  Christ's 
words. 

Hath  called  us  to  peace  {iv  eiprivrf  tchcXoficep  ijfia^).  Rev., 
correctly,  in  peace.  Compare  Gktl.  L  6,  ^  into  the  grace  "  {h 
X^^^'Ti,  Bev.,  in) ;  Eph.  iv.  4,  in  one  hope  {iv  fuf  iKw&i) ;  1 
Thess.  iv.  7,  in  sanctification  (iv  arfuuriJL&).  Denoting  the 
sphere  or  element  of  the  divine  calling.  Enslavement  in  the 
marriage  relation  between  the  believer  and  the  unbeliever  is 
contrary  to  the  spirit  and  intent  of  this  calling. 

17.  But  (ei  ^^).  Rev.,  only.  Introducing  a  limitation  to 
the  statement  in  ver.  15.  There  is  to  be  no  enslavement,  only^ 
to  give  no  excuse  for  the  reckless  abuse  of  this  general  principle, 
the  normal  rule  of  Christian  life  is  that  each  one  should  seek 
to  abide  in  the  position  in  which  God  has  placed  him. 

Ordain  {hiaratraofuu).    See  on  Matt.  xi.  1. 

18.  Become  uncircumcised  {hri^nrdirBa).  The  reference 
is  to  the  process  of  restoring  a  circumcised  person  to  his  nat- 
ural condition  by  a  surgical  operation.  See  Josephus,  ^^  Anti- 
quities,*' xii.,  v.,  1 ;  1  Mace.  i.  15 ;  Smith's  "  Dictionary  of  the 
Bible,"  Article  Oircumoision  ;  Celsus,  "  De  Re  Medica,"  cited 
in  Wetstein  with  other  passages.  See,  also,  Edwards'  note  on 
this  passage. 

20.  Calling  (cXi^ei).  Not  the  condition  or  oooiipationj  a 
meaning  which  the  word  does  not  have  in  classical  Greek,  nor 
in  the  New  Testament,  where  it  always  signifies  the  call  of  God 
into  His  kingdom  through  conversion.  Paul  means :  If  God's 
call  was  to  you  as  a  circumcised  man  or  as  an  uncircumcised 
man ;  as  a  slave  or  as  a  freedman — abide  in  that  condition. 
Compare  ch.  i.  26. 

21.  Use  it  rather.  Whether  the  apostle  means,  use  the 
bondage  or  use  the  freedom — whether,  take  advantage  of  the 


220  WORD  8T0DlKa  IN  THE  SBW   TESTAMENT.         t<^"  VIL 

offer  of  freedom,,  or,  rejnain  in  slavery — is,  as  Dean  Stanley 
I'ontarks,  one  of  the  moat  evenlj"  balanced  qocBtions  in  the  in- 
teipretalion  of  the  New  Teetament.  Tiie  force  of  koI  even, 
and  the  positive  injunction  of  the  apostle  in  w.  20  and  24, 
seem  to  favor  the  meaning,  remain  in  slavery.*  The  injunc- 
tion is  to  be  read  in  the  light  of  ver.  22,  and  of  Gal.  iii.  28 ; 
Col,  iii.  11 ;  1  Cor.  xii.  13,  that  freeman  and  slave  are  one  in 
Christ;  and  also  of  the  feeling  pervading  the  Church  of  the 
speedy  termination  of  the  present  economy  by  the  second  com- 
ing of  the  Lord.  See  vv.  26,  29.  "We  must  be  careful  to  avoid 
basing  our  conclusion  on  the  modern  sentiment  respecting  free- 
dom and  slavery. 

22.  Freeman  {aweXevdtpofi).  Rev,,  correctly,  freedman  / 
the  preposition  atf  from  implying  previous  bondage. 

23.  The  servants  of  men.  Not  referring  to  the  outward 
condition  of  bondage,  but  to  spiritual  subjection  to  the  will 
and  guidance  of  men  a^  contrasted  with  Christ. 

25.  Virgins  {irap^kvfov).  Not  the  unmarried  of  both  sexes, 
as  Bengcl,  The  nse  of  the  word  by  ecclesiastical  writers  for 
an  unmarried  man  has  no  warrant  in  classical  usage,  and  may 
have  arisen  from  the  misinterpretation  of  Apoc.  xiv.  4,  where 
it  is  employed  adjectivally  and  metaphorically.  In  every  other 
cage  in  the  New  Testament  the  meaning  is  nnquestionahle. 

26.  The  present  distress  (t^h  hiea-rHiaav  ayay/crji').    'Eiw- 

Toxrav present  may  also  express  fioniething  which  is  not  siniply 
present,  but  tiie  presence  of  whieli  foreshadows  and  inaugurates 
something  to  come.  Hence  it  may  be  rendered  impendiug  or 
aettiitg  in.  See  on  Bom.  viii.  38.  ^Avar/icq  means  originally 
force,  conalraint,  Tteceaaity,  and  this  is  its  usual  meaning  in 
classical  Greek ;  though  in  the  poets  it  sometimes  has  the  mean- 
ing of  distress,  anguish,  which  ia  very  common  in  Hellenistic 


*  So  Edwards,  EUlootl,  Muver.  D«  Wette,  Bengal,  Alford.  Godet,  on  Iha 
coutru-j,  eipliiiiB,  "  it  thou  majeat  be  made  free,  m»ke  uaa  ot  the  pogsibll 
itj."  His  Argument  ia  certainly  rnrcible.  Both  Stanley  and  Atford  prenciit 
ezoellent  ■ummarles  of  Ilia  dlsuuiUiiun,  tud  Ediru'ds  has  some  good  remarki 


Ch.  Vn.]       THB  FIRST  BPISTLB  TO  THB  GORINTHIANa  221 

Greek.  Tiius  Sophocles,  of  the  approach  of  the  crippled  Phil- 
octetes :  ^^  There  falls  on  my  ears  the  sound  of  one  who  creeps 
slow  and  painfaUy  {icar  avatiicq»y  ^' Philoctetes,"  206) ;  and 
again,  of  the  same :  ^*  Stumbling  he  cries  far  j)atn  {inr  avdrf- 
tca^^^^  215).  In  the  Attic  orators  it  occurs  in  the  sense  of  Uood- 
reUUionshvpy  like  the  Latin  necesaitudo  a  binding  tie.  In  this 
sense  never  in  the  New  Testament.  For  the  original  sense  of 
necessity^  see  Matt,  xviii.  7 ;  Luke  xiv.  18 ;  2  Cor.  ix.  7 ;  Heb. 
ix.  16.  For  distress^  Luke  xxi.  23 ;  1  Thess.  iii.  7.  The  dis- 
tress is  that  which  should  precede  Christ's  second  coming,  and 
Tvhich  was  predicted  by  the  Lord  himself,  Matt.  xxiv.  8  sqq. 
Compare  Luke  xxi.  23-28. 

28.  I  spare  you  {vfi&v  ^IZofuii).  Rev.,  ^^I  would  spare,"  is 
not  warranted  grammatically,  but  perhaps  avoids  the  ambiguity 
of  I spare^  which  might  be  understood:  /  vpare  you  fuviker 
mention  of  these  things.  The  meaning  is:  I  give  you  these  in- 
junctions in  order  to  spare  you  the  tribulation  of  the  flesh. 

29.  Time  (Koipo^).  Not,  the  period  of  mortal  life;  but  the 
time  which  must  elapse  before  the  Lord  appears. 

Short  {aw€(rra\fjkipos;).  Rev.,  correctly,  giving  the  force  of 
the  participle,  shortened.  Compare  Mark  xiii.  20,  and  see  on 
hasting  untOj  2  Pet.  iii.  12.  The  word  means  to  draw  together 
or  contract.  Only  here  and  Acts  v.  6,  where  it  is  used  of  the 
winding  up  of  Ananias'  corpse.  In  classical  Oreek  of  furling 
sails,  packing  luggage,  reducing  expenses,  etc  Applied  to 
time,  the  word  is  very  graphic. 

It  remaineth  that  {ro  XoittSv  tva).  The  meaning  is  rather 
henceforth^  or  for  the  future.  That  (S/a)  in  any  case  is  to  be 
construed  with  the  time  is  shortened.  According  to  the  punct- 
uation by  difiPerent  editors,  we  may  read  either :  the  lime  is 
shortened  that  henceforth  hoth  those^  etc. ;  or,  the  time  is  short- 
ened henceforth,  that  hoth  thosCy  etc.  The  former  is  preferable.* 
The  time  is  shortened  that  henceforth  Christians  may  hold 
earthly  ties  and  possessions  but  loosely. 

*  So  Rer. ;  Weatoott  and  Hort,  Tiaohendorf,  Brown,  Mej«r,  EUioott,  Staiki 
lej.     Oodet  prefers  the  other. 


222  WORD  STODIBB  IN  THG  SEW  TESTAMENT.        [Uh.  VII 

31.  Abusing  {icaTa^(p<i>fitinti).  Only  here  and  cli.  is,  18. 
The  verb  means  to  u«f  t*p  or  conauttie  by  utitiff.  Hence  the 
sense  of  fni-auae  by  twtfruse.  So  A.  V.  and  Rev.,  ahuae.  But 
the  American  liev.,  and  Rev,  at  eh.  ix.  18,  vm  to  tlte/ull,  thus 
according  better  with  the  preceding  antitheseB,  whiuli  do  not 
coDtraat  what  is  right  and  wrong  In  itself  (as  use  and  abuEci. 
but  what  is  right  in  itself  with  what  is  proper  under  altered 
circnmstancee.  In  ordinary  cases  it  is  right  for  Chiialians  to 
sorrow;  but  tliey  should  live  now  as  in  the  near  future,  when 
earthly  sorrow  is  to  be  done  away.  It  is  right  for  tliem  to  live 
in  the  married  state,  but  they  should  "assimilate  their  present 
condition  "  to  that  in  which  they  neither  marry  nor  are  given 
in  marriage. 

Passeth  away  (va^Miyet).  Or,  as  some,  the  continuous  pres- 
ent, ig passing.  If  the  former,  the  nature  of  the  worldly  order 
is  expressed.  It  is  transitory.  If  the  latter,  the  fact ;  it  is  act- 
ually passing,  with  a  suggestion  uf  the  nearncBB  of  the  consum- 
mation.    The  context  seems  to  indicate  the  latter* 

Z'2.  Without  carefulness  {a^ptfivow).  Kot  a  good  transla- 
tion, because  i-arefvlneaa  has  lost  its  earlier  sense  of  anxiety. 
So  Latimer :  "  This  wicked  carefidneaa  of  men,  when  they  seek 
how  to  live — like  as  if  there  were  no  God  at  all."  See  on  take 
no  thought,  Matt,  vi,  25,  Rev.,  free  frovi  cares.  Ignatius 
uses  the  phrase  ev  aftepiftvia  OeoS  in  godhy  cardetsness  (Poly- 
carp,  vii.). 

31.  There  is  a  difference.  The  textual  question  here  is 
very  perplexing,  and  it  is  well-nigh  impossible  to  explain  the 
differences  to  the  English  reader.  He  must  observe,  let.  That 
fWT}  wife  is  also  the  general  term  for  woman,  whether  virgin, 
married,  or  widow,  2d.  That  fiefiipurrat,  A.  V.,  there  is  a  dif- 
ference, literally  means,  is  divided,  eo  that  the  literal  rendering 
of  the  A.  v.,  would  be,  ths  wife  and  the  virgin  are  divided. 
Some  of  the  best  texts  insert  ical  and  both  before  and  after  is 
divided,  and  join  that  verb  with  the  close  of  rer.  33,  so  that  it 


Cn.  YILI       THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  223 

reads :  caretkfor  tlie  things  of  the  toorld  how  he  may  please  his 
fjoife^  and  he  is  dis^ractecL  This  makes  yuptf  and  irapShn)^ 
(A.  v.,  wife  and  virgin)  begin  a  new  sentence  connected  with 
the  preceding  by  tcaX  and.  I\wif  is  rendered  womauy  and  the 
words  fj  offafAo^  the  unmarried^  instead  of  beginning  a  sentence 
as  A.  v.,  are  placed  directly  after  woman  as  a  qualifying  phrase, 
so  that  the  reading  is  ^  yvt^  17  aryofio^  the  unmarried  woman, 
and  both  this  and  17  rrapSivo^  the  virgin  are  nominative  to 
fupifivi  careth.  The  whole,  then,  from  the  beginning  of  ver. 
33,  will  read  :  Brit  he  who  is  mof-ried  careth  /ar  the  things  of 
tlie  world  how  he  may  please  his  wife,  and  he  is  distracted/ 
and  the  unmarried  woman  and  the  virgin  care  for  the  things 
of  the  Lord.* 

35.  Snare  (fip6xpv).  Lit,  a  noose  or  slvjhhnot  for  hanging 
or  strangling.  Thos  Homer  of  Jocasta :  ^'  She  went  to  Hades 
having  suspended  a  noose  on  high  from  the  lofty  roof" 
("  Odyssey,"  xi.,  278).  Sophocles,  of  Antigone  :  '*  We  descried 
her  hanging  by  the  neck,  slung  by  a  thread- wrought  halter  of 
fine  linen"  ("Antigone,"  1222).  Also  a  snare  for  birds;  the 
meshes  of  a  net. 

That  ye  may  attend  {irpo^ — evwdpehpov).  Only  here  in  the 
New  Testament.  From  ev  wellj  irdpeSpo^  sitting  beside.  That 
ye  may  attend  is  a  kind  of  circumlocution.  The  Greek  reads 
literally  :  for  that  which  is  seemly  and  for  that  which  is  assid- 
uous. Assiduous  conveys  the  sense  of  the  word  as  nearly  as 
possible,  since  etymological ly  it  means  sitting  dose  at.  One  is 
reminded  of  Mary  at  Bethany  sitting  at  Jesus'  feet,  Luke  x.  39. 

Without  distraction  (aTrepunrourrw).  See  on  Luke  x.  40. 
The  same  word  compounded  here  with  a  noty  is  used  of 
Martha's  being  cumbered  or  distracted  with  much  servmg. 

36.  Behaveth  himself  uncomely  {aaxnfwveui).  Acts  un- 
becomingly, either  by  throwing  temptation  in  the  daughter's 


*  Rey.  follows  the  A.  V.  So  Mejrer,  Alford,  De  Wette,  Ellicott,  TiBohen- 
dorf ;  and  it  is  trne,  as  EUioott  observes,  that  this  gires  a  clearer  and  sharper 
antithesis  than  the  other ;  bat  MS.  anthority  is  clearlj  in  faror  of  the  other 
reading.     So  Edwards,  following  the  text  of  Westcott  and  Hort,  and  Tregellea. 


224  WORD  8TIJDIHS  IN  THE  NEW  THSTAMEMT.        [Ch.  VU 

way  hy  oonBtraining  lier  to  remaia  unmarried,  or  hy  exposing 
liei"  to  the  disgrace  which  was  suppoaed  to  attach  to  the  un- 
married state.  But  Paul,  in  his  preceding  words,  has  regarded 
tliD  latter  consideration  as  set  aside  hy  the  peculiar  circutn- 
stanccs  of  the  time. 

His  virgin  (ti7i>  irap^hiov  airrov).  Ber.  properly  insert? 
dauglUer.  It  is  an  unusual  expression  for  daughter,  Xenophon 
uses  it  with  tlie  word  i^vyu-njp  daughter  {"  Cyropaedia,"  iv.,  6, 
9),  and  Oedipus  speaks  of  his  two  daugliters  as  my  ^jiaidens 
(Sophocles,  "Oedipus  Tyratinus,"  1462). 

Pass  the  flower  of  her  age  {y  inrepaKfuK).  Rev.,  correctly, 
hejkzat.  Beyond  the  bloom  of  life.  Plato  fixes  the  point  at 
twenty  years  {"  Republic,"  460j.  Diogenes  Laertiiis  says : 
"  An  undowered  maiden  is  a  heavy  burden  to  a  father  after 
sjie  has  outrun  the  flower  of  her  age  "  {"  Lycon,"  v.,  65). 

Let  them  marry.  Evidently  there  was  assumed  to  be  an- 
other in  the  case  beside  the  father  and  tiie  virgin. 

37.  Necessity  {apar/icT}p).  Either  outward  or  moral  con- 
straint.    See  on  ver.  2G,  and  note  on  Luke  xiv,  18. 

Power  over  his  own  will  (i^ovtriau  irepl  tov  iSiov  ^X^fta- 
roi).  The  A.  V.  ia  ambiguous,  and  miglit  I)e  understood  to 
imply  self-control.  The  meaning  is  rather :  iafree  to  act  as  he 
pleases.  Rev.,  as  touching  his  own  will.  The  repetition  of 
his  own  cmphaBizes  the  fact  lliat  the  disposal  of  t)ie  daughter 
lay  wholly  in  the  parent's  power.  Among  tlie  Greeks  and 
Romans  the  choice  of  a  wife  was  rarely  grounded  upon  affect- 
ion. In  many  cases  the  father  chose  for  his  son  a  wife  whom 
the  latter  had  never  seen,  or  compelled  him  to  marry  for  the 
sake  of  checking  his  extravagances.  Thus  Terence  pictures  a 
fatJier  meeting  his  son  in  the  forum,  and  saying,  "  You  are  to  be 
married  to-day,  get  ready  "  {"  Andria,"  i.,  5).  Nor  was  the  con- 
sent of  a  woman  generally  thouglit  necessary.  She  was  obliged 
to  submit  to  t!ie  wishes  of  her  parents,  and  perhaps  to  receive  a 
stranger.  Thus  Ilermione  says:  "My  marriage  is  mj'  father's 
care:  it  is  not  for  me  to  decide  about  that"  (Euripides,  "  An- 
Iromache,"  987).    Under  the  patriarchal  and  Mosaic  dispeusa- 


Ch.  Vm.]      THB  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THB  CORINTHIANa  225 

tions,  the  father's  power  over  the  children  in  the  matter  of 
marriage  was  paramoaut,  and  their  consent  was  not  required. 
After  the  Exile  the  parents  could  betroth  their  children,  while 
minors,  at  their  pleasure ;  but  when  they  became  of  age  their 
consent  was  required,  and  if  betrothed  during  minority,  they 
had  afterward  the  right  of  insisting  upon  divorce. 

39.  Be  dead  {icoifAfqS^).  Lit,  have  /cUlen  (uleep.  See  on 
Acts  vii.  60 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  4 ;  compare  Bom.  vii.  2,  where  the 
usual  word  for  die,  airo^vrf  is  used.  In  that  passage  Paul  is 
discussing  the  abstract  question.  Here  the  inference  is  more 
personal,  which  is  perhaps  the  reason  for  his  using  the  more 
tender  expression. 

40.  Happier  {fuucapmripa).  More  blessed  is  preferable. 
The  word  has  a  higher  meaning  tlian  hajppy.     See  on  Matt. 

"  Bach,  if  on  high  their  thoughts  are  let, 
Nor  in  the  stream  the  source  forget. 
If  prompt  to  quit  the  hliss  thej  know. 
Following  the  Lamb  wherever  He  go, 
Bj  purest  pleasure  unbeguiled 
To  idolize  or  wife  or  child : 
Such  wedded  souls  our  Ood  shall  own 
For  faultless  virgins  round  His  throne.** 
Keblb,  '*  Christian  Year/*  Wednesday  before  Easter. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

1.  Things  offered  unto  idols  (e^XoAtm»y).  Seeon  Apoc. 
ii.  14. 

We  know  that  we  all,  etc.  The  arrangement  of  the  text  is 
in  question.  Evidently  a  parenthesis  intervenes  between  the 
l>eginning  of  ver.  1  and  ver.  4.  It  seems  best  to  begin  this 
parenthesis  with  knowledge  jpuffeth  vp^  and  to  end  it  with  hnoum 
of  him  (ver.  3). 

*  On  the  subject  of  Panrs  riew  of  celibaoj,  see  8tanlej*i  '*  Oommentary  on 
Corinthians,**  p.  117  sqq. 
Vol.  m.— 15 


226  WORD  STUDIES  IH  THB   NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Cn.  VIIL 

We  all  have  knowledge  {iravrtv  yvaaiv  e-)(piieu).  The 
exact  reference  of  these  words  must  remain  uncertain.  Some 
iitiderstanil  Paul  liinigelf  and  the  more  enlightened  Corinthians. 
Others,  all  ChristianE.  All  the  expoeitions  are  but  guesses.  I 
prefer,  on  the  whole,  the  view  that  Paul  is  here  repeating, 
either  verbally  or  in  snbstance,  a  passage  from  the  letter  of  the 
Corinthians  to  him.  In  that  case  the  sense  is  slightly  ironical: 
"We  know,  to  use  jour  own  words,  that  we  all  have  knowl- 
edge." The  parenthesis  thus  comes  in  with  an  appropriate 
cantionary  force. 

Puffeth  up.  See  on  ch.  iv.  6.  The  contrast  is  striking  be- 
tween puffing  up  and  building  up — a  bubble  and  a  building. 

2.  That  he  knoweth  anything  (eyvwKivat  n).  Or,  literally, 
hat  coT/ie  to  knaw.  See  on  John  ii.  24  ;  iii.  10  ;  xvii.  3.  Show- 
ing in  what  sense  knowledge  was  used  in  the  previous  clause: 
yiiTtciefi  knowledge;  knowledge  of  divine  things  without  love. 

3.  The  same  is  known  of  Him  (owros  ^wtTTot  W  ainov). 
The  same,  i.e.,  this  same  man  who  loves  God.  lie  does  not 
say  knows  God,  but  implies  this  in  the  larger  truth,  ia  known 
by  God.  Compare  Gal.  iv,  9 ;  1  John  iv.  7,  8.  16  ;  2  Tim.  ii. 
19.  ruia>irKo>  in  New-Testament  Greek  often  denotes  a  per- 
sonal relation  between  the  knower  and  the  known,  so  that  the 
knowledge  of  an  object  implies  the  influence  of  that  object 
upon  the  knower.  So  John  ii.  24,  25 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  8 ;  1  John  iv. 
8.  In  John  the  relation  itself  is  expressed  by  the  verb.  John 
xvii.  3,  25 ;  1  John  v.  20 ;  iv.  6  ;  ii.  3,  4.  5.* 

i.  An  idol  is  nothing  in  the  world  {oiiSev  elSwXop  iv  Koa-ft^). 
Rev.,  no  idol  is  anytking.  An  idol  is  a  nonentity.  The  em- 
phasis is  on  the  7iothinyn£88  of  the  idol,  hence  the  emphatic 
position  of  ovhkv  nothing.  It  is  a  mere  stock  or  stone,  having 
no  real  significance  in  heaven  or  on  earth.  One  of  the  Old- 
Testament  names  for  heathen  gods  is  elilim-  notliin^js.  Idol 
(eZSwXov)  is  primarily  an  image  or  Ukenesa.     In  Greek  writei-s 

•  The   Undent  ihonld  Olrefully   atndr   Crenier'B   article  viniirm   In   the 

"  Biblido-Tbeoic^icftl  Lexioon  of  New-TeBlunent  Greek." 


C^B.  ym.]     THB  FIRST  EPISTLB  TO  THB  OORINTHIANS.  227 

it  is  sometitnes  used  of  the  shades  of  the  dead,  or  the  fa/iUasies 
of  the  mind.  In  the  Old  Testament,  the  namber  and  variety 
of  the  words  representing  the  objects  of  heathen  worship,  are  a 
striking  oommentarj  upon  the  general  prevalence  of  idohitry. 
ElZaiKov  image  stands  in  the  Septuagint  for  several  of  the  dif- 
ferent Hebrew  terms  for  idols ;  as,  elilim  things  of  noughi ; 
gilhUim  things  rolled  about,  as  logs  or  masses  of  stone ;  cham- 
manim  sun-piUarSy  etc.  Other  words  are  also  used  to  translate 
the  same  Hebrew  terms,  but  in  all  cases  the  idea  is  that  of  the 
material  object  as  shaped  bj  mechanical  processes,  or  as  being 
in  itself  an  object  of  terror,  or  a  vain  or  abominable  thing,  a 
mere  device  of  man. 

5.  Gods — lords.  Superhuman  beings  to  whom  these  titles 
are  given,  as  Eph.  vi.  12  ;  2  Cor.  iv.  4 ;  John  xiL  31 ;  xiv.  30. 

7.  With  conscience  of  the  idol  (rg  irwei^ae^  rov  elhmXov). 
Tlie  best  texts  read  awffSeif  ciistomy  which  occurs  only  here 
and  John  xviiL  39 ;  see  note.  Lit.,  with  custom  of  the  idol ; 
i.e.,  as  Rev.,  being  used  to  the  idol.  Their  long  habit  previous 
to  their  conversion  made  them  still  regard  their  offering  as 
made  to  something  really  existent,  and  consequently  to  feel 
that  it  was  sinful  to  eat  of  meat  thus  offered. 

Is  defiled  (jAoXvuerai).    See  on  Apoc.  xiv.  4. 

8.  Commendeth  —  not  (ov  Trapaanja^i).  Lit,  present. 
Kev.,  more  correctly,  will  not  commend.  See  on  shewed  him* 
self  J  Acts  i.  3. 

9.  Stumbling-block  {trpoo-Ko^/ia).    See  on  Bom.  xiv.  13. 

10.  Idol's  temple  {elBoaikei^).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment.    See  on  Apoc.  ii.  14. 

Be  emboldened  (oUoSo/priSi^eTai).  Lit.,  he  built  vp.  The 
A.  Y.  misses  the  irony  of  the  expression.  His  apparent  ad- 
vance is  really  detrimental.  Calvin  remarks :  ^^  a  ruinous  up- 
building.^ 

11.  Shall  the  weak  brother  perish  {airoXKvrai  ocurBev&v). 
Not  a  question,  as  A.  Y.  The  participle  ^^  he  that  is  being 
weak^^  indicates  a  continuance  of  the  weakness,  and  the  present 


WORD  STDDIE8  VS  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


leiiBC,  iaperishing,  iniplieB  that  the  process  of  moral  undermin- 
ing is  in  progress  tbrongli  the  habitual  indulgence  of  the  better- 
informed  Christian.     Rev.,  he  that  ia  weak  perisheth. 


See  on  Matt. 


13.  Make  to  offend  {aKav&dkSjEt). 
Rev.,  maketh  to  stumble. 

Meat — flesh  {fipmfia — lepea).  The  fornxBT  Jbod  in  generaly 
the  latter  the  epeciaiyood  vihich  causes  stumbling.  Dr.  South 
draws  the  distinction  between  &  tender  and  a  weak  eouscience. 
"  Tenderness,  applied  to  the  conscience,  properly  imports  quick- 
ness and  exactness  of  sense,  which  is  the  perfection  of  this 
faculty.  .  .  .  Though  the  eye  is  naturally  the  most  tender 
and  delicate  part  of  the  body,  yet  is  it  not  therefore  called 
weak,  so  long  as  the  sight  is  quick  and  strong.  ...  A 
weak  conscience  ia  opposed  to  a  strong;  which  very  strength, 
we  shew,  consisted  in  the  tenderness  or  quickness  of  its  discern- 
ing or  perceptive  power  "  (Sermon  XXIX.,  "  A  Tnie  State  and 
Account  of  the  Flea  of  a  Tender  Conscience"). 


CHAPTER  IX. 


1.  Seen  Jesus.  Seech,  xv.  8;  Acts  iz.  17;  xviii.  9;  xxii. 
17,  18  ;  2  Cor.  xii.  1  sqq.     Compare  Acta  xxii.  14. 

2.  Seal  {a^pofji^.  See  on  Rom.  iv.  11;  John  iii.  33;  Apoc 
xxii.  10. 

3.  Answer  {aitoKoriid).     See  on  1  Pet,  iii.  15. 
Examine  {avajcplvovaw).     See  on  Luke  xxiii.  14. 

4.  Eat — drink.  At  the  expense  of  the  churches.  Compare 
Luke  X.  7. 

6.  A  sister,  a  wife.  Wrong.  Sister  meane  a  christian 
woman,  a  fellow-member  of  the  Church,  as  Rom.  xvi.  1 ;  1 
Cor.  vii.  15 ;  Jas.  ii.  15.  It  18  in  apposition  with  m/e;  A  vnf« 
that  it  a  sister  or  bdi&ver.    So  Rev.    Such  an  one  has  also  the 


Ch.  DL]         the  first  EPIBTLB  to  THB  GORINTHIANa  229 

riglit,  like  her  busbaiid,  to  be  maintained  by  the  Charcb.  Some 
of  the  fathers  claimed  that  not  a  wife  was  meant,  but  a  female 
attendant,  sermens  nuUronaj  who  contributed  to  the  mainten- 
ance of  the  apostles  as  certain  women  ministered  to  Christ. 
There  is  no  foundation  for  this.  It  is  contradicted  by  the  ex- 
ample of  Peter  cited  at  the  end  of  this  verse ;  compare  Matt. 
viiL  14 ;  and  besides,  the  point  of  the  argument  is  that  these 
companions  should  be  maintained.  Such  a  practice,  Iiowever, 
did  grow  up  in  the  Church,  but  was  abolished  by  the  Council  of 
Xicaea  on  account  of  its  abuses.  Stanley  remarks  that  the  fact 
of  these  women  accompanying  their  husbands,  may  be  explained 
by  the  necessity  of  females  to  gain  access  to  and  to  baptize  the 
female  converts  in  Greece  and  in  oriental  countries ;  the  same 
necessity  which  gave  rise  to  the  order  of  deaconesses. 

6.  Barnabas.  The  only  mention  of  Barnabas  along  witli 
Paul  since  the  quarrel,  Acts  xv.  39. 

Forbear  working.  For 'their  own  support.  ^Ep^afyaBai 
to  work^  is  the  regular  word  for  manual  labor.  See  Matt.  xxi. 
2S  ;  Acts  xviii.  3.  See  on  3  John  5 ;  and  trade^  Apoc.  xviii. 
17. 

7.  Goeth  a  warfare  {drrparevera*).  The  "a"  in  a  wa/rfa/re 
is  the  abbreviated  preposition  on  or  in,  as  a  comi/ng^  afidd^ 
going  a  pilgrimage.  In  the  Geneva  Bible,  Deut.  xxiv.  5  is 
rendered,  ^' When  a  man  taketh  a  newe  wife,  he  shal  not  go  a 
warfare^  So  Froissart :  "  He  was  not  in  good  poynt  to  ride 
a  warfare^  The  phrase,  however,  is  incorrect  as  a  translation, 
since  the  Greek  word  is  used  not  only  of  war,  but  of  military 
service  in  general.  Soldiers  are  called  orparevofMeuo^,  Luke  iii. 
14.  More  correctly,  who  serveth  as  a  soldier  f  or,  as  Bev., 
wIuU  soldier  serveth  f    See  on  Luke  iii.  14 ;  Jas.  iv.  1. 

Charges  (o^ra>i;/oi9).  See  on  Luke  iii.  14,  and  compare  Bom. 
vi.  23  ;  2  Cor.  xi.  8. 

Feedeth  (iroifialvei).  See  on  1  Pet.  v.  2.  Bengel  remarks: 
"  The  minister  of  the  gospel  is  beautifully  compared  with  the 
soldier,  vine-dresser,  shepherd."      He  goes  forth  to  contend 


230  WORD  8TUDIE8  IK  THE  NEW  I'BSTAMENT,  [Cn.  IX 

witli  the  world,  to  plant  churches,  and  to  exerciee  pastoral  Ciii-e 
over  tliem. 

8.  As  a  man  (xar^  avSptmrov).  Rer.,  after  the  nianrier  of 
inen.  See  on  Rom.  iii.  5.  The  formula  occurs  aix  times  in 
Paul's  epiatlea.  The  qnestion  iutrodiiues  another  kind  of  evi- 
dence—that  from  Scripture.  I  will  not  confine  myself  to  il- 
lustrations from  human  affairs.     I  will  appeal  to  Scripture. 

9.  Muzzle  {4>^piMHrett).  See  on  Matt.  xxii.  12,  34;  Mark  ir. 
39.  Some  texts  read  Kiffuoffeii  muesle,  from  KHfUKt  a  muasle. 
See  Dent.  xxv.  4. 

Ox— treadeth.  The  cnstom  of  driving  the  oxen  over  the 
corn  strewed  on  the  ground  or  on  a  paved  area,  was  nn  Egyp- 
tian one.  In  later  times  the  Jews  nsed  threshing  instniuienls, 
dragged  by  the  beasts  through  the  grain.  Herodotus  says  that 
pigs  were  employed  for  this  purpose  in  Egypt,  hut  the  monu- 
ments always  represent  oxen,  or,  more  rarely,  asses.  In  Anda- 
lasia  the  proceBS  may  still  bo  seen,  the  animals  pulling  the  drag 
in  a  circle  through  the  heap  of  grain  ;  and  in  Italy,  tiie  method 
of  treading  ont  by  horses  was  in  use  up  to  a  comparatively 
recent  date.* 

The  verb  dXodw  to  tread,  occurring  only  here,  ver.  10,  and  1 
Tim.  v.  18,  is  etyinologically  related  to  aikaiv  /lalmi,  tiireshiitg- 
floor  (see  on  Matt.  iii.  12),  which  also  means  the  dlik  of  the 
sun  or  moon,  or  a  halo,  thus  implying  the  circular  shape  of  the 
floor.  Dr.  Thomson  says:  "The  command  of  Moses  not  to 
mnzzle  the  ox  that  troadeth  oat  the  corn  is  literally  obeyed  to 
this  day  by  most  farmers,  and  you  often  see  the  oxen  eating 
from  the  floor  as  they  go  round.  There  are  niggardly  peasants, 
however,  who  do  muzzle  the  ox  "  ("  The  Land  and  the  Book  "). 
Tliis  custom  was  in  strong  contrast  with  that  of  Gentile  farm- 
ers, who  treated  their  laboring  animals  cruelly,  sometimes  em- 
ploying inhuman  methods  to  prevent  them  from  eating  while 
threaliing.    All  students  of  the  Egyptian  monuments  are  famiU 


*  A  capitAl  desoripllan  of  thii  pronen  mt,j  be  footid  In  \  lirelj  book  by 
Heaiy  P.  LBlaad,  "  Amerioknt  in  Rome." 


Ch.  IX.]         THB  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OOaiHTHIANS.  231 

iar  with  the  hieroglyphic  inscription  in  a  tomb  at  Eileithjas, 
one  of  the  oldest  written  poems  extant : 

**  Thresh  ye  for  joanelvot, 
Thresh  ye  for  joiinelyes, 
Thresh  ye  for  jourselyes,  O  oxen. 
MeMores  of  grain  for  jonnelyes, 
Measures  of  grain  for  your  masters.** 

Doth  God  take  care  for  oxen  ?  The  A.  Y.  misses  the  tme 
point  of  the  expression.  Panl,  of  course,  assumes  that  God 
cares  for  the  brute  creation ;  but  he  means  that  this  precept  of 
Moses  was  not  primarily  for  the  oxen's  sake  but  for  man's  sake, 
lie  is  emphasizing  the  typical  and  spiritual  meaning  of  the 
command.   Render,  as  Rev.,  la  iifor  the  oxen  th(U  God  oareth  t  * 

10.  Altogether  (iniin-a>9).  Better,  as  Rev.,  in  margin,  ae  He 
dovbdesa  doth,  or»  as  American  Rev.,  assuredly. 

In  hope  {hr  tkirCbi).  See  on  Rom.  viii.  21.  Resting  an 
hope.  Compare  Aeschylus :  ^^  When  hope  has  raised  me  up  an 
strength  (hr  iCKxa^) ; "  t.6.,  elated  me  with  confidence  (^^  Choe- 
phoroe,"  407). 

He  that  thresheth  in  hope  should  be  partaker  of  his 
hope.  The  text  is  in  error  here.  The  true  reading  is  o  oKo&v 
hr  ikirlSi  rov  fier^e^y  and  he  that  thresheth  to  thresh  in  hope 
ofjpartahmg. 

12.  Power  {i^owrCasi).  Rev.,  correctly,  right.  The  right  to 
claim  maintenance. 

Suffer  (ariyofiev).  Rev.,  bear.  The  primary  meaning  is  to 
cover.  So  some  render  ch.  xiii.  7,  covereth  for  hea/reth.  Hence 
to  protect  by  covering,  as  with  a  tight  ship  or  roof.  So  Aes- 
chylus, of  a  ship :  **  Tlie  wooden  house  with  sails  that  keq>8  out 
{oriytov)  the  sea  "  ("  Suppliants,"  126).  "The  tower  keeps  off 
(aTTOfrreyei)  the  multitude  of  the  enemy "  ("  Seven   against 


^  Hence  Mr.  Leokj  is  mistaken  in  saying:  **St  Panl  tnmed  aside  the 
precept  *  Thon  shalt  not  mnxzle,'  etc.,  with  the  oontemptnons qnettion,  '  Doth 
God  take  care/**  etc.  ('* History  of  Bnropean  Morals,**  IL,  178,  note). 


232  WORD  STUDIES   IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Cii.  IX. 

Thebes,"  220).  And  bo,  to  hear  up  against,  endure.  Coinpare 
1  Theaa.  iii.  1,  5.» 

Hinder  {ty/eov^v  S&fiev).  Lit,  give  hindrance.  Hev.,  cawte 
hindrance.  'EfKOJr^  hiiulrancs,  only  here  in  the  New  Tealii- 
inent  Primarily,  an  incision,  and  bo  need  by  the  phyBJciaii 
Galen.  Compare  the  kindred  verb  eyKOTtra  to  cut  into,  also  Of- 
curring  in  Ilippocratea  in  the  Burgical  eeiiae.  In  tlie  sense  of 
cutting  into  one's  way,  it  gets  the  meaning  of  hindrance.  See 
Actaxxiv.  4;  Rom.  xv.  22;  Gal.  v.  7;  1  ThesB.  ii.  18;  1  Pet. 
iiL  7.     Compare  the  Latin  iniercidcre  to  divide,  interrupt. 

13.  Minister  {epya^6f*evot).  Lit.,  tvork  or perfurm.  Xevei- 
in  claBfiical  Greek  of  being  engaged  in  sacred  rites. 

Wait  {■JTap€&peuovre<;).  Etymologieally  akin  to  irupehpot  git- 
iing  beside.  See  on  ch.  vii.  35.  Only  liere  in  the  New  Teata- 
nient. 

Altar  {$uaiaa-rr)pl<(i).      See  on  Acta  Kvii.  23. 

17.  For  if  I  do  this  thins  willingly,  etc.  The  esact  line  of 
Paul's  thought  is  a  matter  of  much  discussion,  and  must  be  de- 
tt'rmined  if  we  are  to  understand  the  force  of  the  several  words. 
It  appears  to  be  as  follows  :  lie  has  been  apeaking  of  the  fact 
that  he  preaches  at  his  own  cost.  He  so  glories  in  this  that  he 
would  rather  die  than  surrender  this  ground  of  boasting.  Com- 
pare 2  Cor.  xi.  7-12  ;  xii.  13-16.  For  it  is  the  only  ground  of 
boasting  that  is  possible  to  him.  The  preiiehing  of  the  Gub- 
pel  in  itself  furnishes  no  ancb  ground,  for  one  cannot  boaat  of 
what  he  needa  muat  do ;  and  the  necessity  to  preach  the  Gospel 
is  laid  on  him  under  penally  of  a  "woe"  if  he  refuse.  He 
goes  on  to  show,  iu  two  propositions,  why  and  how  there  is  no 
cause  for  boasting  in  preaching  under  necessity.  1.  Supposing 
there  were  no  neceaeity,  but  that  he  preached  of  free  will,  like 
the  twelve  who  freely  accepted  the  apostleahip  at  Christ's  call, 
then  he  would  rightfully  have  a  reward,  as  a  free  man  entering 
freely  upon  service;  and  so  would  have  some  ground  of  glory- 
ing.    2.  But  supposing  I  became  an  apostle  under  constraint, 


Cb.  IX]        THE  FIRST  SPISTLB  TO  TUB  CORINTHIANS.  233 

as  was  the  fact,  then  I  am  not  in  the  position  of  a  free  man 
who  chooses  at  will,  bat  of  a  slave  who  is  made  household 
steward  by  his  master's  will,  without  his  own  choice,  and  con- 
sequently I  have  no  claim  for  reward  and  no  ground  of  boast- 
ing. What,  then,  is  my  reward  ?  What  ground  of  boasting 
have  I  ?  Only  this :  to  make  the  Gospel  without  charge.  In 
this  I  may  glory.* 

Willingly—against  my  will  {iiemv — cuaov).  These  words 
are  not  to  be  explained  of  the  spirit  in  which  Paul  fulfilled  his 
ministry ;  but  of  his  attitude  toward  the  apostolic  charge  when 
it  was  committed  to  him.  He  was  seized  upon  by  Christ 
(Philip,  ii.  12) ;  constrained  by  His  call  on  the  way  to  Damas- 
cus.    Rev.,  of  mine  own  will-— not  of  mine  own  wUl, 

Reward.  Correlative  with  the  second  icewyrifia  eotnething 
to  glory  of  in  ver.  16. 

A  dispensation  is  committed  unto  me  {oltcovofUop  irerr- 
l<rrevfjuu).  Lit,  I  am  entrusted  with  a  stewofrdshijp.  For  a 
similar  construction  see  Rom.  iii.  2.  Stewards  belonged  to  the 
class  of  slaves.  See  Luke  xii.  42,  43,  and  note  oUovofio^  stew^ 
ard  in  ver.  42,  and  hovXo^  iiceivo^  that  bond-servant  in  ver.  43. 
Paul  is  not  degrading  the  gospel  ministry  to  a  servile  office. 
He  is  only  using  the  word  to  illustrate  a  single  point — the  man- 
ner of  his  appointment. 

18.  Abuse  {xara-xpriacuT^i).  See  on  ch.  vii.  31.  Rev., 
correctly,  use  to  thefvU, 

19.  Made  myself  servant  (eSot/Xoxra).  Rev.,  brought  my- 
self under  bondage  ;  better,  as  bringing  out  the  force  of  SoOXo? 
Z^OTu^-servant,  from  which  the  word  is  derived,  and  thus  accord- 
ing with  stewardshipy  ver.  17. 

Gain  (KepS^a-coi),  Carrying  out  the  thought  of  servant  in 
ver.  18.  "He  refuses  payment  in  money  that  he  may  make 
the  greater  gain  in  souls.  But  the  gain  is  that  which  a  faithful 
steward  makes,  not  for  himself,  but  for  his  master"  (Edwards). 

*  A  most  excellent  diBouBsion  of  this  passage  may  be  foand  in  Godet 


234  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMBNT.  [Cs.  IX 

The  word  is  not,  as  Qodet,  to  be  limited  to  its  purely  natiiml 
ineaaing,  bat  Ib  used  io  tlie  sense  of  Matt,  zviii.  15  ;  1  Pet. 
iii.  1. 

20.  Them  that  are  under  the  law.  The  distinction  be- 
tween tbis  clasa  and  Jews  is  differently  explained.  Some,  Jews, 
viewed  nattonallr//  UTider  the  ^um,  viewed  religioiuiJy.  Others, 
Jews  by  origin,  and  Gentile  proselytes.  Others  understand  by 
those  wider  the  law,  rigid  Jews,  Pharisees.  The  first  explana- 
tion seoma  preferable. 

21.  Without  law  (aM>^t).  As  one  of  the  Gentiles.  By 
intercourse  with  them,  relinquiahment  of  Jewish  obserrances, 
and  adapting  his  teaching  to  their  modes  of  thought.  Seo 
Acta  xvfi. 

Under  law  (etow/Mf).  The  expression  differs  from  that  in 
ver.  20,  imo  vofxov  under  l^aw,  though  with  only  a  shade  of  dif- 
ference ill  ineaniiig,  'Evvofio^  means  subject  to  the  law,  but  in 
the  sense  of  keeping  within  (ev)  the  law. 

22.  Weak.  In  faith  and  ciiristian  discernment.  Compare 
uh.  viii.  7  sqq, ;  Rom.  siv,  1 ;  sv.  1 ;  1  Thess.  v.  14. 

24.  In  a  race  (ev  oroSi^}.  Or,  better,  in  a  race-course. 
From  tvTTjfu  to  place  or  establish.  Hence  «  slated  distance  ;  a 
standard  (^length.  Id  all  other  New-Testament  passages  it  is 
used  of  a  measure  of  length,  and  is  rendered /urfoii^,  repi-esent- 
ing  606}  English  feet.  From  the  fact  that  the  race-courses 
were  uBually  of  exactly  this  length,  the  word  was  applied  to 
the  race-course  itself.  The  position  chosen  for  the  stadium 
was  usually  on  the  side  of  a  hill,  which  would  furnish  a  natural 
filope  for  seats;  a  corresponding  elevation  on  the  opposite  side 
being  formed  by  a  mound  of  earth,  and  the  seats  being  sup- 
ported upon  arches.  The  stadium  was  oblong  in  shape,  and 
semicircular  at  one  end  ;  though,  after  the  Eoman  conquest  of 
Greece,  both  ends  were  often  made  semicircular.  A  straight 
wall  shut  in  the  area  at  one  end,  and  here  were  the  entrances 
and  the  starting-place  for  the  runners.  At  the  other  end  was 
the  goal,  which,  like  the  starting-point,  was  marked  by  a  square 


Cb.  IX.  ]        THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  235 

pillar.  Half-way  between  these  was  a  third  pillar.  On  the 
first  pillar  was  inscribed  excel;  on  the  second,  hasten  ;  on  the 
third,  tv/m^  since  the  racers  tamed  round  the  colnmn  to  go 
back  to  the  starting-point.* 

The  isthmus  of  Corinth  was  the  scene  of  the  Isthmian  games, 
one  of  the  four  great  national  festivals  of  the  Greeks.  The 
celebration  was  a  season  of  great  rejoicing  and  feasting.  The 
contests  included  horse,  foot,  and  chariot-racing;  wrestling, 
boxing,  musical  and  poetical  trials,  and  later,  fights  of  animals. 
The  victor's  prize  was  a  garland  of  pine  leaves,  and  his  victory 
was  generally  celebrated  in  triumphal  odes  called  epiniki{ij  of 
which  specimens  remain  among  the  poems  of  Pindar.f  At  the 
period  of  Paul's  epistles  the  games  were  still  celebrated,  and 
the  apostle  himself  may  very  probably  have  been  present^ 
At  the  same  time,  he  would  have  been  familiar  with  similar 
scenes  in  Tarsus,  in  all  the  great  cities  of  Asia  Minor,  espec- 
ially Ephesus,  and  even  in  Jerusalem.  Metaphors  and  allus- 
ions founded  upon  such  spectacles  abound  in  Paul's  writings. 
HacerSj  1  Cor.  ix.  24 ;  hoxerSj  1  Cor.  ix.  26,  27 ;  gladiators 
fighting  with  heasts,  1  Cor.  xv.  32 ;  the  judge  awarding  the 
prize^  2  Tim.  iv.  8 ;  the  goal  and  the  jprize,  1  Cor.  ix.  24 ; 
Philip,  iii.  14 ;  the  chaplety  1  Cor.  ix.  25  ;  2  Tim,  ii.  6 ;  iv.  8 ; 
the  training  for  the  conteety  1  Tim.  iv.  7,  8 ;  the  rvles  govern- 
ing ity  2  Tim.  ii.  5;  the  chariot^acey  Philip,  iii.  14.  These 
images  never  occur  in  the  gospels.  See  on  of  life^  Apoc.  ii. 
10. 

Prize  ()9/Mi^e2oi/).  Only  here  and  Philip,  iii.  14.  The  kind- 
red verb  Ppafiewo  to  he  umpire,  occurs  once.  Col.  iii.  15.  See 
note. 

Obtain  (/caraXa/Si/re).  Lit.,  lay  hold  of.  Rev.,  attain.  See 
on  comprehendedj  John  i.  5  ;  come  uj>on  you,  John  xii.  35  ;  and 
perceived.  Acts  iv.  13.     Compare  Philip,  iii.  12. 


*  See  the  description  of  the  Btadiam  at  Ephesus  in  Wood's  *'  Ephesus.  ** 
f  See  a  fine  description  of  the  Olympic  games,  on  which  the  others  were 
modeUed,  in  J.  Addington  Sjmonds'  **  Studies  of  the  Greek  Poets,**  i.,  ch.  xi 
X  See  the  question  discussed  by  Gonybeare  and  Howson,  ch. 


236  WORD  STUDIES   IN   THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Cu.  LX. 

25.  Striveth  for  the  mastery  {aytuvi^ofievoi;).    Better,  Rev., 

stri'oeih.  in  the  ganicg,  tiiua  prcserviiig  the  metaphor.     The  wcud 
was  the  regular  term  for  contending  in  the  arciis  or  on  the  Etage. 

Is  temperate  {eyKpareverai).  Only  here  and  ch.  vii.  9.'  TJie 
candidate  for  the  races  was  required  to  be  ten  months  in  tiaJn- 
ing,  and  to  practise  in  the  gymnasium  immediately  before  the 
games,  under  the  direction  of  judges  who  had  tliemselves  been 
iiiBtnicted  for  ten  months  in  the  details  of  tlic  games.  The 
training  was  largely  dietary.  Epictetus  says:  "Thou  mnst  be 
I  orderly,  living  on  spare  food  ;  abstain  from  confections;  make 
I  a  point  of  exercising  at  the  appointed  time,  in  heat  and  in  cold  ; 
1  nor  drink  cold  water  nor  wine  at  hazard."  Horace  says:  "The 
]  youth  who  wonld  win  in  the  race  liath  borne  and  done  much ; 
I  lie  hatli  sweat  and  been  cold  ;  he  hath  abstained  from  love  and 
wine^"  Ars  Poetica,"'  412).  Tertullian,  commending  the  ex- 
ample of  tiie  athletes  to  persecuted  Christians,  says:  "Cognn- 
tur,  cruciantur,  fatigantur."  "They  are  constrained,  harassed, 
wearied"  {"  Ad  Martyres,"  3).     Compare  2  Tim.  ii,  5. 

Crown  (trre^vov).     Chaplet  of  pine-leaves.     See  on  Apoc. 


26.  Uncertainly  («5^X<w).  Only  here  in  the  ]:sew  Testa- 
ment. The  kindred  adjective  aSi^Xo?  not  manifest,  occurs  Luke 
xi.  M  (see  note)  and  1  Cor.  xiv.  S.  Compare  also  atj{\aTq^  un- 
certainty, 1  Tim.  vi,  17.  lie  runs  with  a  clear  perception  of 
liis  object,  and  of  the  true  manner  and  result  of  his  striving. 

Fight  1  {trvKTevai).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  Uis- 
tinotively  of  fighting  with  thejists,  and  evidently  in  allusion  to 
the  boxing-match.  Rev.,  in  margin,  box.  Etymologically  akin 
to  •mrffiri  the  fist  /  see  on  (^t,  Mark  vii.  3. 

Beateth  the  air.  A  boxer  might  be  said  to  beat  tlie  air 
when  practising  without  an  adversary.  Tliis  was  called  (rxto- 
nayia  shad^ow-fighttng.  Or  he  might  pnrposely  strike  into  the 
air  in  order  to  spare  his  adversary  ;  or  the  adversary  might 
evade  his  blow,  and  thus  cautue  him  to  spend  his  strength  on 
the  air.     The  two  latter  may  well  be  combined  in  Paul's  meta- 


d 


Oil  IX.]        THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  237 

phor.     He  strikes  straight  and  does  not  spare.    Compare  Vir- 
gil, in  the  description  of  a  boxing-match : 

*<  Entellos,  rising  to  the  work,  his  right  hand  now  doth  Bhow 
TJpreared  ;  bat  he,  the  nimble  one,  foresaw  the  falling  blow 
Above  him,  and  his  body  swift  writhed  skew-wise  from  the  fall. 
Entellos  spends  his  stroke  on  air. " 

* '  Aeneid,  '*  y . ,  448.    Morris'  Translation. 

27.  I  keep  under  {inrcrrruiia}).  A  feeble  translation,  and 
missing  the  metaphor.  The  word  means  to  strike  under  the 
eye ;  to  give  one  a  hlack  eye.  It  occurs  elsewhere  in  the  Kew 
Testament  but  once,  Luke  xviii.  5  (see  note).  Rev.,  /  huffet. 
The  blow  of  the  trained  boxer  was  the  more  formidable  from 
the  use  of  the  ceeticSj  consisting  of  ox-hide  bands  covered  with 
knots  and  nails,  and  loaded  with  lead  and  iron.  So  EnteUus 
throws  his  boxing-gloves  into  the  ring,  formed  of  seven  bulls'- 
liides  with  lead  and  iron  sewed  into  them  (Virgil,  "  Aeneid," 
v.,  405).  They  were  sometimes  called  yvioropoi  limb-breakers. 
A  most  interesting  account  is  given  by  Itodolfo  Lauziani, 
"  Ancient  Home  in  the  Light  of  Recent  Discoveries,"  of  the 
exhuming  at  the  foundation  of  the  Temple  of  the  Sun,  erected 
by  Aurelian,  of  a  sitting  bronze  statue  of  a  boxer.  The  accom- 
panying photograph  shows  the  construction  of  the  fur-lined 
boxing-gloves  secured  by  thongs  wound  round  the  forearm 
half-way  to  the  elbow.  The  gloves  cover  the  thumb  and  the 
hand  to  the  first  finger-joints.  The  writer  says;  "The  nose  is 
swollen  from  the  effects  of  the  last  blow  received ;  the  ears  re- 
semble a  flat  and  shapeless  piece  of  leather ;  the  neck,  the 
shoulders,  the  breast,  are  seamed  with  scars.  .  .  .  The  de- 
tails of  the  fur-lined  boxing-gloves  are  also  interesting,  and  one 
wonders  how  any  human  being,  no  matter  how  strong  and 
powerful,  could  stand  the  blows  from  such  weapons  as  these 
gloves,  made  of  four  or  five  thicknesses  of  leather,  and  forti- 
fied with  brass  knuckles." 

Bring  it  into  subjection  (Sov\arY(uy&).  Rev.,  bring  it  into 
hondage.  Metaphor  of  captives  after  battle.  Not  of  lending 
the  vanquished  round  the  arena  (so  Godet),  a  custom  of  which 


WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


[Ch. 


there  is  no  traoe,  &nd  which,  in  moet  caaes,  the  condition  of 
the  vanquished  would  render  Impossible.  It  is  rather  one  of 
those  sudden  changes  and  mixtures  of  metaphor  so  frequent  in 
Panl's  writings.     See,  for  instance,  2  Cor.  v.  1,  2. 

Having  preached  (unjpufa;).  See  on  2  Pet.  iL  5.  Some 
find  in  the  word  an  allusion  to  the  iterald  (ic^pv^  who  sum- 
moned the  contestants  and  proclaimed  the  prizes. 

Castaway  (aSoMfiot).  See  on  Rom.  i,  28.  Better,  aa  Rev., 
rejeoted^  as  unworthy  of  the  prize. 


CHAPTER  X. 

1.  Moreover  (S^).  But  the  correct  reading  is  f dp  for,  in- 
troducing an  illustration  of  rejection  by  God,  and  thus  connect- 
ing what  follows  with  the  close  of  the  last  chapter.  It  is  pos- 
sible that  I  may  be  rejected,  yb?-  the  Israelites  were. 

All.  Strongly  emphasized  in  contrast  with  iruM  of  them 
(A.  v.,  many)  in  ver.  5.  All  enjoyed  the  privileges,  but  few 
improved  them.     The  word  is  repeated  five  times. 

Under  the  cloud.  The  cloudy  pillar  which  guided  the  Is- 
raelites. It  is  sometimes  spoken  of  as  covering  the  host.  See 
Ps.  cv.  39 ;  Wisdom  x.  17  ;  xix.  7 ;  'Nnm.  xiv.  14. 

2.  Baptized  unto  Moses  (€k).  Rev.,  margin,  irUo.  See  on 
Matt,  xxviii.  19;  Rom.  vi.  3.  They  were  introduced  into  a 
spiritual  union  with  Moses,  and  constituted  his  disciples. 

Cloud — sea.  The  two  together  forming  the  type  of  the 
water  of  baptism.  Bengel  says:  "The  cloud  and  the  sea  are 
in  their  nature  water."  The  cloud  was  diffused  and  suspended 
water. 

3.  Spiritual  meat.  The  manna,  called  spiritual  because 
coming  from  heaven.  See  Ps.  Ixxviii.  25  ;  John  vi.  31 ;  and 
on  Apoe.  xi.  8;  ii.  17. 

4.  Drink— spiritual  drink.  Spiritual,  like  the  meat,  in  be- 
ing Bupernaturally  given.     The  aorist  tense  denotes  something 


d 


CSL  X.]         THE  FIRST  EPISTZiifi  TO   fHE  CORINTHIANS.  230 

past,  jet  without  limiting  it  to  a  particular  occasion.  Tlicy 
drank  at  Rephidim  (Exod.  xvii.  6),  bat  they  continued  to 
drink  Bpiritual  drink,  for 

They  drank  {hrivov).  The  imperfect  tense  denoting  con* 
tinned  action — throughout  their  journey. 

That  spiritual  rock.  For  that  read  a.  Paul  appears  to 
recall  a  rabbinic  tradition  that  there  was  a  well  formed  out  of 
the  spring  in  Horeb,  which  gathered  itself  up  into  a  rock  like 
a  swarm  of  bees,  and  followed  the  people  for  forty  years ;  some- 
times rolling  itself,  sometimes  carried  by  Miriam,  and  always 
addressed  by  the  elders,  when  they  encamped,  with  the  words, 
"Spring  up,  O  welll"  Num.  xxi.  17.  Stanley  says:  "In  ac- 
cordance with  this  notion,  the  Kock  of  Moses,  as  pointed  out 
by  the  local  tradition  of  Mt  Sinai,  is  not  a  cleft  in  the  mount- 
ain, but  a  detached  fragment  of  rock  about  fifteen  feet  high, 
with  twelve  or  more  fissures  in  its  surface,  from  which  the 
water  is  said  to  have  gushed  out  for  the  twelve  tribes.  This 
local  tradition  is  as  old  as  the  Koran,  which  mentions  this  yerj 
stone."  * 

Was  Christ.  Showing  that  he  does  not  believe  the  legend, 
but  only  uses  it  allegorically.  The  important  point  is  that 
Christ  the  Word  was  with  His  people  under  tlie  old  covenant 
"  In  each  case  we  recognize  the  mystery  of  a  *  real  presence ' '' 
(Ellicott).  "Grod  was  in  Christ"  here,  as  from  the  beginning. 
Tlie  mosaic  and  the  christian  economies  are  only  different  sides 
of  one  dispensation,  which  is  a  gospel  dispensation  throughout. 
The  Jewish  sacraments  are  not  mere  types  of  ours.  They  are 
identical. 

6.  Many  [jol^  irXeUHxiv).  The  A.  V.  misses  the  force  of  the 
article,  ifie  many.  Hence  Rev.,  correctly,  most  of  them.  All 
perished  save  Caleb  and  Joshua. 

Overthrown  {KaT€OTp<oSrf<rav).  Only  here  in  the  Kew 
Testament.     Lit.,  were  strewn  dmon  along  (the  ground).     The 

*  Edwards,  Meyer,  Alford,  Stanley,  adopt  the  reference  to  the  tradition. 
Ellicott  is  very  doubtful;  and  Godet  thinks  it  incredible  that  "the  inoel 
spiritual  of  the  apostles  should  hold  and  teach  the  Church  such  puerilities. '' 


340 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  TKE  NE' 


TESTAMENT, 


word  belongs  mostly  to  later  Greek,  though  found  in  Herodotus 
in  the  general  sense  of  slayivg.     So  Euripides :  "  He  laiii  low 

hie  wife  and  child  with  one  dart "  ("  Ilercnles  Fiirens,"  1000). 
It  is  used  of  spreuding  a  couch. 

6.  Examples  (rtiwoi),  See  on  1  Pet.  v.  3.  The  woi-d  may 
mean  either  an  example,  as  1  Tirn.  iv.  12,  or  a  type  of  a  fact  or 
of  a  spiritual  truth.     Ileb.  ix,  24 ;  Rom.  v.  14. 

We  should  not  lust  (/i^  elvai  fiftat;  hriAvft^rikii).  Lit., ehouI4 
not  be  dt-itirers.  'EirtSvfirj-ni^  desirer,  /-over,  only  here  in  tha 
New  Testament,  Frequent  in  the  classics.  The  eiiis  of  the 
Israelites  are  connected  with  those  of  the  Corinthians. 

7.  Idolaters.  Keferring  to  the  dauger  of  partaking  of  the 
idol  feasts. 

To  play  {irai^en').  Tiie  merrymaking  generally  which  fol- 
lowed the  feast,  not  si>ecially  referring  to  the  i/ancinff  at  the 
worship  of  the  golden  calf.     See  Exod.  xxxii.  19. 

1.  Commit  fornication.  Lascivioiisuess  was  habitually  associ- 
ated with  idol-worship.  The  two  are  combined,  Acts  xv.  29, 
A  tlioueand  priests  ministered  at  the  licentious  rites  of  the 
temple  of  Venus  at  Corinth.* 

Three  and  twenty  thousand.  A  plain  discrepancy  be- 
tween this  Btateitient  and  Num.  xxv.  9,  where  the  number  is 
twenty-four  thousand.     It  may  have  been  a  lapse  of  memory. 

9.  Let  us  tempt  Christ  (eKTreipd^w/iev  rov  Xpurrov).  The 
compound  word  is  very  aigniiicant,  "  to  tempt  out "  (en) ;  tempt 
thoroughly/  try  to  the  tttmost.  It  occurs  in  three  other  places; 
Matt.  iv.  7  ;  Luke  iv.  12  ;  x.  25;  and,  in  every  case,  is  used  of 
tempting  or  testing  Christ.  Compare  Pa,  Ixxvii.  18  (Sept.). 
For  Christ  read  Kvpiop  the  I^rd. 

10.  Murmur  (yayyv^eTe).     See  on  John  vi.  41. 

The  destroyer  (rov  oXoSpeurov).  The  destroying  angel,  who 
is  called  o  oyoSpevtov,  Exod.  xii.  23. 


•See  Fumr's  "Paal,"  !..  KiTsq,,  md Gibbon's  deBcription 
Dkplins  at  Antiooh,  ch.  xxiii. 


Ca.  X.J         THE  FIRST  EPIBTLB  TO  TUB  CORINTHIANa  241 

11.  Happened  (awefiaunv).  The  imperfect  tense  inarkd 
the  Buccessive  nnfoIdiDg  of  the  events. 

For  ensamples  (two*).  The  best  texts  read  tvitmcA^  by 
yyay  of  figure. 

Admonition  (voudco-iov).  See  on  the  kindred  verb  to  wani^ 
Acts  XX.  31. 

Ends  of  the  world  (r^  rlXi;  ro>y  aiinmv).  Lit,  ends  of  the 
€iges.  So  Rev.  Synonymous  wicii  17  awriK^ia  r&v  auovfov  the 
consummation  of  the  (MgeSj  Heb.  ix.  26.  The  phrase  assumes 
that  Christ's  second  coming  is  close  at  hand,  and  therefore  tlie 
end  of  tlie  world.  Ellicott  acutely  remarks  that  the  plural, 
ends,  marks  a  little  more  distinctly  the  idea  of  each  age  of 
preparation  having  passed  into  the  age  that  succeeded  it,  so 
that  now  all  the  ends  of  the  ages  have  come  down  to  them. 

Are  oome  {Kan^vrrficev).  See  on  Acts  xxvi.  7.  Compare 
Eph.  iv.  13 ;  Philip,  iii.  11. 

13.  Temptation  (ireipaa-fio^).     See  on  Matt.  vi.  13. 

Common  to  man  {avSpdmivos:).  The  word  means  w/uU  be- 
longs to  men^  human.  It  occurs  mostly  in  this  epistle ;  once  in 
Bom.  vi.  19,  meaning  after  the  manner  of  vien^  popularly  (see 
note).  See  Jas.  iii.  7 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  13 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  4,  13 ;  iv.  3. 
It  may  mean  here  a  temptation  which  is  humauj  i.e.,  incident 
or  common  to  man,  as  A.  Y.,  or,  inferentially,  a  temptation 
adapted  to  human  strength  y  such  as  man  can  bear^  Rev.  The 
words  are  added  as  an  encouragement,  to  offset  the  warning 
^'  let  him  that  thinketh,"  etc.  They  are  in  danger  and  must 
watch,  but  the  temptation  will  not  bo  beyond  their  strength. 

A  way  to  escape  (rr)v  Sc/Soo-ti/).  Rev.,  better,  the  way  of 
escape.  The  word  means  an  egress^  a  way  out.  In  classical 
Greek,  especially,  of  a  way  out  of  the  sea.  Hence,  in  later 
Greek,  of  a  landing-place.  Compare  Xenophoii :  "  The  ford 
that  was  over  against  the  outlet  leading  to  the  mountains" 
("  Anabasis,"  iv.,  3,  20).*  For  the  sense  of  issue  or  end^  see 
on  Ileb.  xiii.  7.     The  words  tcith  the  temptation  and  the  way 


*  Edwards  misunderstandB  tliiB  passage. 
Vol.  Ill  —10 


242  WORD  8TUDIBB  IN  THE   SKW   TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  X. 

of  escape  implj  an  adjustment  of  the  deliverance  to  each  parti(>- 
ular  caee. 

To  bear.  Not  tlie  same  as  escape.  Temptation  which  can- 
not be  fled  must  be  endured.  Often  the  only  escape  is  throDgii 
etidurance.     See  Jae.  i.  13. 

14.  Idolatry.  Notice  the  article:  the  idolatry,  the  tempt&- 
tioii  of  which  is  constantly  present  in  the  idol*feast8, 

15.  Wise  {if>povifioK).  See  on  wisdom,  Luke  i.  17;  wisely, 
Luke  xvi.  S.  The  warning  against  the  eacrificial  feasta  and  the 
allusion  in  ver.  3  suggest  the  eucharietic  feast.  An  act  of 
worship  is  sacramental,  as  bringing  the  worshipper  into  com- 
munion with  tlie  unseen.  Ilence  he  who  practises  idolatry  is 
in  communion  with  demons  (ver.  20),  as  he  who  truly  partakes 
of  the  Eucharist  is  in  communion  with  Christ.  But  the  two 
things  are  incompatible  (ver.  21).  In  citing  the  Eucharist  he 
appeals  to  them  as  intelligent  (wise)  men,  concerning  a  familiar 
practice. 

16.  The  cup  of  blessing  (to  iro-rqpMV  n}t  eiiXo^iai;).  Lit., 
tlie  blessing:  the  cup  over  which  the  familiar  formula  of  bless- 
ing is  pronounced.  Hence  the  IToly  Supper  was  often  styled 
Eulogia  (Blessing).  For  blessing,  eee  on  blessed,  1  Pet.  i.  3. 
It  is  the  same  as  euclicvrialia  (t/umkagiving),  applied  as  the 
designation  of  the  Lord's  Supper:  Eucharist.  See  ch.  xiv,  16; 
1  Tim.  iv.  4,  5.  The  cnp  is  first  mentioned,  perhaps,  because 
Paul  wishes  to  dwell  more  at  length  on  the  bread  ;  or  possibly, 
because  drinking  rather  than  eating  characterized  the  idol-feasts. 

Communion  {Kotuatvia).  Or pariieipaiion.  See  onfelloio- 
skip,  1  John  i.  3 ;  Acts  ii.  42 ;  paHners,  Luke  v.  10.  The 
Passover  was  celebrated  by  families,  typifying  an  nnbroken 
fellowship  of  those  who  formed  one  body,  with  the  God  who 
had  passed  by  the  blood-sprinkled  doors. 

17.  For  (3t().  ^tter,  seeing  tJial.  It  begins  a  new  sentence 
which  is  dependent  on  the  following  proposition  :  Seeiru/  tJujt 
there  is  <me  hread,  we  who  are  many  are  one  hody.  Paul  is  de- 
ducing the  mutxial  communion  of  believers  from  the  fact 


de-  I 


Ch.  X.1         THE  FIRST  EPISTLB  TO  TUB  CORINTHIANS.  243 

their  communion  with  their  common  Lord.  By  each  aud  all 
receiving  a  piece  of  the  one  loaf,  which  represents  Christ's  body, 
they  signify  that  they  are  all  bound  in  one  spiritnal  body, 
united  to  Christ  and  therefore  to  each  other.  So  Rev.,  in  mar- 
gin. Ignatius  says :  ^^  Take  care  to  keep  one  eucharistic  feast 
only ;  for  there  is  one  fiesh  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  one 
cup  unto  unity  of  His  blood ; "  «.d.,  that  all  may  be  one  by  par- 
taking of  His  blood  (Philadelphia,  iv.). 

Body.  Passing  from  the  literal  sense,  the  Lord  s  body  (ver. 
16),  to  the  figurative  sense,  the  body  of  believers,  the  Church. 

Partake  of  (e/c  fier€;^o/Aev).  Or  partake ,^y>77i.  That  which 
all  eat  is  taken jr7*{>m  {iic)  the  one  loaf,  and  they  eat  of  it  mu- 
tuallj/y  in  common^  sharing  it  among  them  (jJLeri).  So  Igna- 
tius :  ^^  That  ye  come  together  &a  afyrov  /cX&vre^  breaking  one 
loaf^  (Ephesians,  xx.). 

18.  Showing  that  partaking  of  the  idol-feasts  is  idolatry,  by 
the  analogy  of  the  Israelite  who,  by  partaking  of  the  sacrifices 
puts  himself  in  communion  with  Jehovah's  altar. 

Partakers  of  the  altar  {icowfovoX  rov  Sva-uumjplov).  An 
awkward  phrase.  Hev.,  better,  bringing  out  the  force  of  xoi- 
P€9vol  communers  :  ha/oe  not  tliey — communion  with  the  altar  f 
The  Israelite  who  partook  of  the  sacrifices  (Lev.  viii.  31)  united 
himself  with  the  altar  of  God.  Paul  says  toith  the  (Utar  rather 
than  toith  God,  in  order  to  emphasize  the  communion  through 
the  specific  act  of  worship  or  sacrifice ;  since,  in  a  larger  sense, 
Israel  qfter  the  fleshy  Israel  regarded  as  a  nation,  was,  in  virtue 
of  that  fact,  in  fellowship  with  Grod,  apart  from  his  partaking 
of  the  sacrifices.  Possibly,  also,  to  suggest  the  external  char- 
acter of  the  Jewish  worship  in  contrast  with  the  spiritual  wor- 
ship of  Christians.  Philo  calls  the  Jewish  priest  ico^vtova^  rov 
fidfiov  j>artaker  of  the  altar. 

20.  Devils  (Baifiopioi^).  See  on  Mark  i.  34.  Used  here,  as 
always  in  the  New  Testament,  of  diabolic  spirits.*  Acufioviov, 
the  neuter  of  the  adjective  Saifiovio^  divvnej  occurs  in  Paul's 

*  Acts  xyii.  18,  is  uttered  bjr  Greeks  in  their  own  sense  of  the  word. 


244 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT 


(Ch.  X. 


writings  only  here  mid  1  Tim.  iv.  1.  It  is  used  in  tlie  Septua- 
gitit,  DeiU.  xxxii.  IT,  to  translate  the  Hebrew  word  which 
seems,  originallj*,  to  have  meant  a  siipernatiira!  being  iiifeiicn- 
to  the  goda  proper,  applied  among  the  Assyrians  to  the  bull- 
deities  whicli  guarded  the  entrances  lo  temples  and  palaces. 
Among  tlie  Israelites  it  came  to  signify  alt  gods  but  the  God  of 
Israel.  Compare  Isa.  Ixv.  11,  wiiere  Gad  {ffood  fortune,  proli- 
ably  tiie  star-god  Jnpiter)  is  rendered  in  the  Septuagint  tjS 
Stuftovi^  the  ilemoii.  See  Rev.,  O.  T.  Also  Ps.  xcvi.  5  (Sept. 
xcv.),  where  e/ilim  thtriga  of  noughi,  A.  V.  idols,  is  rendered 
by  Siufiovia  ilemons* 

21.  The  cup  of  devils.  Hepreseuting  the  heathen  feast. 
The  special  reference  may  be  either  to  the  drinking-ciip,  or  to 
that  used  for  pouring  libations. 

The  Lord's  table.  liepresenting  the  Lord's  Supper,  See 
cli.  xi.  20  sqq.  The  Greeks  and  I^smans,  on  extraordinary  oc- 
casions, placed  images  of  the  gods  reclining  on  couches,  with 
tables  and  food  beside  them,  as  if  really  partakers  of  the  tilings 
offered  in  sacrifice-f  Diodorus,  describing  the  temple  of  Bel 
at  Babylon,  mentions  a  large  table  of  beaten  gold,  forty  feet 
by  fifteen,  standing  before  the  colossal  statues  of  three  deities. 
Upon  it  were  two  driuking-cnps.  See,  also,  the  story  of  "  Bel 
and  the  Dragon,"  vv.  10-15.J  The  sacredness  of  the  table  hi 
heatiien  worsliip  is  apparent  from  the  manner  in  which  it  is 
combined  with  the  altar  in  soleiim  formulae;  as  ara  et  fnenea. 
Allusions  to  the  table  or  to  food  and  drink-offerings  in  honor 
of  heathen  deities  occur  in  the  Old  Testament ;  Isa.  Ixv.  11 ;  Jer. 
vii.  18  ;  Ezek.  xvi.  18,  19 ;  xxiii.  41.  In  Mai.  i.  7,  the  altar  of 
burnt-offering  is  called  "  the  table  of  the  Lord,"  § 

32.  Do  we  provoke — to  jealousy  (^  irapa^ri^oviiep).  The 
A.  V.  does  not  translate  ^  or,  and  thus  breaks  the  connection 

*  On  the  sabject  of  Satan  knd  Demoniac  Powers,  the  stodent  ma;  coneult 
Domer'B  "  Chrlstliohe  GUubenslehrB,"  gg  85.  86. 

f  Bee  >n  MPount  of  bucIi  q  feBti»»l  in  Livj,  v.,  13. 

i  Compu-e  Vir((il.  "  Aeneld,"  ii.,  764  :  vlli.,  279. 

gSee  m  very  IntereBtlnK  article  on  "The  Table  of  Demons,"  bj  Eaoln 
Johnson:   "  Expositor,"  second  aerlea,  viii.,  241. 


J 


Cu.  X.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLB  TO  THE  CORINTHIANa  245 

with  what  precedes.  Yon  cannot  be  at  the  eanie  time  in  com- 
munion with  the  Lord  and  with  demons,  or  will  you  ignore  this 
inconsistency  and  provoke  God  ?  For  the  verb,  see  on  Eom. 
X.  19. 

Are  we  stronger.  The  force  of  the  interrogative  particle 
is,  surdy  we  are  not  stronger. 

24.  Another's  wealth  (to  rot)  Mpov).  Lit.,  t/uU  which  is 
the  other^s.  Wealthy  inserted  by  A.  Y.  is  used  in  the  older 
English  sense  of  weUrbeing.  See  on  Acts  xix.  25.  The  A.  Y. 
also  ignores  the  force  of  the  article,  the  other.  Eev.,  much 
better,  hie  neighbof^s  good. 

25.  The  shambles  (juuc&CKip).  Only  here  in  the  New  Test- 
ament. It  is  a  Latin  word,  which  is  not  strange  in  a  Roman 
colony  like  Corinth.  In  sacrifices  usually  only  a  part  of  the 
victim  was  consumed.  The  rest  was  given  to  the  priests  or  to 
the  poor,  or  sold  again  in  the  market.  Any  buyer  might  there- 
fore unknowingly  purchase  meat  offered  to  idols. 

Asking  no  question.  As  to  whether  the  meat  had  been 
used  in  idol  sacrifice.     See  on  ch.  ii.  14. 

26.  The  earth  Is  the  Lord's,  etc.  The  common  form  of 
Jewish  thanksgiving  before  the  meal.  For  fuLneeSy  see  on 
Kom.  xi.  12. 

28.  Any  man.  Some  fellow-guest,  probably  a  gentile  con- 
vert, but,  at  all  events,  with  a  weak  conscience. 

Shewed  (jjuqvwrauTa).  See  on  Luke  xx.  37.  It  implies  tlie 
disclosure  of  a  secret  which  the  brother  reveals  because  he 
thinks  his  companion  in  danger. 

30.  By  grace  (x^p^ri).  Better,  as  Kev.,  in  margin,  with 
thankfulness :  with  an  unsullied  conscience,  so  that  I  can  sin- 
cerely give  thanks  for  my  food.  Compare  Rom.  xiv.  6;  1 
Tim.  iv.  4,  5. 

Am  I  evil-spoken  of  {/Skaa-ifyrjfiovfuu).  In  the  gospels  this 
word,  of  which  blaspheme  is  a  transcript,  has,  as  in  the  Septu- 
agint,  the  special  sense  of  treating  the  name  of  God  with  scorn. 


346  WOBD  STCDIEB  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ca  XL 

So  Matt.  ix.  3 ;  xxvi.  65 ;  Jolin  x.  36.  In  the  epistles  fre- 
quently ae  here,  with  the  claseical  meaning  of  slandering  or 
dtfaming. 


CHAPTER  XI. 

1.  Followers  (/ttfHp^iu).  Lit.,  iVtt^n^'r^,  as  Her.  Tliia  verse 
belongs  to  the  closing  section  of  ch.  x. 

2.  Ordinances — delivered  {vapaitioeK — -rrapk^Ka).  There 
ia  a  play  of  two  kindred  words,  both  beinj^  derived  from  Trapo- 
SiSatfti  to  (/we  over.  Ordinances  is  a  faulty  rendering.  Better, 
Rev.,  traditions.  By  these  words  Paul  avoids  any  poaaible 
charge  of  iinpoaing  his  own  notions  upon  the  Church.  He  de- 
livers to  them  what  had  been  delivered  to  him.  Compare  1 
Tim.  i.  11;  2  These,  ii.  15. 

4.  Having  his  head  covered  {kotcL  Kt^Xiyt  ^'»'')-  Lit., 
having  som^thiyig  /langing  down  from,  his  head.  Refet litig  to 
the  tallith,  a  four-cornered  ahawl  having  fringea  consisting  of 
eight  threads,  each  knotted  five  times,  and  worn  over  the  liead 
in  prayer.  It  was  placed  npon  the  woi-shipper's  head  at  his 
entrance  into  the  aynagogne.  The  Romans,  like  the  Jews, 
prayed  with  the  head  veiled.  So  Aeneas :  "  And  onr  heads 
are  shrouded  before  the  altar  with  a  Phrygian  vestment" 
(Virgil,  "  Aeneid,"  iii.,  545).  The  Greeks  remained  bareheaded 
during  prayer  or  sacrifice,  as  indeed  they  did  in  their  ordinary 
outdoor  life.  The  Grecian  nsage,  which  had  become  prevalent 
in  the  Grecian  chnrches,  seems  to  have  commended  itself  to 
Paul  as  more  becoming  the  superior  position  of  the  man. 

6.  Her  head  uncovered.  Rev.,  vnveiled.  The  Greek 
women  rarely  appeared  in  public,  but  lived  in  strict  seclnsion. 
Unmarried  women  never  quitted  their  apartments,  except  on 
occasions  of  festal  processions,  either  as  spectators  or  partici- 
pants. Even  after  marriage  they  were  larjrely  confined  to  the 
gynaeconitis  or  woinen' 8  rooms.  Thus  Euripides:  "As  to  that 
which  brings  the  reproach  of  a  bad  reputation  upon  iier  wh 
remains  not  at  home,  giving  up  the  desire  of  this,  I  tarried 


1 


Ch.  XI.]        THB  FIRST  EPIBTLB  TO  THE  CORINTHIANa  247 

my  dwelling"  ("Troades,"  649).  And  Menander:  "The  door 
of  the  court  is  the  boundary  fixed  for  the  free  woman."  The 
head-dress  of  Greek  women  consisted  of  nets,  hair-bags,  or  ker- 
chiefs, sometimes  covering  the  whole  head.  A  shawl  which 
enveloped  the  body  was  also  often  thrown  over  the  head,  es- 
pecially at  marriages  or  funerals.  This  costume  the  Corinthian 
women  had  disused  in  the  christian  assemblies,  perhaps  as  an 
assertion  of  the  abolition  of  sexual  distinctions,  and  the  spirit- 
ual equality  of  the  woman  with  the  man  in  the  presence  of 
Christ.  This  custom  was  discountenanced  by  Paul  as  striking 
at  the  divinely  ordained  subjection  of  the  woman  to  the  man. 
Among  the  Jews,  in  ancient  times,  both  married  and  unmarried 
women  appeared  in  public  unveiled.  The  later  Jewish  authori- 
ties insisted  on  the  use  of  the  veil. 

All  one  as  if  she  were  shaven.  Which  would  be  a  sign 
either  of  grief  or  of  disgrace.  The  cutting  off  of  the  hair  is 
used  by  Isaiah  as  a  figure  of  the  entire  destruction  of  a  people 
by  divine  retribution.  Isa.  vii.  20.  Among  the  Jews  a  woman 
convicted  of  adultery  had  her  hair  shorn,  with  the  formula : 
"  Because  thou  hast  departed  from  the  manner  of  the  daughters 
of  Israel,  who  go  with  their  head  covered,  therefore  that  has 
befallen  thee  which  thou  hast  chosen."  According  to  Tacitus, 
among  the  Germans  an  adulteress  was  driven  from  her  hus- 
band's house  with  her  head  shaved ;  and  the  Justinian  code  pre- 
scribed this  penalty  for  an  adulteress,  whom,  at  the  expiration  of 
two  years,  her  husband  refused  to  receive  again.  Paul  means 
that  a  woman  praying  or  prophesying  uncovered  puts  herself 
in  public  opinion  on  a  level  with  a  courtesan. 

6.  Shorn  or  shaven  {fceipaa^tu  ^  ^paaSai).  To  have  the 
hair  cut  close,  or  to  be  entirely  shaved  as  with  a  razor. 

7.  Image  and  glory  {eUmv  teal  So^a),  For  image,  see  on 
Apoc.  xiii.  14.  Man  represents  God's  authority  by  his  position 
as  the  ruler  of  the  woman.  In  the  case  of  the  woman,  the 
word  image  is  omitted,  although  she,  like  the  man,  is  the  image 
of  God.  Paul  is  expounding  the  relation  of  the  woman,  not  to 
God,  but  to  man. 


248  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE   NEW  TESTAMENT.  (Cb.  XL 

10.  Power  on  Ler  head  (efouffiaf).  Not  in  the  primarj- 
eenee  of  liberty  or  permission,  but  auUionty.  Used  here  of 
tfie  itymhol  of  power,  i.e.,  the  covering  upon  the  liead  ae  a  sipi 
of  iier  husband's  authority.     So  Rev.,  a  sign  of  authoi-Uy. 

Because  of  the  angels.  The  holy  angels,  who  were  sup- 
posed by  both  the  Jewish  and  the  early  Christian  Cliurch  to  be 
present  in  worshipping  assemblies.  More,  however,  seems  to 
be  meant  than  "to  avoid  exciting  disapproval  among  them." 
The  key-note  of  Paul's  thought  is  subordination  according  to 
the  original  divine  order.  Woman  best  asserts  her  spiritiia! 
equality  befoi-e  God,  not  by  unsexing  herself,  but  by  recogniz- 
ing her  true  position  and  fulfilling  its  claims,  even  as  do  the 
angels,  who  are  ministering  as  well  as  iBorshij^ing  spirits 
(Ileb.  i.  4).  She  ia  to  fall  in  obediently  with  that  divine  econ- 
omy of  which  she  forms  a  part  with  the  angels,  and  not  to 
bi-eak  the  divine  harmony,  which  especially  asserts  itself  in  wor- 
ship, wliere  the  angelic  ministers  mingle  with  the  earthly  wor- 
shippers ;  nor  to  ignore  the  example  of  the  holy  ones  who  keep 
their  tirst  estate,  and  serve  in  the  heavenly  sanctuary.* 

14.  Nature  (^litrt?).  The  recognized  constitution  of  things. 
In  tliis  case  tlie  natural  distinction  of  tlio  woman's  long  hair.f 

16.  Custom.  Not  the  custom  of  contentiousness,  hut  that 
of  women  speaking  unveiled.  The  testimonies  of  Tertnllian 
and  ChryeoBtom  show  that  these  injunctions  of  Paul  prevailed 
in  the  clnirches.  In  tlie  sculptures  of  the  catacombs  tlie 
women  have  a  close-fitting  head-dress,  while  tlie  men  have  the 
hair  short. 

*  A  lull  diacusaioD  of  this  difflonlt  passage  1b  imiioBaible  here.  The  v«r1- 
etleB  of  InterpreUtioD  ue  Innumerable  aud  w^&risome,  and  manj  of  tbem 
fkncJfuL  A  good  Bummary  m«y  be  foand  in  Blanley'e  ComiDBntary,  and  an 
Interesting  ulicle,  maintaining  StBnlej'e  eiptanation  of  "  the  angels  "  iii  tha 
"  Eipoailor'B  Nole-Book,"  by  Ba»,  Samuel  Cos.,  D.D.,  p.  402.  Sae,  also, 
Mayer  and  Godet 

1 1  prefer  this  objective  Benae  to  the  aubjecfive  meaning,  Ihr  fnlxTii  scnte 
andprr'-rplinn  of  irhiit  ifrrmiy.  Of  conrse,  such  aubieclise  sense  Is  aasnmed-, 
bat.  aa  Kdvarda  remarks.  "  No  sentiment  of  men  wniild  be  adduced  bv  the 
apostle  nntesa  it  were  grounded  on  an  objeclive  differenue  in 
nf  tbingi" 


Cb.  XL]       THB  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  249 

17.  I  declare  (wapafffiXXoo).  WroDg.  It  means  in  the  New 
Testament  only  comnumd.     See  on  Luke  v.  14 ;  Acts  i.  4. 

18.  In  the  church  (^i^  iiac\fi<TUi).  See  on  Matt.  xvi.  18. 
Not  the  church  edifice^  a  meaning  which  the  word  never  has  in 
the  New  Testament,  and  which  appears  first  in  patristic  writ- 
ings. The  marginal  rendering  of  the  Rev.  is  better :  in  can- 
gregation. 

19.  Heresies  (atpiaei^).  See  on  2  Pet.  ii.  1.  In  Paul  only 
here  and  Gal.  v.  20.  Better,  parties  or  fcusUans^  as  the  result 
of  the  divisions. 

20.  This  is  not  (ovic  iariv).  Rev.,  correctly,  it  is  not  jpas- 
sible. 

The  Lord's  Supper  {tcvpuucov  Behrvov).  The  emphasis  is  on 
Zord^s.  Aehrvov  svpper^  represented  the  principal  meal  of  the 
day,  answering  to  the  late  dinner.  The  Eucharist  proper  was 
originally  celebrated  as  a  private  expression  of  devotion,  and  in 
connection  with  a  common,  daily  meal,  an  agape  or  love-feaet. 
In  the  apostolic  period  it  was  celebrated  daily.  The  social  and 
festive  character  of  the  meal  grew  largely  out  of  the  gentile 
institution  of  clubs  or  fraternities,  which  served  as  savings- 
banks,  mutual-help  societies,  insurance  oflSces,  and  which  ex- 
pressed and  fostered  the  spirit  of  good-fellowship  by  common 
festive  meals,  usually  in  gardens,  round  an  altar  of  sacrifice. 
The  communion-meal  of  the  first  and  second  centuries  exhibited 
this  character  in  being  a  feast  of  contribution,  to  which  each 
brought  his  own  provision.  It  also  perpetuated  the  Jewish 
practice  of  the  college  of  priests  for  the  temple-service  dining 
at  a  common  table  on  festivals  or  Sabbatlis,  and  of  the  schools 
of  the  Pharisees  in  their  ordinary  life. 

Indications  of  the  blending  of  the  encharistic  celebration  with 
a  common  meal  are  found  here,  Acts  ii.  42 ;  xx.  7,  and  more 
obscurely,  xxvii.  35.* 

21.  Taketh  before  other.  Not  waiting  for  the  coming  of 
the  poor  to  participate. 


*See  Stanley's  **Chri8tiaii  InstitatioiiB,*'  ch.  iiL 


250  WORD  STDDIES  IN   THE  [JEW  TESTAMEKT  [Ca.  XL 

22.  Them  that  have  not.     Not,  that  have  not  houses,  but 

absolutely,  the  jtoni;  In  thus  Bhaming  their  poorer  comradea 
they  iiiiitrtted  the  heathen.  Xenoplioii  relates  of  Socrates  that, 
at  feaets  of  contribution,  where  eonie  brought  much  and  others 
Httle,  Socratee  bade  his  attendant  cither  to  place  each  small 
contribntion  on  the  table  for  the  common  use,  or  else  to  dis- 
tribute Ills  share  of  the  same  to  each.  And  so  those  who  had 
brought  much  were  ashamed  not  to  partake  of  that  which  was 
placed  for  general  use,  and  not,  in  return,  to  place  their  own 
stock  on  the  tabic  ("Memorabilia,"  iii.,  14, 1). 

23.  I  received  {eyw  irapeKa^ov).  I  ia  emphatic,  giving  the 
weight  of  personal  authority  to  the  statement.  The  question 
whether  Paul  means  that  he  received  directly  from  Christ,  or 
mediately  through  the  apostles  or  tradition,  turns  on  a  di£Fer- 
ence  between  two  prepositions.  Strictly,  wtto  from  or  of,  witli 
the  LoT'd,  would  imply  the  more  remote  source,  from  the  Lord, 
through  the  apostles;  but  Paul  does  not  always  observe  the 
distinction  between  this  and  trapd  from,  the  preposition  of  the 
nearer  source  (see  Greek,  Col.  i,  7 ;  iii.  24);  and  this  latter 
preposition  compounded  with  the  verb  received,  the  emphatic  /, 
and  the  mention  of  the  fact  itself,  are  decisive  of  the  sense  of 
an  immediate  communication  from  Christ  to  Paul.* 

Also  {koX}.  Important  as  expressing  the  identity  of  the  ac- 
count of  Jesus  witii  his  own. 

He  was  betrayed  (■n-apeStSeTo).  Imperfect  tense,  and  very 
grapiiic.  He  was  being  betrayed.  lie  instituted  the  Eucharist 
while  His  betrayal  was  gning  on. 

24.  Had  given  thanks  (euj^opMrnJo-a?).  Eiicharisteaas. 
Hence  in  post-apostolic  and  patristic  writers,  Eucharist  was 
the  technical  terra  for  the  Lord's  Supper  as  a  sacrifice  of 
thanksgiving  for  all  the  gifts  of  God,  especially  for  the  "  un- 
speakable gift,"  Jesus  Christ,  By  some  of  the  fathers  of  the 
second  century  the  term  was  sometimes  applied  to  the  conse- 
crated elements.     The  formnla  of  thankspivinij  cited  in  "The 

*8«a  thA  wholti  admlnbLy  lummed  np  b^  Godet. 


Ch.  XL]       THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIAN&  251 

Teaching  of  the  Twelve  Apostles"  is,  for  the  cup  first,  "  We- 
give  thanks  to  Thee,  onr  Father,  for  the  holy  vine  of  David 
Thy  servant,  which  Thon  hast  made  known  to  us  throagh 
Jesus,  Thy  servant:  to  Thee  be  the  glory  forever."  And 
for  the  bread:  ""We  give  thanks  to  Thee,  our  Father,  for 
the  life  and  knowledge  which  Thou  hast  made  known  to  us 
through  Jesus  Thy  servant:  to  Tliee  be  the  glory  forever. 
As  this  broken  bread  was  scattered  upon  the  mountains  and, 
gathered  together,  became  one,  so  let  Thy  Church  be  gathered 
together  from  the  ends  of  the  earth  into  Thy  Kingdom,  for 
Thine  is  the  glory  and  the  power  through  Jesus  Christ  for- 
ever." 

Brake.  Bengel  says:  ^'The  very  mention  of  the  breaking 
involves  distribution  and  refutes  the  Corinthian  plan— every 
man  his  own  "  (ver.  21). 

Do  {iroietre).     Be  doing  or  contimie  doing. 

In  remembrance  (e^).  Strictly,  for  or  wUh  a  view  to,  de» 
noting  purpose.  These  words  do  not  occur  in  Matthew  and 
Mark.  Paul's  account  agrees  with  Luke^s.  Itemembrance  im- 
plies Christ's  bodily  absence  in  the  future. 

25.  After  supper.  Only  Luke  records  this  detail  It  is  added 
to  mark  the  distinction  between  the  Lord's  Supper  and  the  ord- 
inary meal. 

Testament  (SuA^icrf).  Bev.,  correctly,  covenant.  See  on 
Matt.  xxvi.  28.  The  Hebrew  word  is  derived  from  a  verb 
meaning  to  cut.  Hence  the  connection  of  dividing  the  victims 
with  the  ratification  of  a  covenant.  See  Gen.  xv.  9-18.  A 
similar  usage  appears  in  the  Homeric  phrase  Bpiaa  irurriL  rafiehf, 
lit.,  to  ciU  trustworthy  o(UhSy  whence  the  word  oaths  is  used  for 
the  victims  sacrificed  in  ratification  of  a  covenant  or  treaty. 
See  Homer,  "Iliad,"  ii.,  124;  iii., 73,  93.  So  the  JjiimfoedM 
ferire  *'  to  kill  a  league,'*  whence  our  phrase  to  strike  a  compact. 
In  the  Septuagint  proper,  where  it  occurs  nearly  three  hundred 
times.  SiaSyjtcrj,  m  all  but  four  passages,  is  the  translation  of  the 
Hebrew  word  for  covenant  {herith).    In  those  four  it  is  used  to 


253  WORD  STUDIBB  IN  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XL 

render  hroiherhood  and  words  ojtke  covenant.  In  Philo  it  lias 
the  same  sense  as  in  the  Septuagint,  and  covenant  ia  its  invari- 
able sense  in  the  New  Testament. 

26.  Ve  do  shew  («OTa77eXA«Te).  Kat.,  better,  proclaim. 
It  IB  more  than  represent  or  signify.  The  Lord's  death  is 
preached  in  the  celebration  of  tiie  Eucharist.  Compare  £.\odns 
xiii.  8,  thou,  shall  shew.  In  tiio  Jewish  passover  the  word 
Ilaggadah  denoted  the  historical  explanation  of  the  meaning 
of  the  passover  ritea  given  by  the  father  to  the  son.  Dr.  Schsff 
Siiys o£  the  eucharistic  service  of  the  apostolic  age:  "Thefom-- 
teentb  chapter  of  first  Corintliiana  makes  the  impression — to 
nse  an  American  phrase — of  a  religious  meeting  thrown  open. 
Eveiybody  who  had  a  spiritual  gift,  whether  it  was  the  gift  of 
tongues,  of  interpretation,  of  prophecy,  or  of  sober,  didactic 
teaching,  had  a  right  to  apealc,  to  pray,  and  to  sing.  Even 
women  exercised  their  gifts"  ("Introduction  to  the  Didache"). 
See,  further,  on  ch.  xiv.  33. 

27.  Unworthily  (avafiw!).  Defined  by  "not  diacerning  the 
Lord's  body,"  ver.  29. 

Guilty  {evo-xp<:).     See  on  Ma.rk  iii.  29 ;  Jas.  ii.  10. 

28.  So*  After  self-examination  and  consequent  knowledge 
of  his  spiritual  state. 

29.  Unworthily.    Omit. 

Damnation  (xpl^).  See  on  Mark  xvi.  16;  John  ix.  39. 
This  false  and  horrible  rendering  has  destroyed  the  peace  of  more 
sincere  and  earnest  souls  than  any  other  misread  passage  in  tiie 
New  Testament.  It  has  kept  hundreds  from  the  Lord's  table, 
Kplfia  is  a  tevtporary  jndginent,  and  so  is  distinguished  from 
KaraKpifJM  condemnaiiort,  from  which  this  temporary  judgment 
is  intended  to  save  the  partictpsnt.  The  distinction  appears  in 
ver.  32  (see  note).  The  A.  V.  of  the  whole  passage,  28-34,  ia 
marked  by  a  confusion  of  the  renderings  of  Kpiveiv  to  judgt 
and  its  compounds.* 

*  Sea  Lightfoot,  "  On  >  FtmIi  Rerlaion  of  the  New  TeaUmeiit." 


L.     ^ 


Cu.  XI.]       THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  253 

Not  discerning  (ji^  huucplvwv).  Kev.,  if  he  discern  not^ 
bringing  out  the  conditional  force  of  the  negative  particle. 
The  verb  primarily  means  to  separate^  and  hence  to  make  a  die- 
tinctioriy  discriminate.  Kev.,  in  margin,  discriminating.  Such 
also  is  the  primary  meaning  of  discern  {discemere  to  part  or 
separate)^  so  that  discerning  implies  a  mental  act  of  discrim- 
inating between  different  things.  So  Bacon :  "  Nothing  more 
variable  than  voices,  yet  men  can  likewise  discern  these  per- 
sonally." This  sense  has  possibly  become  a  little  obscared  in 
popalar  usage.  From  this  the  transition  is  easy  and  natural  to 
the  sense  of  doubting ^  disputing^  judging^  all  of  these  involving 
the  recognition  of  differences.  The  object  of  the  discrimina- 
tion here  referred  to,  may,  I  think,  be  regarded  as  complex. 
After  PanPs  words  (vv.  20,  22),  about  the  degradation  of  the 
Lord's  Supper,  the  discrimination  between  the  Lord's  body  and 
common  food  may  naturally  be  contemplated;  but  further, 
such  discernment  of  the  peculiar  significance  and  sacredness  of 
the  Lord's  body  as  shall  make  him  shrink  from  profanation 
and  shall  stimulate  him  to  penitence  and  faith. 

The  Lord's  body.  Omit  Lord^s  and  read  the  body.  This 
adds  force  to  discerning. 

30.  Weak  and  sickly.  Physical  visitations  on  account  of 
profanation  of  the  Lord's  table. 

Many  sleep  {/coift&vrai  ueavoC).  The  word  for  ma/ny  means, 
primarily,  adegtuUCy  sufficient.  See  on  Rom.  xv.  23.  £ev.,  not 
a  few  hardly  expresses  the  ominous  shading  of  the  word :  quite 
enough  have  died.  Sleep.  Better,  are  sleeping.  Here  simply 
as  a  synonym  for  are  deadj  without  the  peculiar  restful  sense 
which  christian  sentiment  so  commonly  conveys  into  it  See 
on  Acts  vii.  60 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  4. 

31.  We  would  judge  (SiCKplvofiep).  An  illustration  of  the 
confusion  in  rendering  referred  to  under  ver.  29.  This  is  the 
same  word  as  discerning  in  ver.  29,  but  the  A.  V.  recognizes 
no  distinction  between  it,  and  judged  (ifcpivofielkt)  immediately 
following.  Eender,  as  Rev.,  if  we  discerned  ourselves;  i.e., 
examined  and  formed  a  right  estimate. 


254 


WORD  STUDIES   IN   THE  HEW  TESTAMENT.  [Cil.  Xil 


We  should  not  be  judged  {ovk  dv  eKptvo/ifSa).  By  God. 
^ere  judged  ia  correct.  A  proper  eel f-Gxaini nation  wonld  save 
08  from  the  divine  judgment. 

32.  When  we  are  judged  {Kpiiv/ievoi).  Correct,  The  same 
word  ae  the  last.  With  this  constrne  hi/  the  Lord ;  not  willi 
chastened.  The  antithesis  to  judging  ourselves  is  thus  pre- 
served.    So  Rev.,  in  margin. 

Condemned  {KaTOKptSaftep).  Signifying  the  final  condem- 
natory judgment ;  but  in  ver.  29  the  simple  tcpi/ia  temporary 
judgmeTit,  is  made  equivalent  to  this.     See  note. 

33.  Tarry  {eVSe^etr^e).  In  the  usual  Xew-Testament  eense, 
aa  John  v.  3 ;  Acts  xvii.  16 ;  though  in  some  cases  the  idea 
of  ey^ctaiicy  is  emphasized,  as  Heb.  x,  13 ;  xi.  10 ;  Jas.  v.  7. 
Some  render  reoeive  ye  one  another,  in  contrast  witli  despising 
the  poorer  guests ;  but  this  is  not  according  to  New-Testament 
usage. 

34.  Will  I  set  in  order  (Sutrafo/uu).  Referring  to  outward, 
practical  arrangements.  See  on  Matt.  xi.  1,  and  compare  cb. 
ix.  14;  xvi.  1;  Gal.  iii.  19. 


CHAPTER  XIL 

1,  Spiritual  gifts.  The  ckarwmata,  or  special  endowments 
of  supernatural  energy,  such  as  prophecy  and  speaking  witli 
tongues.  "Before  this  consciousness  of  a  higher  power  than 
tlieir  own,  the  ordinary  and  natural  faculties  of  the  human 
mind  seemed  to  retire,  to  make  way  for  loftier  aspirations, 
more  immediate  intimations  of  the  divine  will,  more  visible 
manifestations  of  the  divine  power.  ...  It  resembled  in 
some  degree  the  inspiration  of  the  Jewish  judges,  pealmists, 
and  prophets ;  it  may  be  illustrated  by  the  ecstasies  and  visions 
of  prophets  in  all  religions;  but  in  its  energy  and  universality 
it  was  peculiar  to  the  christian  society  of  the  apostolic  age  ' 
(Stanley). 


\ 


J 


Cu.  XIL]      TH£  FIRST  BPISTLE  TO  THE  OORINTUIANB.  255 

2.  Ye  were  carried  away  {am-a/yofjievoi).  Blindly  hurried. 
Rev.,  led. 

Dumb  idols.    Compare  Pb.  cxy.  5,  7.     And  Milton: 

"  The  oracles  are  dumb, 
No  voice  or  hideous  hum 
Rons  through  the  arched  roof  in  words  deoeiTing.** 

•*  Hjmn  on  the  NaUTitj." 

The  contrast  is  implied  with  the  living  vocal  spirit,  which 
dwells  and  works  in  Christ's  people^  and  responds  to  their 
prayers. 

Even  as  ye  were  led  (ck  &p  iiyeaSt).  Bev.,  Aotosoever  ye 
might  he  led.  Better,  Ellicott :  '^  A%fr<yia  time  to  imve  ye  might 
"be  led.  The  imperfect  tense  with  the  indefinite  particle  signifies 
hahitvaJLLy^  whenever  the  occasion  might  ariee.  Compare  Greek 
of  Mark  vi.  56.  '^  Now  the  fatal  storm  carried  the  blinded  gentile, 
with  a  whole  procession,  to  the  temple  of  Japiter ;  again  it  was 
to  the  altars  of  Mars  or  Yenus,  always  to  give  them  over  to  one 
or  other  of  their  deified  passions  "  (Godet). 

3.  Calleth  Jesus  accursed  (Xeyet  ^AvdStfia  ^IrftroO^).  Lit., 
saith  Anathema  Jeeue.  Kev.,  preserving  the  formula,  eaith 
Jceus  is  Anathem4i.  Compare  Acts  xviii.  6,  and  see  on  offerings^ 
Luke  xxi.  5.  Paul  uses  only  the  form  avdSefui,  and  always  in 
the  sense  of  accursed. 

4.  Diversities  {Suupeaei^).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. It  may  also  be  rendered  distributions.  There  is  no 
objection  to  combining  both  meanings,  a  distribution  of  gifts 
implying  a  diversity.  Ver.  11,  however,  seems  to  favor  dis- 
tributions. 

Gifts  (xofUTfiaTc^v).     See  on  Rom.  i.  11. 

^'  Administrations  (Simkovi&p).  Rev.,  better,  ministrations. 
Compare  Epli.  iv.  12.  In  the  New  Testament  commonly  of 
spiritual  service  of  an  official  character.  See  Acts  i.  25  ;  vi.  4; 
XX.  24 ;  Rom.  xi.  13 ;  1  Tim.  i.  12 ;  and  on  minister.  Matt.  xx. 
26. 


256 


WORD  STUDIES   IN   THE   NEW   TESTAMENT. 


6.  Operations  {ei/epyi'tftara).  Rev.,  warkiiiga.  Outward 
inanifeat:ttiotig  and  results  of  epiritual  gifts.  T)ie  kindred  wurd 
cvepyeia  energy  is  used  only  by  Paul,  and  only  of  superlmman 
good  or  evil.  Compare  Epli.  i,  19  ;  iii.  7 ;  Col.  ii.  12.  See  on 
Mark  vi.  14. 

Worketh  {evepydv).  Etymological ly  akin  to  operaiUma. 
See  on  Mark  vi.  li;  Jas.  v.  16. 

All  (tA  iravra).  Or  them  all.  The  article  sliowa  that  they 
are  regarded  collectively, 

9.  Faith.  Not  saving  faith  in  general,  which  is  the  common 
endowment  of  all  Chriatians,  bnt  wonder'Wnrkmg  faith. 

10.  Prophecy.  Not  mere  foretelling  of  the  future.  Quite 
probably  very  little  of  tbia  clement  is  contemplated  ;  but  utter- 
ance under  immediate  divine  inspiration:  delivering  inspired 
exhortations,  instructions,  or  warnings.  See  on  prcphet,  Luke 
rii.  26.  The  fact  of  direct  inspiration  distinguished  prophecy 
from  "  teaching." 

Discerning  of  spirits.  Rev.,  correctly,  dUceniingg.  Dis- 
tinguishing  between  the  different  prophetic  utterances,  whether 
they  proceed  from  true  or  false  epiritg.  See  1  Tim,  iv,  1 ;  1 
John  iv.  1,  2. 

Divers  kinds  of  tongues  {yhni  y\Mtr<Tatv).    I.  Pasbaoks 

RKLATINO  TO  THB  GIFT  OF  TONGUES.       Mark    XVl.  17;    ActS    ii.  3- 

21;  X.  46;  xix.  6;  1  Cor.  xii.  10,  28;  xiii.  1;  xiv.  Possibly 
Eph.  v.  18 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  11.  II.  Terms  employed.  jVeio  ionguee 
(Mark  xvi.  17) :  oilier  or  differmt  Umgues  {Irepai,  Acts  ii.  4) : 
ki/iiia  {yevn)  of  tongitca  (1  Cor.  xii.  10) :  simply  totigites  or 
tongue  {'y\&<TfTai,  '/X&tTffa,  1  Cor.  xiv.) ;  to  apeak  with  tmiguca 
or  a  tong^ie  (yXcoo-aaii  or  y\aMr<rrj  XaXetv,  Acts  ii.  4 ;  x.  46 ; 
xix.  6  ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  2,  4,  13,  14,  19,  27) ;  to  pray  in  a  iwigue 
(vpoa^v)(e<TSai  fXaxrvp,  1  Cor.  xiv.  14,  15),  equivalent  to  pray- 
ing in  the  spirit  as  dietingHished  from  praying  with  the  under- 
standing: toii'jnen  of  men  and  angela  (I  Cor.  xiii.  1).  III. 
Recorded  facts  in  the  Nkw  TEBTAKE^fT.  (1.)  The  first  re- 
corded bestowment  of  tlie  gift  was  at  Pentecost  (Acts  ii,).    Tlie 


J 


Oil  XU.]       THB  FIRST  EPISTLB  TO  THB  CORINTHIANS.  257 

question  arises  whether  the  speakers  were  miraculously  en- 
dowed to  speak  witli  other  tongues,  or  whether  the  Spirit  in- 
terpreted the  apostle's  words  to  each  in  his  own  tongue.  Prob- 
ably the  latter  was  the  case,  since  there  is  no  subsequent  notice 
of  the  apostles  preaching  in  foreign  tongues;  there  is  no  allusion 
to  foreign  tongues  by  Peter,  nor  by  Joel,  whom  he  quotes.  This 
fact,  moreover,  would  go  to  explain  the  opposite  effects  on  the 
hearers.  (2.)  Under  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  the  company  ad- 
dressed by  Peter  in  the  house  of  Cornelius  at  Caesarea  spake 
with  tongues.  Acts  x.  11  16.  (3.)  Certain  disciples  at  Ephe- 
sus,  who  received  the  Iloly  Spirit  in  the  laying  on  of  Paul's 
hands,  spake  with  tongues  and  prophesied.  Acts  xix.  6.  IV. 
Meaning  of  the  term  ^^tonque."  The  various  explanations 
are :  tlie  tongue  alone^  inartictUately :  rare^  provincialy  poetic^ 
or  archaic  words  :  langiMge  or  dialect.  The  last  is  the  correct 
definition.  It  does  not  necessarily  mean  any  of  the  known  lan- 
guages of  men,  but  may  mean  the  speaker's  own  tongue,  shaped 
in  a  peculiar  manner  by  the  Spirit's  influence ;  or  an  entirely 
new  spiritual  language.  V.  Nature  of  the  gift  in  the  Corinth- 
ian Chitroh.  (1.)  The  gift  itself  was  identical  with  that  at 
Pentecost,  at  Caesarea,  and  at  Ephesns,  but  differed  in  its  man- 
ifestations, in  that  it  required  an  interpreter.  1  Cor.  xii.  10, 
SO  ;  xiv.  6, 13,  26, 27.  (2.)  It  was  closely  connected  with  proph- 
esying :  1  Cor.  xiv.  1-6,  22,  25 ;  Acts  ii.  16-18 ;  xix.  6.  Com- 
pare 1  Thess.  V.  19,  20.  It  was  distinguished  from  prophesying 
as  an  inferior  gift,  1  Cor.  xiv.  4,  5 ;  and  as  consisting  in  ex- 
pressions of  praise  or  devotion  rather  than  of  exhortation,  warn- 
ing, or  prediction,  1  Cor.  xiv.  14r-16.  (3.)  It  was  an  ecstatic 
utterance,  unintelligible  to  the  hearers,  and  requiring  interpre- 
tation, or  a  corresponding  ecstatic  condition  on  the  part  of  the 
hearer  in  order  to  understand  it.  It  was  not  for  the  edification 
of  the  hearer  but  of  the  speaker,  and  even  the  speaker  did  not 
always  understand  it,  1  Cor.  xiv.  2,  19.  It  therefore  impressed 
unchristian  bystanders  as  a  barbarous  utterance,  the  effect  of 
madness  or  drunkenness,  Acts  ii.  13,  15;  1  Cor.  xiv.  11,  23. 
Hence  it  is  distinguished  from  the  utterance  of  the  understand- 
ing, 1  Cor.  xiv.  4,  14r-16,  19,  27.  VI.  Paul's  j^stimate  of  Tire 
gift.  lie  himself  was  a  master  of  the  gift  (1  Cor.  xiv.  18),  but 
Vol.  m.— 17 


25b  word  studies  in  THB  new  TKSTAMBNT,        (fa.  Xll. 

lie  assigned  it  an  iuferiur  position  ^1  Cor.  xiv.  4,  5),  und  die- 
tinctl;  gave  propliesying  and  speaking  with  the  noderetanding 
tJie  preference  (i  Oor.  xiv.  a,  H,  5,  19,  22),  VII.  liLbULTS  and 
PERMANENCE.  Being  recognized  distinctly  as  a  gift  of  t)je  Spiiit, 
it  must  be  inferred  that  it  contributed  in  some  way  to  tlie  edifi- 
cation of  tlie  Church ;  but  it  led  to  occasional  disorderly  out- 
breaks (1  Cor.  xiv.  9,  11,  17,  20-23,  26-28,  33,  40).  Ae  a  fact 
it  soon  passed  away  from  the  Church.  It  is  not  mentioned  in 
the  Catholic  or  Pastoral  Epistles.  A  few  allusionB  to  it  occur 
in  the  writings  of  the  fathers  of  the  second  century.  Ecstatic 
conditions  and  manifestations  marked  the  Montanists  at  the 
close  of  the  second  century,  and  an  account  of  such  a  case,  in 
which  a  woman  was  the  subject,  is  given  by  Tertullian.  Simi- 
lar phenomena  have  emerged  at  intervals  in  various  sects,  at 
times  of  great  religious  excitement,  as  among  the  Camisards  in 
France,  the  early  Quakers  and  MetLodists,  and  especially  the 
Irvingites.* 

13.  Made  to  drink  (^oWtr^^i').  The  verb  means  origin- 
ally to  give  to  drink,  fi-om  which  comes  the  sense  of  to  water 
or  irrigfUe.  The  former  is  invariably  the  sense  in  the  gospels 
and  Apocalypse ;  the  latter  in  1  Cor.  iii.  6~S,  and  by  some  here. 
The  reference  is  to  the  reception  of  the  Spirit  in  baptism. 
Omit  into  before  orte  Spirit. 

14.  The  body.  The  student  will  naturally  recall  the  fable 
of  the  body  and  the  members  uttered  by  Menenins  Agrippa. 


•The  literBtnro  of  Ihe  sabjeot  ii  Yolnniinoas.  Good  BummarieB  may  be 
founii  in  Slanli^y.  "  Commentar;^  on  CorinthiuiB,"  p.  344  sqq.  ;  Soball.  "  Hia- 
lorj  of  the  Christian  Church,  "  i.,  ch.  4.  See,  al>o,  E.  H.  Plumptre,  article 
"Gift  of  Tongues,  '  in  Smith's  •■Diotlonarj  o(  tho  Bible  ;  "  Farrar,  "Life 
and  Work  of  St.  Paol,"  1.,  B6  sqq.  Tyermane  "Life  of  Wesley  ;  "  Mm.  Oil- 
phanfs  ■'  Lifa  of  Edward  Irrlng  ; "  Bohaff,  "  History  of  Ihe  Apoalolic  Church  ;" 
Qloag,  ■'  Commentary  on  Acts,"  A  list  of  the  principal  German  anthoritiea  la 
giron  by  Sohaff,  "  Hiatory  of  the  Christian  Cliiirch,"  i.,  cb.  4.  See  Peyrat, 
'■Hintoire  die  Pastenra;"  Clbelln,  "Troublej  de  CoTenneB;"  Cooqnerel, 
"EgllsBB  de  Deserl;"  Fisher,  " Beginnings  of  Christianity;  ■'  Hippolyle 
Btanc.  " De  1' Inspiration  Aaa  CamlsardB."  article  "Camisarda,"  Encyclopae- 
dia BHtanuica;  arlicle  "Znngenreden  "  Hent^'s  "  TheoloRiBche  Eeal-Eo- 
eyklopadie."    See  also  Oodet  and  Edwards  oii  flrst  CorinthiaoH. 


Ed-  J 


Ch.  Xn.]      THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANB.  259 

And  related  by  Livy,  ii.,  32 ;  but  the  illuBtration  seems  to  have 
been  a  favorite  one,  and  occurs  in  Seneca,  Marcus  Antoninns, 
and  others.* 

18.  Set  {SBero).  See  on  John  xv.  16,  where  the  same  word 
is  used  by  Christ  of  ajjpovnting  His  followers. 

22.  Seem  to  be  {hoxovvra — inrapxeiv).  The  allusion  is  prob- 
ably to  those  which  seem  to  be  weaker  in  their  original  stract- 
ure,  naturally.  This  may  be  indicated  by  the  use  of  uirdpx^w 
to  he  (see  on  Jas.  ii.  15) ;  compare  elvoA  tohejin  ver.  23.  Others 
explain  of  those  which  on  occasion  seem  to  be  weaker,  as  when 
a  member  is  diseased. 

23.  We  bestow  {wepirlSefiev).  Elsewhere  in  the  New  Test- 
ament the  word  is  used,  without  exception,  of  encircling  with 
something ;  either  putting  on  clothing,  as  Matt,  xxvii.  28 ;  or 
surrounding  with  a  fence,  as  Matt.  xxi.  33 ;  or  of  the  sponge 
j>laced  round  the  reed,  as  Mark  xv.  36;  John  xix.  29.  So 
evidently  here.  Rev.,  in  margin,  put  on.  The  more  abundant 
honor  is  shown  by  the  care  in  dothing. 

Uncomely — comeliness  {aar^/jLova — ewrxfifioavvfiv).  See 
on  honorable^  Mark  xv.  43 ;  ehamCj  Apoc.  xvi.  15.  Compare 
curxnfiopeiv  heha/oeth  uncomely^  ch.  vii.  36.  The  comeliness  is 
oiUwardy  as  is  shown  by  the  verb  we  put  on,  and  by  the  com- 
pounds of  iryr^ika fashion.     See  on  tramsjjigwred^  Matt.  xvii.  2. 

24.  Tempered  together  {vwkKpcurtv).  Only  here  andHeb. 
iv.  2.  Lit.,  mixed  together.  Here  the  idea  of  mutual  adjust- 
ment is  added  to  that  of  mingling.  Compare  Plato  on  God's 
creating  the  soul  and  body.  '^  He  made  her  out  of  the  follow- 
ing elements,  and  on  this  manner.  Of  the  unchangeable  and 
indivisible,  and  also  of  the  divisible  and  corporeal  He  made 
{(vpeKepda-aro  compounded)  a  third  sort  of  intermediate  essence, 
partaking  of  the  same  and  of  the  other,  or  diverse  "  (see  the 
whole  passage,  "  Timaeus,"  35). 

26.  Suffer  with  It.  Compare  Plutarch  of  Solon's  Laws: 
"  If  any  one  was  beaten  or  maimed  or  snfFered  any  violence, 


*  A  number  of  parallels  maj  be  found  in  Wetstein. 


260  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.        [Ch,  XII 

any  man  that  would  and  was  able  might  prosecute  the  wrong- 
doer ;  intending  by  this  to  accnEtom  the  citizens,  like  meinbere 
of  the  eame  body,  to  resent  and  be  senBible  of  one  anothei's 
injuries"  (Solon).  And  Plato:  "As  in  the  body,  when  but  a 
finger  is  hurt,  the  whole  frame,  drawn  towards  the  soul  and 
forming  one  realm  under  the  rnliag  power  therein,  feele  the 
Imrt  and  sympathizes  all  together  with  the  part  affected" 
{"  Republic,"  v.,  462). 

Is  honored  (Sof^erot).  Or  glorijUd.  Receives  anything 
which  contributes  to  its  eonndness  or  comelineee.  So  ChrjB- 
ostom :  "The  head  is  crowned,  and  all  the  members  have  a 
share  in  the  honor;  the  eyes  laugh  when  the  month  gpeaks," 

27.  In  particular  (ex/^/Mi^).  Rev.,  better,  «ewra%.  Each 
according  to  his  own  place  and  function.  See  oa  part,  Rom. 
xl.  25. 

28.  Hath  set  (e3«To).  See  on  ver.  18.  The  middle  voice 
implies yo^r  Ilis  owih  use. 

Miracles.  Note  tJie  change  from  endowed  persona  to  ab- 
stract gifl«,  and  compare  the  reverae  order,  Rom.  xii.  6-8, 

Helps  {dintX^fi^eii).  Rendered  to  the  poor  and  sick  as  by 
the  deacons.     See  on  hath  liolpeii,  Luke  i.  54. 

Governments  {Kv^epv^atK).  Only  here  in  the  New  Teeta- 
ment.  From  Kvffepvda  to  ate&r.  The  kindred  Kvffepinjn}^  ship- 
vuuter  or  steersman,  occurs  Acts  xxvii,  11;  Apoc.  xviii.  17. 
Referring  probably  to  administrators  of  church  government,  as 
presbyters.  The  marginal  wi^e  counsels  (Rev.)  is  based  on 
Septuagint  usage,  as  Prov.  i.  5 ;  xx.  21.  Compare  Prov.  xi. 
14;  xxiv.  C.  Ignatius,  in  his  letter  to  Polycarp  says:  "The 
occasion  demands  thee,  as  pilots  (Kv^epvrJTat)  the  winds." 
The  reading  is  disputed,  but  the  sense  seems  to  be  that  tlie  crisis 
demands  Polycarp  as  a  pilot.  Lightfoot  says  that  this  is  the 
earliest  example  of  a  simile  which  was  afterward  used  largely 
by  christian  writers — the  comparison  of  the  Church  to  a  ship, 
nippolytns  represents  the  mast  as  the  cross ;  the  two  ruddera 
the  two  covenants;  the  underglrding  ropes  the  love  of  Chriet 


jra  J 


Oh.  Xm.]     THE  FIBST  BPISTLB  TO  THE  OOHINTUIANa  261 

Tlie  ship  is  one  of  the  oruaments  wliich  Clemeut  of  Alexandria 
allows  a  Christian  to  wear  ("  Apostolic  Fathers,"  Part  II.,  Ig- 
natius to  Poljcarp,  ii.). 

31.  The  best  (r^  tcpehropa).  The  correct  reading  is  ra 
lielfyva  the  greater.     So  Bev. 

Yet  (Iri).  Some  construe  with  more  excellent^  rendering  yet 
more  excellent.  So  Bev.  Others  render  m^Mreover^  and  give 
the  succeeding  words  a  superlative  force :  ^^  and  m/yreover  a 
most  excellent  toay,"  etc.     See  on  toith  excellency y  ch.  ii.  1. 

Way.  To  attain  the  higher  gifts.  The  way  of  love  as  de- 
scribed in  ch.  xiii.  "  Love  is  the  fairest  and  best  in  himself, 
and  the  cause  of  what  is  fairest  and  best  in  all  other  things  " 
(Plato,  «  Symposium,"  197). 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

^'Love  is  our  lord — supplying  kindness  and  banishing  on- 
kindness ;  giving  friendship  and  forgiving  enmity ;  the  joy  of 
the  good,  the  wonder  of  the  wise,  the  amazement  of  the  gods ; 
desired  by  those  who  have  no  part  in  him,  and  precious  to 
those  who  have  the  better  part  in  him.  ...  In  every  word, 
work,  wish,  fear — pilot  (tcvfiepvifn)^,  compare  governments^  xii. 
28),  comrade,  helper,  savior ;  glory  of  gods  and  men,  leader  best 
and  brightest ;  in  whose  footsteps  let  every  man  follow,  sweetly 
singing  in  his  honor  that  sweet  strain  with  which  love  charms 
the  souls  of  gods  and  men  "  (Plato,  "  Symposium,"  197).  "He 
interprets  between  gods  and  men,  conveying  to  the  gods  the 
prayers  and  sacrifices  of  men,  and  to  men  the  commands  and 
replies  of  the  gods :  he  is  the  mediator  who  spans  the  chasm 
which  divides  them,  and  in  him  all  is  bound  together.  .  .  . 
Through  love  all  the  intercourse  and  speech  of  God  with  man, 
whether  awake  or  asleep,  is  carried  on.  The  wisdom  which 
understands  this  is  spiritual "  (Id.,  202-3). 

Trench  cites  the  following  Italian  proverbs :  "  He  who  has 
love  in  his  heart  has  spurs  in  his  sides."    '^  Love  rules  without 


262  WORD  STCDIES  IN  THE  SEW  TBaXAMENT.       TCh  XUl 

Uw."  "  Love  rules  Lis  kingdom  without  a  eword."  "Loveia 
tlie  master  of  all  arts."  See,  also,  Stauley'a  essay  oil  '■  The 
Apostolic  Doctrine  of  Love ; "  Commentary,  p.  237. 

1.  Tongues.  Mentioned  first  because  o£  the  exaggerated 
importance  which  the  CoriDthians  attached  to  this  gift. 

Angels,  deferring  to  the  ecstatic  ntterances  of  thoae  who 
spoke  witii  tongnee. 

Charity  {aydin}v).  Rev.,  love.  The  word  does  not  occur  in 
the  ulaBsics,  though  the  kindred  verbs  afyatrata  and  uyawei^w  to 
love,  are  common.  It  first  appears  in  the  Septnagiut,  where, 
however,  in  all  hut  two  of  the  passages,  it  refers  to  the  love  of 
the  sexes.  Eleven  of  the  passages  are  in  Canticles.  See,  also, 
2  Sam.  xiii.  15,  Sept.  The  cliange  in  the  Rev.  from  charity 
to  love,  is  a  good  and  thoroughly  defensible  one.  Cliariiy  fol- 
lows the  carUas  of  the  Vulgate,  and  is  not  used  consistently  in 
the  A.  V.  On  the  contrary,  in  the  gospels,  arfdirt]  is  always 
rendered  love,  and  mostly  elsewhere,  except  in  this  epistle, 
where  the  word  occurs  but  twice.  Charily,  in  modem  usage, 
has  acquired  the  sensea  of  tolerance  and  heiuificenue,  which  ex- 
press only  single  phases  of  love.  There  is  no  more  reason  for 
saying  "charity  en vieth  not,"  than  for  saying  "God  is  charity;" 
"  the  charity  of  Christ  constraineth  us ; "  "  the  charity  of  God 
is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts,"  The  real  objection  to  the  change 
on  the  part  of  unscholarly  partisans  of  the  A.  V.  is  the  break- 
ing of  the  familiar  rhythm  of  the  verses. 

Sounding  brass  {-xoKkqi;  ^x^")-  '^^^  metal  is  not  properly 
brass,  the  alloy  of  copper  and  zinc,  but  copper,  or  hrome,  the 
alloy  of  copper  and  tin.  of  wluch  the  Homeric  weapons  were 
made.  Being  the  metal  in  common  use,  it  came  to  be  employed 
as  a  term  for  metal  in  general.  Afterward  it  was  distinguished  ; 
common  copper  being  called  Hack  or  red  copper,  and  the  cele- 
brated Corinthian  bronze  being  known  as  misted  copper.  The 
word  here  does  not  mean  a  brazen  instrument,  but  a  piece  of 
nnwrought  metnl,  which  emitted  a  sound  on  being  struck.  In 
the  streets  of  Seville  one  may  see  pedlera  striking  together 
two  pieces  of  brass  instead  of  blowing  a  horn  or  ringing  a  bell 


d 


Ch.  Xmi     THB  FIRST  EPISTLB  TO  THB  GOBINTHIAN&  2tS3 

Tinkling  cymbal  {icvfifiaKov  oKaKd^ov).  The  verb  rendered 
tinkling^  ctlalaaOj  origiually  meant  to  repeat  the  cry  alala,  as  in 
battle.  It  ia  used  by  Mark  (vi.  88)  of  the  wailings  of  hired 
mourners.  Hence,  generally,  to  ring  or  dcmg.  Bev.,  clanging. 
KvfAfiaKov  cymhalj  is  derived  from  tcv^o^  a  hollow  or  a  cup. 
The  cymbal  consisted  of  two  half-globes  of  metal,  which  were 
struck  together.  In  middle-age  Latin,  cymbalum  was  the  term 
for  a  church-  or  convent-bell.  Ducange  defines :  ^^  a  bell  by 
which  the  monks  are  called  to  meals,  and  which  is  hung  in  the 
cloister."  The  comparison  is  between  the  unmeaning  clash  of 
metal,  and  music ;  between  ecstatic  utterances  which  are  jargon, 
and  utterances  inspired  by  love,  which,  though  unintelligible  to 
the  hearers,  may  carry  a  meaning  to  the  speaker  himself  and 
to  God,  1  Cor.  xiv.  4,  7. 

2.  All  mysteries  (r^  fiwrn^pia  irdvra).  The  mysteries,  all 
of  them.  See  on  Bom.  xi.  25.  The  article  indicates  the  well- 
known  spiritual  problems  which  exercise  men's  minds. 

All  faith  {iraa'av  T^vvlcrai).    All  the  special  faith  which 

works  miracles. 

3.  Bestow  {'^iilam).  Only  here  and  Bom.  xii  20.  See  on 
sop^  John  xiii.  26.  The  verb  means  to  feed  out  in  moreeU,  dole 
out 

To  be  burned  (&a  /cau9f7<m/iai).  The  latest  critical  text 
reads  fca\rxTi<r^iJMi  in  order  that  I  may  glory ^  after  the  three 
oldest  MSS.  The  change  to  burned  might  have  been  suggested 
by  the  copyist's  familiarity  with  christian  martyrdoms,  or  by  the 
story  of  the  three  Hebrews.  Bishop  Lightfoot  finds  a  possible 
reference  to  the  case  of  an  Indian  fanatic  who,  in  the  time  of 
Augustus,  burned  himself  alive  at  Athens.  His  tomb  there 
was  visible  in  Paul's  time,  and  may  have  been  seen  by  him. 
It  bore  the  inscription :  "  Zarmochegas  the  Indian  from  Bar- 
gosa,  according  to  the  ancient  customs  of  India,  made  himself 
immortal  and  lies  here."  Calanus,  an  Indian  gymnosophist 
who  followed  Alexander,  in  order  to  get  rid  of  his  sufferings, 
burned  himself  before  the  Macedonian  army  (see  Plutarch, 
^^  Alexander ").    Martyrdom  for  the  sake  of  ambition  was  a 


2«i4 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ch.  xm, 


fact  of  eaily  occurrence  iu  tbe  Chiircb,  if  not  iu  Paul's  duv. 
Farrar  eayB  of  his  age,  "both  at  this  time  and  iu  the  persecu- 
tion of  Diocletian,  there  were  Christians  who,  oppressed  by 
debt,  by  misery,  and  sometimes  even  by  a  sense  of  guilt,  thrust 
themselves  into  tlie  glory  and  imagined  redcinptivenees  of  the 
baptism  of  blood.  .  .  .  The  extravagant  estimate  formed 
of  the  merits  of  all  who  were  confessoi-s,  became,  almost  immed- 
iately, the  cause  of  grave  scandals.  We  are  borritied  to  read 
in  Cyprian's  letter  that  even  in  prison,  even  when  dfath  was 
imminent,  there  were  some  of  the  confessors  who  Mere  puffed 
up  with  vanity  and  pride,  and  seemed  to  think  that  the  blood 
of  martyrdom  would  avail  them  to  wash  away  the  stains  of 
flagrant  and  even  recent  immoralities"  ("  Lives  of  the  Fathers," 
oh.  vi.,  sec.  ii.). 

4.  Suffereth  longj  (juucpoAviieT).     See  on  Jas.  v.  7. 

Is  kind  {j(pri<TTeveTai).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 
See  on  j^pijoros,  A.  V.,  easi/.  Matt.  xi.  30,  and  j^trroTiji  good, 
Horn.  iii.  12. 


"  Th«  high  oharit;  wliloh  in*kea  m 
Prompt  to  the  ooaoBel  whioli  codIioIs  the  vorld." 

Dantb,  "Piradiso,"  iii.,  70,  71. 


Vsunteth  {vefmepevercu).  From  irifytrepo^  a  braggart.  Used 
of  one  who  somids  his  own  praises.  Cicero  introduces  a  com- 
pound of  the  word  in  one  of  his  letters  to  Atticus,  describing 
his  speech  in  the  presence  of  Pompey,  who  had  just  addressed 
the  senate  on  his  return  from  the  Mithridatic  war.  He  says : 
"  Heavens  I  How  /  showed  off  {everrepwepewdn^v)  before  my 
new  auditor  Pompey,"  and  describes  the  various  rhetorical 
tricks  which  he  employed. 

Puffed  up  (^vo-iovrat) .  See  on  clu  iv.  6,  and  compare  ch. 
viii.  1.  Of  inward  disposition,  as  the  previous  word  denotes. 
outward  display.     The  opposite  is  put  by  Dante : 


Ch.  XIIL]      THB  FIBST  BPISTLB  TO  THE  COBIKTHIANa  265 

5.  Easily  provoked  {impo^vyerod).  Easily  is  superflaousi 
and  gives  a  wrong  coloring  to  the  statement,  which  is  absolute : 
18  not  provoked  or  exasperated.  The  verb  occurs  only  here  and 
Acts  xvii.  16.  The  kindred  noun  Trt^yo^vo'fw^y  in  Acts  xv.  39, 
describes  the  irritaiion  which  arose  between  Paul  and  Barna- 
bas. In  Heb.  x.  24,  etimtdatinff  to  good  works.  It  is  used  of 
provoking  God,  Dent.  ix.  8 ;  Ps.  cv.  29 ;  Isa.  Ixv.  3. 

Thinketh  no  evil  (ov  Xcrfl^eroA  to  kojcov).  Lit,  rechmeth 
not  the  evil.  Bev.,  taketh  not  account  of.  The  evil ;  namely, 
that  which  is  done  to  love.  ^^  Love,  instead  of  entering  evil  as 
a  debt  in  its  account-book,  voluntarily  passes  the  sponge  over 
what  it  endures  "  (Gkniet). 

6.  Rejoiceth  in  the  truth  {trvyxcupei  rg  aXi|3e^).  Bev., 
correctly,  rejoicetli  with.  Truth  is  personified  as  love  is. 
Compare  Ps.  Ixxxv.  10. 

7.  Beareth  {(rriyei).  See  on  suffer^  ch.  ix.  12.  It  keeps  out 
resentment  as  the  ship  keeps  out  the  water,  or  the  roof  the 
rain. 

Endureth  {inrofihet).  An  advance  on  ieareth:  patient  ac- 
quiescence, holding  its  ground  when  it  can  no  longer  believe 
nor  hope. 

**  All  mj  days  are  spent  and  gone; 
And  je  no  more  shall  lead  joar  wretched  life, 
Caring  for  me.     Hard  was  it,  that  I  know, 
Hj  children  I     Tet  one  word  is  strong  to  loose. 
Although  alone,  the  burden  of  these  toils, 
For  love  in  larger  store  je  could  not  have 
From  any  than  from  him  who  standeth  here." 

Sophocles,  **  Oedipus  at  Colonus,"  618-418. 

8.  Faileth  {itnriirre^).  Falls  off  {U)  like  a  leaf  or  flower,  as 
Jas.  i.  11 ;  1  Pet.  i.  24.  In  classical  Greek  it  was  used  of  an 
actor  who  was  hissed  off  the  stage.  But  the  correct  reading  is 
irlinei  faUsj  in  a  little  more  general  sense,  as  Luke  xvi.  17. 
Love  holds  its  place. 

11.  A  child.    See  on  ch.  iii.  1,  and  ii.  6. 


266  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THK  NEW  TBSTAJCKNT.       tCa.  XIII 

I  understood  (ei^povow).  See  on  Kom.  viii.  5.  The  kind- 
red noun  if>phiet  occurs  only  once  in  tlie  New  Testament,  cli. 
xiv.  20,  where  also  it  is  associated  with  children  in  the  sense  of 
reflection  or  discrimination.  Rev.  renders/elt ;  but  the  verb, 
as  Edwards  correctly  remarks,  is  not  the  generic  term  for  emo- 
tion, though  it  may  be  used  for  what  includes  emotion.  The 
reference  here  is  to  the  earlier  undeveloped  exercise  of  the 
childish  mind  ;  a  thinking  which  is  not  yet  connected  reason- 
ing. This  last  is  expressed  by  ikoyl^ofiiji/ 1  thouijht  or  reasoned. 
There  seems  to  be  a  covert  reference  to  the  successive  stage* 
of  development;  mere  idle  prating;  thought,  in  the  sense  of 
crude,  general  notions ;  consecutive  reasoning. 

When  I  became  (ore  yeyova).  Rev,,  better,  giving  the  force 
of  the  perfect  tense,  jiovr  thai  lam  bewme.  Hence  I luiveput 
away  for  J  put  away.     Lit.,  have  hrought  them,  to  nought. 

12.  Through  a  glass  {hC  iaotnpov).  Rev.,  in.  a  mirror. 
Through  {hia)  is  hy  meatta  of.  Others,  however,  explain  it  as 
referring  to  the  illusion  by  which  the  mirrored  image  appears 
to  be  on  the  othur  side  of  the  surface:  others, again,  think  that 
the  reference  is  to  a  window  made  of  horn  or  other  transluceiil 
material.  This  is  quite  untenable.  'Ea-mnpov  m.irror  occurs 
only  here  and  Jas.  i.  23.  The  synonymous  word  KdrortrTpov 
does  not  appear  in  the  New  Testament,  but  its  kindred  verb 
xaTtrirrp^ofuu  to  look  at  one's  self  in  a  mirror,  is  found,  2  Coi. 
iii.  18.  The  thought  of  imperfect  seeing  is  emphasized  by  the 
character  of  the  ancient  mirror,  which  was  of  polished  metal, 
and  required  constant  polisliing,  so  that  a  sponge  witli  pounded 
puinice-stone  was  generally  attached  to  it.  Corinth  was  fam- 
ous for  the  manufacture  of  these.  Pliny  mentions  stone  mirrors 
of  agate,  and  Nero  is  said  to  have  nsed  an  emerald.  The  mir- 
rors were  usually  so  small  as  to  be  carried  in  the  hand,  though 
there  are  allusions  to  larger  ones  which  reflected  the  entire  per- 
son. The  figure  of  the  mirror,  illustrating  the  partial  vision  of 
divine  things,  is  frequent  in  the  rabbinical  writings,  applied,  for 
instance,  to  Moses  and  the  prophets.  Plato  says:  "There  is  no 
light  in  the  earthly  copies  of  justice  or  temperance  or  any  of 
the  higher  qualities  which  are  precious  to  souls:  they  are  seen 


J 


Gb.  XIV.]     the  first  BPISTLE  to  THB  COBINTHIAKa  267 

through  a  glass,  dimly  "  ("  Phaedrus,"  250).     Compare  "  Re- 
public," vii.,  516. 

Darkly  {iv  alvtyfAari).  Lit,  in  a  riddle  or  enignuij  the  word 
expressing  the  ohecure/arm  in  which  the  revelation  appears. 
Compare  Si  ahfir/fidrfov  in  dark  speec/ieSy  !Nnm.  liL  8. 

Face  to  face.    Compare  rrumth  to  movihy  Num.  xiL  8. 

Shall  I  know  {hrvyvaHrofuu).  American  Bev.,  rightly,  *^  I 
shaliyi^y  know."  See  on  knawledgSj  Bom.  iii.  20.  The  A.  Y. 
has  brought  this  out  in  2  Cor.  vL  9,  wM  known, 

I  am  known  {hreyvdHrSriv).  The  tense  is  the  aorist,  ^^tow 
known,"  in  my  imperfect  condition.  Paul  places  himself  at 
the  future  stand-point,  when  the  perfect  has  come.  The  com- 
pound verb  is  the  same  as  the  preceding.  Hence  American 
Rev.,  "  I  wsLs/ullt/  known." 

13.  And  now  (vtipl  hi).  Rev.,  btU;  better  than  (md,  bring- 
ing out  the  contrast  with  the  transient  gifts.  JTow  is  logical 
and  not  t&fnporal.     ThvSj  as  it  is. 

Abideth.  Not  merely  in  this  life.  The  essential  perman- 
ence of  the  three  graces  is  asserted.  In  their  nature  they  are 
eternal. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

3.  To  edification  —  exhortation  —  comfort  {oUoSofiijv — 
TrapaxXffO'iv — TTopafAvSlatf).  Omit  to.  For  ed\fie(Uion  see  on 
huild  up.  Acts  XX.  32.  ExhoH^Uioiiy  so  American  Rev.  Rev., 
comfort.  See  on  Luke  vi.  24.  IlapafivSla  comfort^  Rev.,  con- 
solation^  occurs  only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  HapofivSiov, 
which  is  the  same,  in  Philip,  ii.  1.  The  two  latter  words  are 
found  together  in  Philip,  ii.  1,  and  their  kindred  verbs  in  1 
Thess.  ii.  11.  The  differences  in  rendering  are  not  important. 
The  words  will  bear  either  of  the  meanings  in  the  two  Revis- 
ions. If  irapdxKfiaiv  be  rendered  as  Rev.,  comfort^  irapafivSia 
might  be  rendered  incentive^  which  implies  exhortation.  Con- 
solation  and  comfort  border  a  little  too  closely  on  each  other. 


268  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT-       [Cr.  SJV. 

7.  Voice  (^i^i*).  See  on  sound,  Rom.  x.  18.  The  sound 
generally.  Used  eoinetimea  of  Bounds  emitted  by  things  witli- 
out  life,  aa  a  trumpet  or  the  wiud.  See  Matt.  xxir.  31  i  <foim 
iii.  8. 

Harp  (Kt^apa).     See  on  Apoc.  v.  8. 

Distinction  (^ukttoX^i').  Proper  modnlatiou.  Compare  the 
use  of  the  word  in  Kom.  iii.  22;  x,  12. 

Sounds  (^3o770(f),  The  diatinctive  sounds  as  modulated. 
See  on  Rom.  x.  18. 

8.  Th«  trumpet  {(ToK-n-e^^).     Properly,  a  war-trumpet. 
Sound  (if>a>vijv).      Rev.,  much  better,  vowe,  preserving  the 

distinction  between  the  more  sound  of  the  trumpet  and  the 
modulated  notes.  The  ease  might  be  illustrated  by  the  bugle- 
calls  or  fiohiils  by  whicU  military  commands  are  issued,  as  dis- 
tinguished from  the  mere  blare  of  tiic  trumpet. 

10.  Voices — without  signification  (j^kuvwv — a^vmv).  The 
translation  loses  the  word-play.  So  many  kinds  of  voices,  and 
iio  kind  is  voiceless.     By  voices  are  raeant  languages. 

U.  Meaning  (SiW/Mv).     Lit.,/oraj. 

Barbarian.  Supposed  to  be  originally  a  descriptive  word 
of  those  who  uttered  Iiarsh,  rude  accents — iar  bar.  Homer 
calls  the  Carians  ffapffap6tf>avoi  harbar-voined,  liarsh-speahing 
("Iliad,"  ii.,  867).  Later,  applied  to  all  who  did  not  speak 
Greek.  Socrates,  speaking  of  the  way  in  whic!i  the  Greeks  di- 
vide up  mankind,  says :  "  Here  they  cut  off  the  Hellenes  as  one 
species,  and  all  t!ie  otlier  species  of  mankind,  which  are  innum- 
erable and  have  no  connection  or  common  language,  they  in- 
clude under  the  single  name  of  harbariana''^  (Plato,  "States- 
man," 262).  So  Clytaemnestra  of  the  captive  Cassandra; 
'■  Like  a  swallow,  endowed  with  an  unintelligible  barbaric  voice" 
(Aeschylus,  "  Agamemnon,"  1051).  Prodicns  in  Plato's  "  Pro- 
tagoras" says:  "Simonides  is  twitting  Pittacna  with  ignorance 
of  the  use  of  terms,  which,  in  a  Lesbian,  who  lias  been  accust- 
omed to  speak  in  a  barbarous  languaite,  is  natural "  (341V 
Aristophsnea  calls  the  birds  barbarians  because  they  sing  inart- 


Ch.  XIV.]     THB  FIRST  BPISTLB  TO  THH  GOBINTHIAN&  269 

icolatelj  (^^  Birds,"  199) ;  and  Sophocles  calls  a  foreign  land 
ayKgoa-a-o^  without  a  tongue.  ^^  Neither  Hellas  nor  a  tongaeless 
land "  (^'  Trachiniae/'  1060).  Later,  the  word  took  the  sense 
of  (nUlandish  or  rude. 

12.  Spiritual  gifts  {irvevfiirwy).  Lit,  spirite.  Paul  treats 
the  different  spiritual  manifestations  as  if  they  represented  a 
yarietj  of  spirits.  To  an  observer  of  the  nnseemlj  riyalries  it 
would  appear  as  if  not  one  spirit,  but  different  spirits,  were 
the  object  of  their  zeal. 

13.  Pray  that  he  may  interpret  {irpoaevxio'Sta  Xva  Siep- 
lirpfevrj).  Not,  pray  for  the  gift  of  interpretation,  but  use  his 
unknown  tongue  in  prayer,  which,  above  all  other  spiritual 
gifts,  would  minister  to  the  power  of  interpreting. 

14.  Spirit  (7rv€t)/iu»).  The  human  spirit,  which  is  moved  by 
the  divine  Spirit.     See  on  Bom.  viii.  4. 

Understanding  {yovsi).    See  on  Bom.  vii.  23. 

Is  unfruitful  {pucapnro^  i<mv).    Furnishes  nothing  to  others. 

15.  I  will  sing  ('^XcS).  See  on  Jas.  v.  13.  The  verb  fS» 
is  also  used  for  aing^  Eph.  v.  19 ;  Col.  iii.  16 ;  Apoc.  v.  9 ;  xiv. 
3  ;  XV.  3.  In  the  last  two  passages  it  is  combined  with  playing 
on  harps.  In  Eph.  v.  19  we  have  both  verbs.  The  noun  y^uK- 
fjLo^  psalm  (Eph.  v.  19 ;  Col.  iii.  16 ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  26),  which  is 
etymological ly  akin  to  this  verb,  is  used  in  the  New  Testament 
of  a  religious  song  in  general,  having  the  character  of  an  Old- 
Testament  psalm ;  though  in  Matt.  xxvi.  30 ;  Mark  xiv.  26, 
Ifivm  hymneoj  whence  our  hymuj  is  used  of  singing  an  Old- 
Testament  psalm.  Here  applied  to  such  songs  improvised 
under  the  spiritual  ecstasy  (ver.  26).  Some  think  that  the  verb 
has  here  its  original  signification  of  singing  with  an  instrument 
This  is  its  dominant  sense  in  the  Septuagint,  and  both  Basil 
and  Gregory  of  Nyssa  define  a  psalm  as  implying  instrumental 
accompaniment ;  and  Clement  of  Alexandria,  while  forbidding 
the  use  of  the  flute  in  the  agapae,  permitted  the  harp.  But 
neither  B.isil  nor  Ambrose  nor  Chrysostom,  in  their  panegyrics 
upon  music,  mention  instrumental  music,  and  Basil  expressly 
condemns  it.     Bingham  dismisses  the  matter  summarily,  and 


270 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW    TESTAMENT.        [Cn.  XIV 


tites  Justin  Mai'tjrr  as  saying  expreeBl;  that  inatrnmGittal  iniiBic 
was  not  used  in  tbe  Christian  Cliiirch.  The  verb  is  used  here 
in  the  general  sense  of  singing  praise. 

16.  The  place  {top  r&irov).  Some  explain  of  a  particular 
seat  in  the  aasemblj.  Rather  it  expresses  the  condition  of 
those  who  are  unintelligent  as  regards  the  utterance  in  an  un- 
known tongue. 

The  unlearned  {ISimtov).  Only  once  outside  of  the  Corin- 
tliian  Epistles:  Acts  iv.  13  (see  note).  In  the  Septuagint  it 
does  not  occur,  but  its  kindred  words  are  limited  to  the  sense 
of  private,  jKraonal.  Trench  ("  Synonyms  ")  illustrates  the  fact 
that  in  classical  Greek  there  lies  habitually  in  the  word  "  a 
negative  of  the  particular  skill,  knowledge,  profession,  or  stand- 
ing, over  against  which  it  is  antithetically  set ;  and  not  of  any 
other  except  that  alone."  As  over  against  the  physician,  for 
instance,  he  is  ISuan}^  in  being  unskilled  in  medicine.  This  is 
plainly  the  case  here — the  man  who  is  unlearned  as  respects 
the  gift  of  tongues.  From  llie  original  meaning  of  a  private 
individual,  the  word  came  to  denote  one  who  was  unfit  for  pub- 
lic life,  and  therefore  uneducated,  and  dually,  one  whose  mental 
powers  were  deficient.  Hence  our  idiot.  Idiot,  however,  in 
earlier  English,  was  used  in  the  milder  sense  of  an  uneducated 
person.  Thus  "Christ  was  received  of  idiots,  of  the  vulgar 
people,  and  of  the  simpler  sort"  (Blount).  "What,  wenest 
thou  make  an  idiot  of  our  dame?"  (Chaucer,  5893).  '-This 
plain  and  idioticaZ  style  of  Scripture."  "  Pictures  are  the 
scripture  of  idiots  and  simple  persons"  (Jeremy  Taylor). 

Amen,  Rev,,  correctly,  t/ie  Amen.  The  customary  response 
of  the  congregation,  adopted  from  the  synagogue  worsliip.  See 
Deut.  xxvii.  15  sqq. ;  Neh.  viii,  6.  The  Rabbins  have  numer- 
ous sayings  about  the  Amen.  "  Greater  is  he  who  responds 
Amen  than  he  who  blesses."  "Whoever  answers  Amen,  his 
name  shall  be  great  and  blessed,  and  the  decree  of  his  damna- 
tion is  utterly  done  away."  "To  him  wlio  answers  Amen  the 
gates  of  Paradise  are  open."  An  ill-considered  Amen  was 
styled  "an  orphan  Amen."  "Whoever  says  an  orphan  Amen, 
his  children  shall  be  orphana."     The  custom  was  perpetuated 


J 


Ob.  XIV.]     THB  FIRST  EPISTLB  TO  THB  COBHTTHIANS.  271 

in  Christian  worship,  and  this  response  enters  into  all  the  an- 
cient liturgies.  Jerome  says  that  the  united  voice  of  the  people 
in  the  Amen  sounded  like  the  fall  of  water  or  the  sound  of 
thunder. 

19.  Teach  (icarrfx^^)'    Orally.     See  on  Luke  i.  4. 

20.  Understanding  ((^ptirlv).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. Originally,  in  a  physical  sense,  the  diaphragm.  Denot- 
ing the  reasoning  power  on  the  reflective  side,  and  perhaps  in- 
tentionally used  instead  of  vov^  (ver.  15),  which  emphasizes  the 
distinction  from  ecstasy. 

Children — be  ye  children  {^atZta — vffir^ijfyTe).  The  A.  Y. 
misses  the  distinction  between  children  and  habeSj  the  stronger 
term  for  being  unversed  in  malice.  In  imderstanding  they  are 
to  be  above  mere  children.  In  malice  they  are  to  be  very  habes* 
See  on  chUd^  ch.  xiii.  11. 

Malice  {xoKUf).    See  on  Jas.  i.  21. 

Men  {r&sjEMi),    lAtnj perfect.    See  on  ch.  IL  6. 

21.  It  is  written,  etc  From  Isa.  xxviii.  11,  12.  The  quo- 
tation does  not  correspond  exactly  either  to  the  Hebrew  or  to 
the  Septuagint.  Heb.,  with  etammeringe  of  lip.  Sept.,  By 
reason  of  oantempttunts  words  of  lips.  Paul  omits  the  Heb.: 
This  is  the  reety  give  ye  rest  to  the  weary ^  and  this  is  the  repose. 
Sept. :  This  is  the  rest  to  him  who  is  hungry j  and  this  is  t/ie 
ruin.  The  point  of  the  quotation  is  that  speech  in  strange 
tongues  was  a  chastisement  for  the  unbelief  of  Gkxi's  ancient 
people,  by  which  they  were  made  to  hear  His  voice  ^^  speaking 
in  the  harsh  commands  of  the  foreign  invader."  So  in  the 
Corinthian  Church,  the  intelligible  revelation  of  Qod  has  not 
been  properly  received. 

24.  Convinced  (iXAjxerai).  Of  his  sins.  See  on  tell  him 
hisfaidtj  Matt,  xviii.  15 ;  conmnoedj  Jas.  ii.  9 ;  reprovedj  John 
iii.  20.     Rev.,  reproved:  convicted  in  margin. 

Judged  {av€ucpiif€Tcu).  Examined  and  judged.  The  word 
implies  inquiry  rather  than  sentence.  Each  inspired  speaker, 
in  his  heart-searching  utterances,  shall  start  questions  which 


273  WORD  STCDIffi  rS  the  sew  TBSTAJIKST.       [Cb-  XIV 

Bbftil  rered  tbe  bearer  to  bimaeU.     See  oa  discerned,  ch.  u.  14. 
On  tbe  compomidB  of  <f>uw,  see  oo  cb.  xi  39,  31,  33. 

27.  By  two,  etc  Tbat  is,  to  the  ntunber  of  two  or  three  tt 
each  meetiiig.* 

By  course  iava  /tipoi).  Rct.,  oorreclly,  in  turn.  Edwards' 
espUnation,  antipfiCnally,  is  quite  beside  tbe  niark. 

29.  Judge.  See  on  cb.  xi.  29.  Referring  to  the  gift  of  the 
discernment  of  spirits.     See  od  cb.  xii.  10. 

30.  That  sitteth.     Rev.,  gitting  by.     Tbe  speaker  standing. 
33.  The  spirits.    Tlie  movements  aad  maoifestations  of  the 

divine  Spirit  in  the  bnman  spirit,  as  in  cli.  xii.  10. 

Are  subject.  "People  speak  as  if  tbe  divine  antbority  of 
the  prophetic  word  were  Miinehow  dependent  on,  or  confirmed 
by,  tlie  fact  that  the  prophets  enjojed  rieionB.  ...  In  tbe 
Kew  Testament  Paul  lays  down  the  principle  that,  in  true 
prophecy,  self-consciousness,  and  self-conimand  are  never  lost. 
•  Tlie  spirits  of  the  proplieta  are  subject  to  tbe  prophets'"  (W. 
Robertson  Smith,  "  Tbe  Prophets  of  Israel "). 

33,  Confusion  (axaTaaraalat!).  See  on  commotions.  Lake 
xxi.  9;  and  unruly,  Jas.  iii.  8.     Compare  2  Cor.  vi.  5. 

As  in  all  the  churches  of  the  saints.  Many  connect  these 
words  with  let  the  wom^n,  etc.  The  old  arrangement  is  retained 
by  Rev.  and  by  Westcott  and  Hort,  though  tbe  latter  regard 
the  words  and  the  splrlts—^yf  j>eace  as  parenthetical.  I  see  no 
good  reason  for  departing  from  the  old  arrangement.f 

38.  Let  him  be  ignorant  {ayvoihai).  I^ct  Iiini  remain  ig- 
norant. The  text  ia  doubtful.  Some  read  a/yimeiToi  Ke  is  not 
knovm  ;  i.e.,  be  is  one  whom  God  knows  not. 

*  EdwardB,  very  BlrkngBljr.  explilna  "  two  or  three  U  n  lime."  Aa  Oodet 
pRrtinentlj  u;a  :  '■  CerUinlj  P«ul  woald  never  haTS  approTed  of  the  slmul- 
laiieoue  utlerance  of  ativera!  disconraea,  the  one  hindering  the  eSect  of  tha 

+  There  la  force  in  Edwards'  remsrk  Ihal  in  the  new  arraniremeiit  it  ia  d!f 
lloult  to  acooQut  for  the  implied  permidsiou  to  iromeQ  iu  oh.  iL  5. 


CB.XV.]       THB  FIRST  li^ISTLB  TO  THE  OOBDrrHIAN&  273 


CHAPTER  XV. 

1.  I  declare  {yvwpi^).  Beproachfallj,  as  having  to  declare 
the  Gospel  anew. 

2.  If  ye  keep  in  memory  what,  etc.  I  see  no  good  reason 
for  departing  from  the  arrangement  of  the  A.  V.,  which  states 
that  the  salvation  of  the  readers  depends  on  their  holding  fast 
the  word  preached.*  Bev.  reads:  through  which  ye  are  saved; 
I  make  known^  Isat/j  in  what  words  I  jpreached  it  tmto  youj 
if  ye  hold  it/aety  etc.  This  is  certainly  very  awkward,  making 
Paol  say  that  their  holding  it  fast  was  the  condition  on  which 
he  preached  it.     American  Bev.  as  A.  Y. 

3.  That  Christ,  etc.  Stanley  remarks  that  vv.  1-11  contain 
the  earliest  known  specimen  of  what  may  be  called  the  creed  of 
the  early  Church,  differing,  indeed,  from  what  is  properly  called 
a  creed,  in  being  rather  a  sample  of  the  exact  form  of  the 
apostle's  early  teaching,  than  a  profession  of  faith  on  the  part  of 
converts.  See  his  dissertation  in  the  commentary  on  Coiinth- 
ians. 

4.  Rose  {ir^^eprai).  Bev.,  correctly,  hath  been  raised. 
Died  and  was  buried  are  in  the  aorist  tense.  The  change  to 
the  perfect  marks  the  abiding  state  which  began  with  the  resur- 
rection,    lie  hath  been  raised  and  still  lives. 

5.  Was  seen  {infAq).  Bev.,  appeared.  The  word  most 
commonly  used  in  the  New  Testament  for  seeing  visions.  See 
on  Luke  xxii.  43.  Compare  the  kindred  omToaia  vision^  Luke 
L  22  ;  Acts  xxvi.  19 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  1. 

8.  One  born  out  of  due  time  (to!  ifcrpaffutri).  Only  here 
in  the  New  Testament.  It  occurs,  Num.  xii.  12 ;  Job  iii.  16  ; 
Eccl.  vi.  3.  The  Hebrew  nephelj  which  it  is  used  to  translate, 
occurs  in  the  same  sense  in  Ps.  Iviii.  8,  where  the  Septuagint 


*  Edwards*  diBtinction  between  the  word  and  the  Ootpel  Uie^iB  orentrained, 
A^5  being  constantly  used  specificaUj  for  the  gospel  doctrine. 
Vol.  III.— 18 


274 


WORD  STUDIES  IS  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ca.  XV. 


followe  another  reading  of  the  Hebrew  text.  In  every  case  the 
word  means  an  abortion,  a  sttll-bom  embryo.  In  the  same 
Beuse  it  is  found  frequently  in  Greek  medical  writers,  as  Galen 
and  Hippocrates,  and  in  the  writings  of  Aristotle  on  physical 
science.  This  is  the  rendering  of  the  liheims  Version  :  an 
abortive.  Wye,  a  dead-bom  child.  The  rendering  of  the 
A.  V.  and  Rev,  is  nn satisfactory,  since  it  introduces  the  notion 
of  tirne  which  is  not  in  the  original  word,  and  fails  to  express 
the  abortive  character  of  the  product ;  leaving  it  to  be  inferred 
that  it  is  merely  jfremaiure,  but  living  and  not  dead.  The 
word  does  not  mean  an  untim^y  living  birth,  but  a  dead  abor- 
tion, and  suggests  no  notion  of  lateness  of  birth,  but  rather  of 
being  born  before  the  time.  The  words  as  uiUo  the  abortion 
are  not  to  be  connected  with  last  of  aU—last  of  aU  as  to  tlie 
abortion — because  there  is  no  eongruity  nor  analogy  between 
the  figure  of  an  aboition  and  the  fact  that  Christ  appeared  to 
him  last.  Connect  rather  with  He  aj>peared:  last  of  all  lie 
ajipeared  unto  me  as  unto  the  abortion.  Paul  means  that  when 
Clirist  appeared  to  bim  and  called  him,  he  was — as  compared 
with  the  disciples  who  had  known  and  followed  Ilim  from  the 
first,  and  whom  he  had  been  persecuting — no  better  than  an 
unperfected  foetus  among  living  men.  The  comparison  em- 
phasizes his  condition  at  the  time  of  his  call.  The  attempt  to 
explain  by  a  reference  to  Paul's  insignificant  appearance,  from 
which  he  was  nicknamed  *'  The  Abortion "  by  his  enemies, 
requires  no  refutation.* 

10.  Was  not  (oy  iyev^Si})-  Eflv.,  better,  was  not  fou-nd : 
did  not  turn  out  to  be. 

11.  Ye  believed  {tTTurTevaare).  When  the  Gospel  was  first 
preached :  with  a  suggestion  of  a  subsequent  wavering  from 
the  faith. 

12.  There  is  no  resurrection.  Compare  Aeschylus:  "But 
who  can  recall  by  charms  a  man's  dark  blood  shed  in  death, 
when  once  it  has  fallen  to  the  ground  at  hia  feet  ?     Ilad  this 


Ob.  XV.]      the  first  BPISTLB  TO  TH£  OORINTHIANa  275 

been  lawf ol,  Zeus  would  not  have  stopped  him  who  knew  the 
right  way  to  restore  men  from  the  dead "  *  (^^  Agamemnon,'* 

987-992). 

14.  Vain  (leevov).    Empty,  a  mere  chimaera. 

17.  Vain  Qutraia).  A  di£Ferent  word,  signifying  fruiden^. 
The  difference  is  between  reality  and  resnlt. 

19.  Only.  To  be  taken  with  the  whole  clause,  at  the  end 
of  which  it  stands  emphatically.  If  in  this  life  we  are  hopers 
in  Christ,  and  if  that  is  all.  If  we  are  not  such  as  shall  have 
hope  in  Christ  after  we  shall  have  fallen  asleep. 

20.  The  first-fruits  (aTrop^).  See  on  Jas.  L  18.  Omit 
become.    Compare  Col.  i.  18,  and  see  on  Apoc.  i.  5. 


22.  All — all.  What  the  all  means  in  the  one  case  it  means 
in  the  other. 

23.  Order  (roy/orri).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 
In  Sept.,  a  hcmdj  troop^  or  cohort;  also  a  etcmdard;  Num.  x. 
14 ;  xviii.  22,  25.  How  the  one  idea  ran  into  the  other  may 
be  perceived  from  the  analogy  of  the  Latin  tnantjnUitSj  a  hand- 
ful of  hay  twisted  round  a  pole  and  used  by  the  Romans  as  the 
standard  of  a  company  of  soldiers,  from  which  the  company  itself 
was  called  numijnUtis.  In  classical  Greek,  besides  the  meaning 
of  comjxmyy  it  means  an  ordinance  and  a  Jboed  aeeeesment. 
Here  in  the  sense  of  handy  or  compa/nyj  in  pursuance  of  the 
principle  of  a  descending  series  of  ranks,  and  of  consequent 
subordinations  which  is  assumed  by  Paul.  The  series  runs, 
Gody  Christy  man.  See  ch.  iii.  21-23 ;  xi.  3.  The  reference 
is  not  to  time  or  merit,  but  simply  to  the  fact  that  each  occupies 
his  own  place  in  the  economy  of  resurrection,  which  is  one 
great  process  in  several  acts.  Band  after  band  rises.  First 
Christ,  then  Christians.  The  same  idea  appears  in  the  first- 
fruits  and  the  harvest. 


*  AeflonUpim. 


276 


WOBD   STDDIES   IN    THK  SEW   TtSTAUBNT.         [Ch.  XV. 


2i.  Rule  —  authority — power  {apxf}P,  i^ovaiav,  &vvafi,tv). 
Abstract  terras  for  different  ordei-a  of  spmtiiul  and  angeliu 
powers;  ae  Eph.  i.  21 ;  iii.  10;  vi.  1-2  ;  Col.  i.  16. 

27.  When  He  saith  {orap  vmri).  God,  epenking  through 
the  PBalrnist  (Pa,  viii.  fjj.  Suiut;,  however,  give  a  future  force 
to  the  verb,  and  render  but  w/ten  lie  shall  liave  tiaid ;  i.e., 
wlseij,  at  the  end,  God  ahitll  have  eaid,  "  All  things  are  put  un- 
der Iliui.     The  suhjection  iaaucomplished."    See  Rev.,  margin. 

29.  What  shall  they  do  (t*  iroi^ffovaiv).  What  will  tliey 
effect  or  acconiplisli.  Xot,  W?ial  will  thty  hare  recoiirae  to  t 
nor,  IIow  •will  it  profit  litem,?  The  reference  is  to  the  living 
who  are  baptized  for  the  dead. 

Baptized   for  the   dead   {^atrtiXptixvoi  inrip  r&v  vtKp&v). 

Coneeniing  this  expression,  of  wliich  some  thirty  different  ex- 
planations are  given,  it  is  best  to  admit  frankly  that  we  lack 
the  facts  for  a  decisive  interpretation.  None  of  the  explana- 
tions proposed  are  free  from  objection.  Paul  is  evidently  al- 
hiding  to  a  usage  familiar  to  liin  readers;  and  the  term  em- 
ployed was,  as  Godet  remarks,  in  their  vocabuiary,  a  sort  of 
technical  phrase.  A  large  number  of  both  ancient  and  modern 
conmientators  *  adopt  the  view  that  a  living  Christian  was  bap- 
tized for  an  nnbaptized  dead  Christian.  The  Greek  expositors 
regarded  the  words  tiie  dead  as  equivalent  to  the  resurrection 
of  the  dead,  and  the  baptism  aa  a  manifestation  of  belief  in  the 
doctrine  of  the  resurrection.  Godet  adopts  the  explanation 
wliieh  refers  baptism  to  martyrdom— the  baptism  of  blood — and 
cites  Luke  xii.  50,  and  Mark  x.  3S.  In  the  absence  of  anything 
more  satisfactory  I  adopt  the  explanation  given  above. 

31.  I  protest,  etc.  I  profit  is  not  expressed,  bnt  merel}- 
implied,  in  tlie  particle  of  adjuration,  i/^  Jy.  The  order  of  the 
Greek  is  noteworthy.     I  die  daily,  by  yota-  re^oiciny,  etc. 

Your  rejoicing  (t^h  v/iirepav  KavyTjatv).  Rev.,  better,  thtU 
glorying  in  ymt  which  I  home.     Paul  would  say :  "  Yon  Corintli- 


Cn.  XV.]      THE  FIB8T  EPISTLB  TO  THB  COBINTHIAN&  271 

ian  CbriBtians  are  the  fruit  of  inj  apoBtoIic  labor  which  has 
been  at  a  daily  risk  to  life ;  and  as  truly  as  I  cau  point  to  jou 
as  such  fruit,  so  truly  can  I  say,  ^  I  die  daily.' " 

I  die  daily.  I  am  in  constant  peril  of  my  life.  Compai*e 
2  Cor.  iv.  11;  xi.  23;  Rom.  viii.  36.  So  Cly t^emnestra :  "1 
have  no  rest  by  night,  nor  can  I  snatch  from  the  day  a  sweet 
moment  of  repose  to  enfold  me ;  but  Time,  ever  standing  over 
me,  was  as  a  jailer  who  conducted  me  to  death  "  (Sophocles, 
"Electra,"  780,  781).  And  Philo:  "And  each  day,  nay,  each 
hour,  I  die  beforehand,  enduring  many  deaths  instead  of  one, 
the  last.^' 

32.  After  the  manner  of  men  (Kark  Sv^pwrov).  As  men 
ordinarily  do,  for  temporal  reward ;  and  not  under  the  influ- 
ence of  any  higher  principle  or  hope. 

I  have  fought  with  beasts  {iBripto^ytia^)'  ^^\f  ^^^  ^" 
the  New  Testament.  Figuratively.  Paul,  as  a  Roman  citizen, 
would  not  have  been  set  to  fight  with  beasts  in  the  arena ;  and 
such  an  incident  would  not  have  been  likely  to  be  passed  over 
by  Luke  in  the  Acts.  Compare  similar  metaphors  in  ch.  iv.  9, 
2  Tim.  iv.  17 ;  Tit  i.  12 ;  Ps.  xxii.  12,  13, 20,  21.  Some,  how- 
ever, think  it  is  to  be  taken  literally.*  They  refer  to  the  pres- 
ence at  Ephesns  of  the  Asiarchs  (Acts  xix.  31),  who  had  charge 
of  the  public  games,  as  indicating  that  the  tumult  took  place  at 
the  season  of  the  celebration  of  the  games  in  honor  of  Diana  ; 
to  the  fact  that  the  young  men  at  Ephesus  were  famous  for 
their  bull-fights ;  and  to  the  words  (U  EpheauB  as  indicating  a 
particular  incident.  On  the  assumption  that  he  speaks  figura- 
tively, the  natural  reference  is  to  his  experience  with  the  feroc- 
ious mob  at  Ephesus.  There  was  a  legend  that  Paul  was 
thrown,  first  of  all,  to  a  lion ;  then  to  other  beasts,  but  was  left 
untouched  by  them  all.  In  the  Epistle  of  Ignatius  to  the  Rom- 
ans occur  these  words :  "  From  Syria  even  unto  Rome,  I  fight 
with  beasts,  both  by  land  and  sea,  both  night  and  day,  being 
bound  to  ten  leopards.  I  mean  a  band  of  soldiers,  who,  even 
when  they  receive  benefits,  show  themselves  all  the  worse"  (yX 


*  So  Godet,  whose  defence,  however,  Sb  verj  feehle. 


378  WORD   STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XV, 

Compare  Epiatle  to  Tralles,  x. :  "  Why  do  I  pray  that  I  iiiaji' 
fight  with  wild  beasts  ? "  So  in  the  Epistle  to  Sniyrna  he  eaya : 
"  1  would  put  jou  on  your  guard  against  these  monsters  in 
human  shape"  {$iipiti>v  rSiv  avSpamofuiptficov)  ;  and  in  the  An- 
tiochene  "Acts  of  Martyrdom"  it  ia  said:  "lie  (Ignatins) 
was  seized  hy  a  beastly  soldiery,  to  be  led  away  to  liome  as  a 
prey  for  carnivorous  beasts"  (ii,). 

Let  U3  eat  and  drink,  etc.  Cited,  after  the  Septnagint,  f  rom 
laa.  xxii.  13.  It  is  the  exclamation  of  the  ])eople  of  Jerusalem 
during  the  siege  by  the  Assyrians.  The  traditional  founder  of 
Tarsus  was  Sardanapalus,  who  was  worshipped,  along  witli 
Serairamis,  with  licentious  ritea  which  resembled  those  of  the 
Feast  of  Tabernacles.  Paul  had  probably  witnessed  this  fest- 
ival, and  had  seen,  at  the  neighboring  town  of  Anchiale,  the 
statue  of  Sardanapalus,  represented  as  snapping  his  fingers,  and 
with  tlie  inscription  upon  the  pedestal,  "Eat,  drink,  enjoy  thy- 
self. The  rest  is  nothing."  Farrar  cites  the  fable  of  the  Epi- 
curean fly,  dying  in  the  lioney-pot  with  the  words,  "I  have 
eaten  and  drunk  and  bathed,  and  I  care  nothing  if  I  die." 
Among  the  inscriptions  from  the  catacombs,  preserved  in  the 
Vatican  are  these:  "To  the  divine  shade  of  Titus,  who  lived 
fifty-seven  years.  Here  ho  enjoys  everything.  Baths  and 
wine  ruin  our  constitutions,  but  they  make  life  what  it  is. 
Farewell,  farewell."  "While  I  lived  I  lived  well.  My  play 
is  now  ended — soon  yours  will  be.  Farewell  and  appland  me." 
Compare  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  ii,   1-9. 

33.  Communications  (o/wWat),  Wrong.  Lit,  comj?anion' 
sAijis.     Kev,,  company. 

Manners  {r)%).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament  Origin- 
ally ^.$0;  means  an  ajs-ustoined  eeat  or  haunt ;  thence  custom, 
■usage;  phir&\,  manners,  morals,  character.  The  passage,  "  Evil 
company  doth  corrupt  good  manners,"  is  an  iambic  line;  either 
the  repetition  of  a  current  proverb,  or  a  citation  of  the  same 
proverb  from  the  poet  Menander.  Compare  Aeschylus:  "Alas 
for  the  ill-luck  in  mortals  that  brings  the  honest  man  into  com- 
pany with  those  who  have  leas  regard  for  i-eligion.     In  every 


Ceu  XV.]      THB  FIBST  EPI8TLB  TO  THB  COBINTHIAN8.  279 

matter,  indeed,  nothing  is  worse  than  evil-fellowship  "  {ofuklasi) 
C'  Seven  against  Thebes,"  593-595). 

34.  Awake  (^icyi}^r€).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament 
It  means  to  awake  from  a  drunken  stupor.  Compare  Joel  i. 
5,  Sept.  The  kindred  verb  iiyayi/^  return  to  eobemen  (A.  Y. 
and  Rev.,  recover),  occurs  at  2  Tim.  ii.  26. 

Have  not  the  knowledge  {arpfmaCav  ixfnHrw).  Lit.,  have 
an  ignorance.  Stronger  than  ayvoeiv  to  he  ignorcmt.  Thej 
have  and  hold  it.  For  the  form  of  expression,  see  on  have  sor- 
row, John  xvi.  22.  The  word  for  ignorance  is  found  only  here 
and  1  Pet  ii.  15  (see  note). 

35.  How— with  what  (mk — irol^).  Rev.,  correctly,  with 
what  manner  of.  There  are  two  questions :  the  iBrst  as  to  Md 
manner,  the  second  as  to  the  form  in  which  resurrection  is  to 
take  place.  The  answer  to  the  first.  How,  etc.,  is,  the  body  is 
raised  through  death  (ver.  36) ;  to  the  second,  with  what  kind 
of  a  body,  the  answer,  expanded  throughout  nearly  the  whole 
chapter,  is,  a  spiritual  body. 

Body  (a-dfiari).  Organism.  The  objection  assumes  that 
the  risen  man  must  exist  in  some  kind  of  an  organism ;  and  as 
this  cannot  be  the  fleshly  body  which  is  corrupted  and  dissolved, 
resurrection  is  impossible.  S&fjui  body  is  related  to  adpl^  flesh, 
as  general  to  special;  a&fia  denoting  the  material  organism, 
not  apart  from  any  matter,  but  apart  from  any  definite  matter - 
and  adp^  the  definite  earthly,  animal  organism.  See  on  Rom. 
vi.  6.  The  question  is  not,  what  will  be  the  substance  of  the 
risen  body,  but  what  will  be  its  organisation  (Wendt)  f 

36.  Thou  sowest  {urif  (nrelpei^).  Thou  is  emphatic.  Every 
time  thou  sowest,  thou  sowest  something  which  is  quickened 
only  through  dying.  Paul  is  not  partial  to  metaphors  from 
nature,  and  his  references  of  this  character  are  mostly  to  nature 
in  connection  with  human  labor.  Dean  Howson  says :  ^^  We 
find  more  of  this  kind  of  illustration  in  the  one  short  epistle  of 
St.  James  than  in  all  the  writings  of  St.  Paul "  ("  Metaphors 
of  St.  Paul."    Compare  Pamir's  "  Paul,"  i.,  20,  21). 


280  WORD  STUDIES   IN   THE   NEW   TESTAMENT.  [CiL  XV, 

Die.  Become  corrupted.  Applied  to  the  seed  in  order  to 
keep  up  the  analogy  with  the  body. 

37.  Not  that  body  that  shall  be.  Or,  more  literally,  that 
cAall  come  to  pass.  Meeting  the  objector's  aBsumption  that 
either  the  raised  body  must  be  the  same  body,  or  that  there 
could  be  no  resurrection.  Paul  says :  "  What  you  sow  is  one 
body,  and  a  different  body  arises;"  yet  the  identity  is  pre- 
served. Dissolution  is  not  loss  of  identity.  The  full  heads  of 
wheat  are  different  from  the  wheat-grain,  yet  both  are  wheat. 
Clement  of  Borne,  in  liis  first  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  argu- 
ing for  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  cites  in  illustration  thu 
fable  of  the  phoenix,  the  Arabian  bird,  the  only  one  of  its  kind, 
and  which  lives  for  a  hundred  years.  "When  the  time  of  its 
death  draws  near  it  builds  itself  a  nest  of  frankincense,  myrrh, 
and  other  spices,  and  entering  it,  dies.  In  the  decay  of  ils  flesh 
a  worm  is  produced,  which,  being  nourished  by  the  juices  of 
the  dead  bird,  brings  forth  feathera.  Then,  when  it  has  ac- 
quired strength,  it  takes  up  the  nest  with  the  bones  of  its  pa- 
rent and  bears  them  to  Ileliopolia  in  Egypt. 

Bare  {yvii-vov).  Naked.  The  mere  seed,  without  the  later 
investiture  of  stalk  and  head. 

It  may  chance  (et  7V)(pi).  Lit.,  if  U  happen  to  be:  i.e., 
whatever  grain  you  may  chance  to  sow. 

38.  As  it  hath  pleased  (xaSax;  ^iKr)(rep).  Lit.,  even  as  He 
willed ;  at  the  creation,  when  He  fixed  the  different  types  of 
grain,  so  that  each  should  permanently  assume  a  form  accord- 
ing to  its  distinctive  type — a  iody  of  iU  own:  that  wheat 
should  always  be  wheat,  barley  barley,  etc.  Compare  Gen.  i, 
U,  12. 

39.  All  flesh  is  not  the  same  flesh.  Still  arguing  that  it 
ie  conceivable  that  the  resurrect  ion -body  should  be  organized 
differently  fi-ora  the  earthly  body,  and  in  a  way  which  cannot 
be  inferred  from  the  sliape  of  the  earthly  body.  There  is  a 
great  variety  of  organization  an>ong  bodies  which  we  know:  it 
may  fairly  be  inferred  that  there  may  be  a  new  and  different 
organization  in  those  which  we  do  not  know.     Flesh 


.  is  the        J 


Co.  XV.]      THB  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OOBINTHIAK&  281 

body  of  the  earthly,  living  being,  including  the  bodily  form. 
See  on  Rom.  vii.  5,  sec.  3. 

40.  Celestial  bodies  {a-dfuiTa  hrovp6vu£).  Not  angels.  For 
the  meaning  of  ataiiara  bodies  is  not  limited  to  animate  beings 
(see  vv.  37,  38),  and  "  the  scoffers  who  refused  to  believe  in 
the  existence  of  the  future  body  would  hardly  have  admitted 
the  existence  of  angelic  bodies.  To  convince  them  on  their 
own  ground,  the  apostle  appeals  exclusively  to  what  is  seen " 
(Godet).  The  sense  is,  the  Jieokvenly  hodieSj  described  more 
specifically  in  ver.  41. 

Bodies  terrestrial  (<r<»/L(ara  Myeta).  Looking  back  to  ver. 
39,  and  grouping  men,  beasts,  birds,  fishes  under  this  term.  It 
is  to  be  observed  that  the  apostle  makes  two  general  categories 
— terrestrial  and  celestial  bodies,  and  shows  the  distinctions  of 
organization  subsisting  between  the  members  of  each — men, 
beasts,  fishes,  birds,  and  the  sun,  moon,  stars ;  and  that  he  also 
shows  the  distinction  between  the  two  categories  regarded  as 
wholes.  '*  The  glory  of  the  celestial  is  one,  and  the  glory  of 
the  terrestrial  is  different." 

41.  Glory  (Bo^a).     Lustre;  beauty  of  form  and  color. 

'*  Ab  heaven's  high  twins,  whereof  in  Tjrian  hlne 
The  one  reyolyeth,  throogh  his  conne  immenae 
Might  love  hia  fellow  of  the  damask  hue, 
For  like  and  difference. " 


" the  triple  whirl 

Of  hlne  and  red  and  argent  worlds  that  mount 

Or  float  across  the  tnhe  that  Herschel  swajs, 
Like  pale-rose  chaplets.  or  like  sapphire  mist, 
Or  hang  or  droop  along  the  heavenlj  wajs. 
Like  scarves  of  amethjst** 

Jean  Ingelow,  '*Hoii(nr&'* 

Herodotus,  describing  the  Median  city  of  Agbatana,  says  that 
it  is  surrounded  by  seven  walls  rising  in  circles,  one  within  the 
other,  and  having  their  battlements  of  different  colors — ^white, 
black,  scarlet,  blue,  orange,  silver,  and  gold.      These  seven 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


[C«.  XT. 


colors  were  those  employed  by  the  Orientals  to  denote  the 
seven  great  heavenly  bodiee:  Saturn  black,  Jupiter  otutige, 
Mara  scarlet,  the  sun  gold,  Mercury  blue,  the  Moou  gi-een 
or  silver,  and  Venus  white.  The  great  temple  of  Nebuchad- 
nezzar at  Boreippa  was  built  in  seven  platforms  colored  in  a 
similar  way.  See  the  beautiful  description  of  the  Astrologer's 
Chamber  in  Schiller's  " WallenHtein,''  Part  I.,  act  ii.,  sc,  i. 
There  is  no  allusion  to  the  different  degrees  of  gloty  among 
the  risen  saints. 

42.  So  also.  Ilavicig  ai^ied  that  newness  of  organization 
is  no  argument  against  its  poseibility,  Paul  now  shows  that 
the  substantial  diversity  of  organism  between  the  earthly  and  the 
new  man  is  founded  in  a  diversity  of  the  whole  nature  in  the 
state  before  and  in  the  state  after  the  resurrection.  Earthly 
beings  are  distiuguislied  from  the  risen  as  to  duration,  value, 
power,  aud  a  natural  as  distinguished  from  a  spiritual  body.* 

It  is  sown.  Referring  to  the  interment  of  the  body,  as  is 
clear  from  vv.  36,  ST.f 

43.  Weakness.  Compare  Homer:  "The  /eeUe  hands  of 
the  dead  "  ("  Odyssey,"  v.,  21) ;  aud  the  shade  of  Agamemnon 
stretching  out  his  hands  to  Ulysses,  "for  no  firm  force  or  vigor 
was  in  him  "  (Id.,  xi..  393).     See  Isa.  xiv.  10. 

44.  A  natural  body  {awfia  •^v-j^ikov).  See  on  ch.  ii.  14. 
The  word  ^vyiKov  natural  occurs  only  twice  outside  this  epistle ; 
Jas.  iii.  15 ;  Judo  19.  The  expression  tiatural  body  signifies 
an  organism  animated  by  a  ^v%i;  soul  (see  on  Rom.  xi.  4) ; 
that  phase  of  the  immaterial  principle  in  man  which  is  more 
nearly  allied  to  the  aa.p%  flesh,  aud  which  characterizes  the  mau  as 
a  mortal  creature ;  while  Trmi/ui  spirit  is  that  phase  which  looks 
Qodward,  and  characterizes  him  as  related  to  God.  "It  is  a 
brief  designation  for  the  whole  compass  of  the  non-oorporeal 
uide  of  tlie  earthly  man  "  fWendt).  "  In  the  earthly  body  the 
^^X^  soul,  not  the  7rceO/M»  spirit  is  that  which  conditions  its 

*  I  am  Indebted  to  Weodt  for  the  lubstsiioB  of  thli  note. 

I  The  rfeir  of  CaWin,  tultoned  by  Helnrial  and  Edtruda,  that  the  apootlt 
Is  Dontraatini;  the  preaent  atate  from  birth  to  death  with  the  po«t- reaorrsotion 
state,  caanot  bti  maintained. 


Cel  XV.]      THB  FIBST  EPI8TLB  TO  THB  CORINTHIANS.  283 

coDBtitutioa  and  its  qualities,  so  that  it  is  framed  as  the  organ 
of  the  '^^^x^.  In  the  resurrection-bodj  the  irvevfjM  spirity  for 
whose  life-activity  it  is  the  adequate  organ,  conditions  its  nature" 
(Meyer).  Compare  Plato  :  *^  The  soul  has  the  care  of  inanimate 
being  everywhere,  and  traverses  the  whole  heaven  in  divers 
forms  appearing ;  when  perfect  and  fully  winged  she  soars  up- 
ward, and  is  the  ruler  of  the  universe ;  while  the  imperfect  soul 
loses  her  feathers,  and  drooping  in  her  flight,  at  last  settles  on 
the  solid  ground — there,  finding  a  home,  she  receives  an  earthly 
frame  which  appears  to  be  self -moved,  but  is  really  moved  by 
her  power ;  and  this  composition  of  soul  and  body  is  called  a 
living  and  mortal  creature.  For  immortal  no  such  union  can 
be  reasonably  believed  to  be ;  although  fancy,  not  having  seen 
nor  surely  known  the  nature  of  God,  may  imagine  an  immortal 
creature  having  a  body,  and  having  also  a  soul  which  are  united 
throughout  all  time ''  ("  PhaedruB,"  246). 

Spiritual  body  {a-dfui  irvevftarucSv).  A  body  in  which  a 
divine  wvevfAa  spirit  supersedes  the  ^^v-xfi  sotd,  so  thai  the  resur- 
rection-body is  the  fitting  organ  for  its  indwelling  and  work, 
and  so  is  properly  characterized  as  a  spirUiud  body. 

"  When,  gloriom  and  Mmotified,  onr  flesh 
Is  reMBomed,*  then  shall  our  persons  be 
More  pleasing  bj  their  being  all  complete  ; 
For  will  increase  whatever  bestows  on  as 
Of  light  gratnitOQB  the  Good  Supreme, 
Light  which  enables  us  to  look  on  Him ; 
Therefore  the  vision  must  perforce  increase, 
Increase  the  ardor  which  from  that  is  kindled. 
Increase  the  radiance  from  which  this  proceeds 
Bat  even  as  a  coal  that  sends  forth  flame. 
And  bj  its  yivid  whiteness  overpowers  it 
So  that  its  own  appearance  it  maintains, 
Thos  the  effalgence  that  sarroands  as  now 
Shall  be  overpowered  in  aBi>ect  bj  the  flesh. 
Which  still  to-daj  the  earth  doth  cover  ap  ; 
Nor  can  so  great  a  splendor  weary  as, 
For  strong  will  be  the  organs  of  the  body 
To  everything  which  hath  the  power  to  please  na* 

<•  Paradise/' ziy.,  4S-60. 


*  Dante  believes  in  the  resorreotion  of  the  fleshly  body  which  is  boried. 


284  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  TBB  NEW  TKSTAICENT.         (Ch.  XV 

There  is.  Tho  best  testa  insert  if.  If  there  ia  a,  uatural 
body,  there  is  alao  a  spiritual  body.  The  eslBteiieo  of  the  one 
forms  a  logical  presuinption  for  the  existence  of  the  other. 

45.  A  living  soul  {-^vx^v  l^maav).  See  Gen.  ii.  7.  Here 
■^wj^Tj  passee  into  its  personal  sense — an  individual  personality 
(eee  Rom.  xi.  4),  yet  retaining  the  emphatic  reference  to  the 
■^y^^ij  as  the  distinctive  principle  of  that  individuality  in  con- 
traat  with  the  wvevfia  spirit  following.  Hence  this  fact  illua- 
tratea  the  general  statement  there  is  a  natural  bodij :  such  was 
Adam's,  the  receptacle  and  organ  of  the  ^i^  soul. 

Last  Adam.  Christ,  Put  over  against  Adam  because  of 
the  peculiar  relation  in  which  both  stand  to  the  race :  Adam 
as  the  physical,  Christ  as  the  spiritual  head.  Adam  the  head 
of  the  race  in  its  sin,  Christ  in  its  redemption.  Compare  Rom. 
V.  14. 

Quickening  spirit  (■n-wii/ia  fmowowiw).  Rev.,  life^ving. 
Not  merely  li/uin-g,  but  imparting  life.  Compare  John  i.  4 ; 
iii.  36 ;  V.  26,  40  ;  vi.  33.  35 ;  x.  10  ;  xi-  25  ;  siv.  6.  The  per- 
iod at  which  Christ  became  a  qnickening  Spirit  is  the  resurrec- 
tion, after  whicli  Ilia  body  began  to  take  on  the  characteristics 
of  a  spiritual  body.*     See  Rom.  vi.  4 ;  1  Pet.  i.  21. 

46.  Not  first — spiritual — natural.  A  general  principle,  il- 
lustrated everywhere  in  human  history,  that  the  lower  life  pre- 
cedes the  higher. 

47.  Earthy  {x.olK6<i).  Only  in  thia  chapter.  The  kindred 
noun  xoij?  dust  appears  Mark  vi.  11 ;  Apoc.  xviii.  19.  From 
yito  to  pour  ;  hence  of  earth  thrown  down  or  heaped  up:  loose 
earth.     Compare  Glen.  ii.  7,  Sept.,  where  the  word  is  used. 

From  heaven  (ef  ovpavaH).  'E^  out  of,  marking  the  origin, 
as  eK  77?  out  qft/ie  earth.  Meyer  acutely  remarks  that  "  no 
predicate  in  this  second  clause  corresponds  to  the  earthy  of  the 
first  half  of  the  verse,  because  the  material  of  the  glorified  body 

*8e«Newin»n  Smyth,  "  Old  F«UhB in  New  Light,"  p,  358 ;  »nd  a b«»uti(ul 

Lirticle  hj  the  Rev.  J   Ostrald  Dvkeg,  "Tha  Identit/  of  the  Lord  Jsans  ■fter  J 

HU  ReBarraatioD,"  "  Bxpoaitor,"  Bret  BeriM,  Ut.,  161.  | 


Oh.  XV.]      THB  first  EPISTLB  TO  TRB  OOBINTHIAN8.  285 

of  Christ  transcends  alike  conception  and  expression.''  The 
phrase  includes  both  the  divine  origin  and  the  heavenly  nature ; 
and  its  reference,  determined  by  the  line  of  the  whole  argn- 
ment,  is  to  the  glorified  body  of  Christ — the  Lord  who  shall 
descend y/*{>m  heaven  in  His  glorified  body.  See  Philip,  iii.  20, 
21.» 

49.  We  shall  bear  (if^piaofiev).  The  great  weight  of  au- 
thority is  in  favor  of  ^piamfLev  let  tts  bear.  This  reading  pre- 
sents a  similar  difficulty  to  that  oi  let  us  ha^oe  in  Rom.  v.  1  (see 
note).  The  context  and  the  general  drift  of  the  argument  are 
certainly  against  it.  The  preceptive  or  hortative  subjunctive 
is,  as  Ellicott  remarks,  singularly  out  of  place  and  nnlooked  for. 
It  may  possibly  be  a  case  of  itacism^  i.e.,  the  confusing  of  one 
vowel  with  another  in  pronunciation  leading  to  a  loose  mode  of 
orthography. 

51.  We  shall  not  all  sleep  {irdurei  ov  Ko$fjtifiSfi<r6fi£Ba). 
Kot,  there  is  not  one  of  %l8  now  living  who  shall  die  before 
the  Lord's  coming,  but,  we  shall  not  idl  die.  There  will  be 
some  of  us  Christians  living  when  the  Lord  comes,  but  we  shall 
be  changed.  The  other  rendering  would  commit  the  apostle  to 
the  extent  of  believing  that  not  one  Christian  would  die  before 
the  coming  of  Christ. 

52.  Moment  (arofup).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 
Atom>08j  from  a  not  and  rifLvto  to  ciUj  whence  our  atom.  An 
undivided  point  of  time.  The  same  idea  of  indivisibility  ap- 
pears in  iucctpiff^  (not  in  the  New  Testament),  from  d  not  and 
Kelpm  to  shear  /  primarily  of  hair  too  short  to  be  cut,  and  often 
used  in  classical  Greek  of  time,  as  in  the  phrase  ip  atcapel  *)(poiih 
ov  in  a  moment  of  time. 

Twinkling  (pvaf).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament  Orig- 
inally the  swing  or  force  with  which  a  thing  is  thrown ;  a  stroke 
or  heat.  Used  in  the  classics  of  the  rush  of  a  storm,  tke  fia/p- 
ping  of  wings ;  ike  hmz  of  a  gnat ;  the  quivering  of  a  harp- 
string;  the  tioinkling  of  the  stars.    Generally  of  any  rapid 


*  See  the  admirable  disooflBioii  of  the  pasMge  bj  Oodet 


286  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NBW  TESTAMENT.         [Ca.  X\ 

movemeDt,  as  of  the  feet  in  runDing,  or  the  quick  darting  of  a 
fish. 

53.  This  corruptible.  As  if  pointing  to  his  own  body. 
Compare  the«e  hands.  Acts  xx.  34 ;  this  tabernacle,  2  Cor,  v.  1. 

Put  on  (eifBiiiTtuTSai).  The  metaphorof  clothing.  Compare 
2  Cor.  V.  2—4.  Incorruption  and  immortality  are  to  iuvest  the 
spiritually-embodied  personality  like  a  garment. 

54.  Is  swallowed  up  («<»Te7ro5i;).  From  Isa.  xxv.  8.  The 
quotation  agrees  with  the  Hebrew :  Jle  »hall  avyaUoio  up  death 
forever,  rather  than  with  the  Septuagint,  Deaik  lias  prevailed 
and  awailowed  men  up,  which  reverses  the  meaning  of  the  He- 
brew,    Compare  2  Cor.  v.  4. 

In  victory  {ek  vuem).  Lit,  unto  victory,  so  that  victory  is 
to  be  established. 

55.  O  death,  where,  etc.  From  Hos.  .\ii!.  14,  a  free  vers- 
ion of  the  Sept. :  "  Where  is  thy  penalty,  0  Death  ?  Where 
thy  sting,  0  Hades  t     Heb, :  Where  are  thy  ploffues,  0  Death  f 

Where  thy  jiestilence,  0  Sheolf 

O  grave  (oStj).  Which  is  the  reading  of  the  Septuagint 
The  correct  reading  is  Sdvare  0  death.  So  Rev.  Iladea  does 
not  occur  in  Paul's  writings.  In  Rom.  x.  7  he  usee  abyss.  Ed- 
wards thinks  that  this  is  intentional,  and  suggests  that  Fanl, 
writing  to  Greeks,  may  have  shunned  the  ill-omened  name 
which  people  dreaded  to  utter.  So  Plato :  "  People  in  general 
use  the  word  {Pluto)  as  a  euphemism  for  Hades,  which  their 
fears  lead  them  to  derive  erroneously  from  o^iSiJ;  the  invis- 
*'&;«"  ("Cratylua,"  403). 

Sting  {Kkmpov).  In  the  Septuagint  for  the  Hebrew  pesti- 
lence. See  on  Apoc.  ix.  9-  The  image  is  that  of  a  beast  with 
ft  sting;  not  death  with  a  goad,  driving  men. 

I  57.  Giveth.    The  present  participle  marking  the  certainty 

I  of  the  future  victory.*     Contrast  Sir  Walter  Baleigh^s  words 

I  *ory 


■  Bdwuds  ind  Godet  explain  the  present  tense  u  iDdicatSng  the  daQy  tv- 
torji  of  the  reaurrectioa-life  In  belleren,  whiah  deitroja  the  pow«r  of  tin 


/Kr-  J 


Ch.  XVL]     THB  first  BPISTLB  to  THB  OORINTHIAN&  287 

in  conclnding  hk  "  History  of  the  World.''  "  It  is  therefore 
Death  aloue  that  can  make  any  man  anddenly  know  himself. 
He  tells  the  proud  and  insolent  that  they  are  but  abjects,  and 
humbles  them  at  the  instant ;  makes  them  cry,  complain,  and 
repent;  yea,  even  to  hate  their  forepassed  happiness.  He 
takes  the  account  of  the  rich,  and  proves  him  a  beggar — a 
naked  beggar — which  hath  interest  in  nothing,  but  in  the 
gravel  that  fills  his  mouth.  He  holds  a  glass  before  tlie  eyes 
of  the  most  beautiful,  and  makes  them  see  therein  their  de- 
formity and  rottenness ;  and  they  acknowledge  it 

"  O  eloquent,  just  and  mighty  Death  I  whom  none  could  ad- 
vise, thou  hast  persuaded ;  what  none  hath  dared,  thou  hast 
done ;  and  whom  all  tlie  world  hath  flattered,  thou  only  hast 
cast  out  of  the  world  and  despised.  Thou  hast  drawn  together 
all  the  far-stretched  greatness,  all  the  pride,  cruelty,  and  am- 
bition of  man  ;  and  covered  it  all  over  with  these  two  narrow 
words :  Hio  Jacet." 

58.  Stedfast,  unmovable.  The  former  refers  to  their  firm 
establishment  in  the  faith  ;  the  latter  to  that  establishment  as 
related  to  assault  from  temptation  or  persecution.  Fixedness 
is  a  condition  of  (ibaundinff  in  work.  All  activity  has  its  centre 
in  rest.* 


CHAPTER  XVL 

1.  Collection  (Xo^^).  Peculiar  to  the  New  Testament, 
and  occurring  only  here  and  ver.  2.  The  classical  word  is 
avXXoyr),  Vulg.,  collectay  which  latter  is  also  used  of  the  as- 
semblies in  which  the  collections  took  place.  From  Xiyw  to 
collect.  For  such  material  ministries  Paul  uses  a  variety  of 
words;  as  %<£/)i9  hounty,  ver.  3;  KowtDvla  contnbutionj  Rom. 

of  the  law.  This  is  true  as  a  fact ;  for  the  believer  ia  moraUj  risen  with 
Christ,  walks  in  newness  of  life,  and  ?uUh  everlasting  life  (Rom.  vi.  4-14 ; 
Eph.  ii.  5-7  ;  Col.  iii.  1-5).  Bnt  the  whole  drift  of  Panl's  thought  is  toward 
the  final  victory  over  death. 

*  One  of  the  best  popular  expositions  of  this  chapter  is  the  Reyerend  Samr 
nel  Cox  s  little  book,  <*  The  Besorreotion.'*    R.  D.  Dickinson,  London. 


388  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        (Cu.  XVX 

XV.  26  ;  evXoyi'a  Messing,  2  Cor.  ix.  5  ;  fuii/rovprfia  miniatraiion, 
3  Cor.  ix.  12;  iKemioavvan  altns.  Acta  xxiv.  17.  The  word 
epavoi  was  used  by  the  Greeks  to  denote  a  feast  of  contribution 
or  jiicitic ;  a  club  for  mutual  relief,  and  a  c&nirihution,  made 
us  &  club-eubecriptioD,  or  for  the  support  of  the  poor. 

The  saints.     At  Jerusalem.     Evidently  the  community  of 

property  (Acts  ii.  i4)  liad  been  abandoned  ;  and  Augustine  snp- 
poses  that  the  poverty  of  the  Jerusalem  Christians  was  due  to 
tiiat  practice.  See  note  on  Rom.  xv.  26.  The  precise  causes 
of  the  destitution  in  that  church  can  be  only  conjectured. 

2.  Upon  the  first  day  of  the  week  (uit^  ^iav  aa^ffarov). 
Karii  has  a  distributive  force,  every  first  day.  For  toeek,  lit., 
Sabbath,  see  on  Acts  x.x.  7. 

Lay  by  him  in  store  {yrap  catToi  TiSerta  BvjaavpC^tav).  Lit., 
put  by  himself  treasuring.     Put  by  at  home.* 

As  God  hath  prospered  (o  t(  &-v  evoScorat).  Lit.,  w/iatso- 
«w  he  may  prosper  in.  See  on  Rom,  i.  10 ;  3  John  2 ;  and 
on  Acts  xi.  29  for  the  verb  einropia  in  the  similar  sense  of  mak- 
ing a  prosperous  journey. 

No  gatherings,  etc.  Rev.,  collections.  The  amount  would 
be  greater  through  systematic  weekly  saving  than  through  col- 
lections made  once  for  all  on  his  arrival. 

When  I  am  come  {orav  e\Sa)  rore).  Lit.,  t/i&n.  whenever  I 
•may  have  come.  The  indefinite  whenever  and  the  emphatic 
then  indicate  his  unwillingness  to  rely  upon  a  special  contribu- 
tion called  forth  by  his  arrival  at  any  uncertain  time.  Christ- 
ian beneficence  is  to  be  the  outcome  of  a  setiUd  principle,  not 
of  an  occasional  impulse. 

3.  Approve  by  your  letters.  So  A.  V.  and  Rev.  Others, 
however,  connect  by  letters  with  will  /send,  making  the  letters 

I  to  be  PaitTs  introduction  to  the  church  at  Jenisalem.     The 


*  Se«  Ka  utlole  b;  Deui  Plomptre,  ■ 
poritor,"  tint  seiisi,  1.,  ^B. 


»  Uanof  BuBinHSs," 


€h.  XVX]      THB  first  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANa  289 

the  collection  ;  Paul,  as  the  originator  and  apostolic  steward  of 
the  collection,  will  send  the  money. 

4.  Meet  for  me  to  go  (ofioy  rov  tchfii  wopeveaSiu).  Lit, 
if  it  be  worthy  of  my  goings  i.e.,  if  the  gift  be  suflScieutl  j  large 
to  warrant  an  apostolic  journey  to  Jerusalem.  This  is  better 
than  if  it  be  becoming. 

9.  Great  and  effectual  door.  Door  metaphorically  for 
opportunity :  great  as  to  its  extent ;  effectual  as  to  the  result. 
The  figure  of  an  effectual  door^  as  it  stands,  is  of  course  clumsy, 
but  the  idea  as  a  whole  is  clear :  a  great  opportunity  for  effect- 
ive work. 

15.  Achaia.  In  a  restricted  sense,  the  northwest  of  Pelop- 
onnesus ;  but  often  used  by  the  poets  for  the  whole  of  Greece. 
Under  the  Romans  Greece  was  divided  into  two  provinces, 
Macedonia  and  Achaia;  the  former  including  Macedonia  proper, 
with  Illyricum,  Epirus,  and  Thessaly,  and  the  latter  all  that  lay 
south  of  these.  In  this  latter  acceptation  the  word  is  uniformly 
employed  in  the  New  Testament. 

17.  That  which  was  lacking  on  your  part  (jo  vfiirepw 
varipfffia).  Or  the  (i.e.,  7ny)  lack  of  you.  The  Greek  will  bear 
either  rendering.  Compare  Philip,  ii.  30  ;  2  Cor.  viii.  14 ;  ix. 
12.  Tlie  latter  is  preferable.  Edwards,  somewhat  naively 
says :  ^'  I  do  not  see  what  could  be  lacking  on  the  part  of  the 
Corinthians  which  Stephanas  and  his  two  friends  could  supply 
at  Ephesus." 

19.  Asia.    See  on  Acts  ii.  9. 

Aquila  and  Prisca.    See  on  Rom.  xvi.  3. 

22.  Maran-atha.  Not  to  be  joined  with  anathema  as  one 
phrase.  Rev.,  properly,  a  period  after  cmathema.  Maran- 
atha  means  the  Lord  cometh*  It  was  a  reminder  of  the  sec- 
ond coming.  The  reason  for  the  use  of  the  Aramaic  phrase 
is  unknown.  It  is  found  in  ^'The  Teaching  of  the  Twelve 
Apostles,"  ch.  X.,  at  the  conclusion  of  the  post-communion 
prayer.     Compare  Apoc.  xxii.  20. 


^FUld,  '*Otiam  NorvioeiiM,"  renden,  the  LordUame, 


TTTV. 

SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS 


CHAPTER  I. 

1.  Timothy  our  brother.  Lit.,  the  brother.  Compare  1 
Cor,  i.  1,  Well  known  in  the  Cliristian  brotherhood,  "When 
Paul  writes  to  Tiinotlij  himself  he  calls  liim  &on"  (Bengel). 
Timothy  appears,  not  as  araauuensie,  nor  as  joint-author,  but 
as  joint-sender  of  the  epistle. 

Achaia.     See  on  1  Cor.  svi.  15. 

3.  The  Father  of  mercies  (6  var^p  rmv  olimpftav).  Equiv- 
alent to  the  compassionate  Father.  Compare  the  phrasea  Father 
of  glory,  Eph.  i,  17;  spirits,  Heb.  xii,  9;  lights,  Jas.  i.  IT. 
OlKTippMv  mercy,  from  olicro^pity  or  mercy,  the  feeling  which 
expreeses  itself  in  the  exclamation  61  oh!  on  seeing  another's 
misery.  The  distinction  between  this  and  eKeot,  according  to 
whicli  oticTtpfim  signifies  the  feeling,  and  eK£<k  tlte  manifesta- 
tion, cannot  be  strictly  held,  since  the  manifestation  is  often 
expressed  by  oueripfw.  See  Sept.,  Ps.  xxiv.  6 ;  cii.  4 ;  exviii. 
77. 

All  comfort  (■7rd<rr)ii  irapaKX^aeeai;).  The  earliest  passage  in 
the  New  Testament  where  this  word  comfort  or  its  kindred 
■verb  is  applied  to  God.  Compare  7ropt»«XijT0?  comforter^  advo- 
cate, of  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  John  xiv.  16,  26,  etc.  AU  is  better 
rendered  every:  the  God  of  every  consolation. 

4.  In  at!  our  tribulation— in  any  trouble  (iTrl  trdtrp  -rg 
Sxii^i  fjfi&v — fv  ■7rd<rT/  Sxii^i).     Note  the  nice  nee  of  the  art- 


i 


Ch.  L]  THB  BBOOND  BPISTLB  to  THB  CORINTHIANS.  291 

icie :  all  <ywr  tribuloHon^  coUectivelj ;  any  or  every  trouble^ 
specifically.  In  is  literaUj  upon;  the  trouble  forming  the 
ground  of  the  comfort.    So  m  hope^  Bom.  iv.  18 ;  v.  2. 

We  ourselves  are  comforted.  An  illnstration  of  the  per- 
sonal character  which  pervades  this  epistle.  Paol  had  been 
oppressed  with  anxiety  concerning  the  reception  of  his  first 
epistle  by  the  Corinthian  Oharch,  by  the  delay  of  tidings,  and 
by  his  disappointment  in  meeting  Titus.  The  tidings,  when  at 
last  they  did  arrive,  aroused  his  gratitude  for  the  wholesome 
effect  of  his  rebuke  upon  the  Church,  and  his  indignation  at 
the  aggressions  of  the  Judaizing  teachers.  With  these  feelings 
mingled  his  anxiety  to  hasten,  in  the  Corinthian  Church,  the 
contribution  for  the  poor  saints  in  Judaea.  This  second  letter 
therefore  bears  the  marks  of  the  high  tension  of  feeling  which 
fiads  expression  in  frequent  personal  allusions,  especially  to  his 
afflictions.* 

5.  Sufferings  of  Christ.  Kot  things  suffered  far  Chrieee 
kikey  but  GhrisSs  own  eufferinge  as  they  are  shared  by  His  dis- 
ciples. See  Matt.  xx.  22 ;  Philip,  iii.  10 ;  Col.  i.  24 ;  1  Pet. 
iv.  13.  Note  the  peculiar  phrase  abound  {irepuraevei)  in  ue, 
by  which  Christ's  sufferings  are  represented  as  overflotoing 
upon  His  followers.     See  on  Col.  L  24. 

6.  And  whether  we  be,  etc.  The  MSS.  differ  in  their  ar- 
rangement of  this  verse.  The  main  points  of  difference  may 
be  seen  by  comparing  the  A.  Y.  and  Rev.  The  sense  is  not 
affected  by  the  variation. 

Is  effectual  {ivefjyovfUpffs:).    See  on  Mark  vi.  14;  Jas.  v.  16. 

8.  We  would  not  have  you  ignorant.    See  on  Bom.  i.  13. 

Came  to  us  in  Asia.  Rev.,  better,  befell.  The  nature  of 
the  trouble  is  uncertain.  The  following  words  seem  to  indicate 
inward  distress  rather  than  trouble  from  without,  such  as  he 
experienced  at  Ephesus. 

*  See  Farrtr'B  '"Paul,"  iL,  ch.  zxziU.,  and  Stanlej's  IntroduoUon  to  tht 
Epistle. 


292 


WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW   TESTAMENT, 


ICh.  L 


Were  pressed  out  of  measure  {koS'  vvfp^oKijv  f^ap^Srj- 
/*«').  Rev.,  better,  were  weighed  down,  tluiB  giving  tlie  ety- 
mological force  of  the  verb,  from  ^dpo<i  burden.  For  out  of 
measure,  Rev.,  exceedingly  ;  see  on  1  Cor.  ii.  1. 

We  despaired  {e^airopr^^vai).  Only  here  and  cli.  iv.  6. 
From  ef  out  and  out,  and  awopeto  to  he  without  a  way  of  escape. 
See  on  did  many  things,  Mark  vi,  20. 

9.  Sentence  of  death  {avoxpifta  tov  Saudrov).  'AwoKpifia 
occurs  only  here  in  the  New  Testament,  and  not  in  classical 
Greek  nor  in  the  Septnagint.  In  tlie  latter  the  kindi-ed  words 
have,  almost  uaiformly,  the  meaning  of  atiswer.  Josephus 
used  it  of  a  response  of  the  Roman  senate.  Sentence,  which 
occurs  in  some  inscriptions,  if  a  legitimate  rendering  at  all,  is  a 
roundabont  one,  derived  from  a  classical  use  of  tlie  verb  awo- 
Kplvto  to  reject  on  inquin/,  decide.  Rev.,  therefore,  correctly, 
answer  of  death.  The  sense  is  well  given  by  Stanley:  "When 
I  have  asked  myself  what  would  be  the  issue  of  this  struggle, 
the  answer  has  been,  '  death.' " 

.    Doth  deliver  (Jtverai).     The  correct  reading  is  pvaerai  wiR 
delivery  Rev. 

11.  Persons  {TTpoffonrmv).  Face  is  the  ueoal  rendering  of 
the  word  in  the  New  Testament.  Even  when  rendered  ^jaraon 
the  usage  is  Ilebraistic  ior  face.  See  on  Jas.  ii.  1.  There  ie 
no  reason  for  abandoning  that  sense  here.     The  expression  is 

pictorial;  that  thanksgiving  may  be  given  from  many  faces  ; 
the  cheerful  countenances  being  an  offering  of  thanks  to  God. 

12.  Godly  sincerity  (eikiKpivtla  roO  BeoC).  Lit.,  eincertty 
of  God,  as  Rev.     See  on  2  Pet.  iii.  1. 

We  have  had  our  conversation  (difeaTpdtfnftieu).  Rev.,, 
behaved  ourselves.     See  on  1  Pet.  i.  15. 

13.  Read —  acknowledge  [dvayivtoaKerc — eTrvyaiaivKeTe). 
The  word-play  cannot  be  reproduced  in  English. 

14.  In  part  (d-TTo  fUpoiK).  Referring  to  the  partial  under- 
standing of  his  character  and  motives  by  the  Corinthians. 


i 


Ch.  L]  THB  second  BPISTLB  to  the  CORINTHIANS.  293 

15.  Before  (irparepov).  Bather,  Jirst  of  aU.  Instead  of 
going  first  to  the  Macedonians,  as  he  afterward  decided.  See 
1  Cor.  xvi.  5. 

Second  benefit  {Sevripop  xopii^).  Benefit  is,  literally,  grace. 
Not  a  mere  jpleasurable  experience  through  Paal's  visit,  but  a 
divine  bestowal  of  grace.  Compare  Som.  i.  11.  Second  refers 
to  his  original  plan  to  visit  Corinth  twice,  on  bis  way  to  Mace- 
donia and  on  his  retarn. 

17.  Did  I  use  lightness  (rg  ika^pUf  ixpffadfjurgp).  Bev., 
sJiew  fickleness.  *Ekeuf>plf  lightnesSj  only  here  in  the  New  Test- 
ament Compare  iKai^pi^  ligktj  Matt.  xi.  30;  2  Cor.  iv.  17. 
His  change  of  plan  had  given  rise  to  tlie  charge  of  fickleness. 

The  yea,  yea,  and  the  nay,  nay.  That  I  should  say  <<yes" 
at  one  time  and  ^^no"  at  another;  promising  to  come  and 
breaking  my  promise. 

18.  As  God  is  true  {irioro^  6  Oea^).  Not  to  be  taken  as  a 
formula  of  swearing.  He  means  that  God  will  answer  for  him 
against  the  charge  of  fickleness  by  the  power  and  blessing 
(benefit)  which  will  attend  his  presence.  Hence  the  meaning 
is :  /aithfiU  is  God  (in  this)  that  our  speechj  etc. 

19.  Was  not  {ovk  iyhero).  Bather,  did  not  prove  to  he^  m 
the  result. 

In  Him  was  yea  (vol  iv  aur^  yiyovev).  Lit,  yea  has  come 
to  pass  in  Him.  He  has  shown  Himself  absolutely  the  truth. 
Compare  John  xiv.  6 ;  Apoc.  iii.  7,  14. 

20.  All  ipaoA).     Wrong.     As  many  as. 

Are  yea,  etc.  Making  this  the  predicate  oipromiseSy  which 
is  wrong.  The  meaning  is  that  how  many  soever  are  Gkxl's 
promises,  in  Christ  is  the  incarnate  answer,  ^^yeal"  to  the 
question,  "Will  they  be  fulfilled?"  Hence  Bev.,  correctly: 
How  many  soever  he  th^  promises  of  Oodj  in  Him  is  the  yea. 

And  in  Him  Amen  {koX  iv  ain^  ro  afiffp).  The  correct 
reading  is :  Bio  koX  Bi  airrov  to  ofAffv  Wherefore  also  through 
Bim  is  the  Amen.     In  giving  this  answer  in  His  person  and 


294  WORD  STDD1B8  IN  THE   NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Cu.  I. 

life,  Christ  puts  the  emphatic  confirmation  upon  God'e  promiBes, 
even  aB  in  the  congregation  the  people  say,  Amen,  verily.  In 
Jlim  is  in  His  person:  through  Him,  by  His  ogeTicy. 

By  us  (S*  7/«Sc).  Tlirough  our  ministration.  Christ,  in 
and  through  whom  are  the  yea,  and  the  amen,  is  so  proclaimed 
by  U8  as  to  beget  assurance  of  God's  promises,  and  bo  to  glorify 
Him. 

21.  Stablisheth— in  Christ  (/Se)9atwi'^€«).  The  present 
participle  with  el<t  into  indicates  tlie  work  as  it  is  in  progress 
toward  a  iinal  identification  of  the  believers  with  Christ, 

22.  Sealed  {atftpoffurdfttvm).  See  on  John  iii.  33;  Apoc. 
xxii.  10. 

Earnest  {appa^wva).  Only  here,  ch.  v.  5,  and  Eph.  i.  14.  It 
means  caution -money,  deposited  by  a  purchaser  in  pledge  of 
full  payment. 

Of  the  Spirit.  Not  the  foretaste  ot  pledge  of  the  Spirit,  but 
the  Spirit  Himself 'm  pledge  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  promises. 
By  a  common  Greek  usage  the  words  are  in  apposition :  the 
earnest  which  is  the  Spirit. 

23.  I  call  God  for  a  record  (roe  Beov  etrticaMOfiai).  Rev., 
better,  witness.  A  common  classical  idiom.  Compare  Plato  : 
"Ne.xtwill  follow  the  choir  of  young  men  under  the  age  of 
thirty,  who  will  call  upon  the  god  Paean  to  testify  to  the  truth 
of  these  words  "  ("  Laws,"  664).  Homer :  "  For  the  gods  will 
be  the  best  witnesses"  ("Iliad,"  xxii.,  254).  Compare  Rom.  i. 
9;  Gal.  i.  20;  Philip,  i.  8;  1  Thess.  ii.  5,  10;  Gen.  xsxi.  50, 
Sept  Tliis  particular  form  of  expression  occurs  nowhere  else 
in  the  New  Testament.  The  verb  is  often  translated  aj/peai, 
as  Acts  XXV.  11,  12.  Also  to  call  upon  in  the  sense  of  mippH 
oation,  Rom.  x.  12,  13,  14 ;  1  Cor.  L  2. 


ch.  il]      thb  sboond  bpistlb  to  the  COamTHIAN&         295 


CHAPTER  IL 

1.  With  myself  (^/iai/r^).  Rev.,  better,  for  myadf.  Paul, 
with  affectionate  tact,  puts  it  as  if  he  had  taken  this  resolution 
for  his  own  pleasure. 

In  heaviness  {h  Xxnrg).  Meaning,  apparently,  the  apostle's 
own  sorrowful  state  of  mind.  This  is  wrong.  He  refers  to 
the  sorrow  which  his  coming  would  bring  to  the  Church. 
Compare  to  spa/re^  ch.  i.  23.     Rev.,  with  sorrow. 

Again.    Referring  to  a  former  unrecorded  visit. 

2.  If  I  make,  etc.  /  is  emphatic,  implying  that  there  are 
enough  others  who  caused  them  trouble. 

Who  then  is  he,  etc  The  thought  underlying  the  passage, 
i.  24-ii.  1-3,  is  that  the  apostle's  own  joy  is  bound  up  with  the 
spiritual  prosperity  of  the  Church.  Compare  Philip,  iv.  1. 
As  the  helper  of  their  joy  he  would  receive  joy  through  their 
faith  and  obedience.  So  long  as  their  moral  condition  com- 
pelled him  to  come,  bringing  rebuke  and  pain,  they  could  not 
be  a  source  of  joy  to  him.  If  I  must  needs  make  you  sorry 
with  merited  rebuke,  who  can  give  me  joy  save  you  who  are 
thuB  made  sorry? 

4.  Anguish  (crt/i^o;^).  Only  here  and  Luke  xxi.  25.  Lit, 
a  fielding  together^  constraining^  or  cornpressing.  See  on  taken^ 
Luke  iv.  38.  So  anguish^  from  the  Latin,  angere  to  choke : 
anger  J  which,  in  earlier  English,  means  affliction^  mental  tort' 
ure:  anxious  :  the  Latin  anguis  a  snake^  marking  the  serpent 
by  his  ihrotUimg.  In  Sanscrit,  anhaSy  from  the  same  root,  was 
the  name  for  sin,  the  throttler.  It  reappears  obscurely  in  our 
medical  term  quinsy^  which  was  originally  qumcmcy^  Oreek 
Kwatficq  dog-throttling^  med.,  cyncmche. 

5.  Any.    Referring  to  the  incestuous  person. 

Not  to  me.  Not  that  Paul  did  not  grieve  over  the  of- 
fender; but  he  desires  to  emphasize  the  fact  that  the  injury 


WORD  STaDIES  IS  THE  NBW  TESTAMHINT. 


cuiiiiei]  by   the 
Chui-cb, 


I   uut   to   liiui 


jnally,   but   to   the 


But  in  part,  that  I  may  not  overcharge  you  all  (u\\a, 
diro  fupow  "iva  fii)  iiritiapa)  vavTOft  6/id;).  Foi"  overcharge. 
Rev., press  too /teavili/,  ia  order  to  briug  out  more  dietinctij' 
tlie  idea  of  tbe  verb,  laying  a  hunltin  {^dpof)  ujioii.  Ovei- 
cftarge,  however,  is  not  incorrect,  though  possibly  ambiguous  in 
the  light  of  the  various  uses  of  cltarge.  Charge  is  from  tlie 
Latiu  carrua  a  wagon.  Compare  tlie  low  Latin  carricare  to 
load  a  wagon,  &i\A  carica  a  freightshi/p.  Hence  cliarge  is  a 
load ;  compare  the  interchange  of  charge  and  load  applied  to 
the  contents  of  a  gun.  So««'^o,  and  carvxiture,  whit-h  is  an  ex- 
aggerated or  ovei'loaded  drawing.  Hence  expense,  coat,  commis- 
sum,  accusatUyii,  all  implying  a  burden,  either  of  pecuniary  or 
of  other  reepouaibility,  or  of  guilt.  In  part  does  not  refer  to 
Paul,  as  if  ho  had  said,  "You  have  not  grieved  nie  alone  and 
principally,  but  in  part,  since  my  sorrow  ia  siiared  by  the 
Church."  With  in  part  is  to  be  construed,  parenthetically, 
that  I  press  not  too  heavily,  that  is,  on  the  offemhr :  the  whole 
clause  being  intended  to  mitigate  tbe  charge  against  tlie  of- 
fender of  having  wounded  the  whole  Chnrch.  Thus  you  all 
depends  upon  he  hath  caused  sorrow,  not  upou  that  /press  not 
too  heavily  upon.  Render,  aa  Rev.,  He  hath  caused  sorrow,  iwt 
to  me,  hut  iiipart  (that  I  press  riot  too  heavily)  to  you  aU. 


6.  Many  {t€>v  trKeiovwv).  Rev.,  correctly,  the  many:  tlm 
majority  of  the  Church. 

7.  Forgive  {^(apiaaffAai).  The  idea  oifreeness  (x^vi,  see 
on  Luke  i,  30)  lies  in  the  v/or  A  forgive,  which  isforth-give. 

Overmuch  sorrow  (rg  -n-epiaaoTepa  Xujrp).     Rev.  gives  the 

force  of  the  article,  his  sorrow.     C/Dermuch,  excessive,  throngh 
the  refusal  of  pardon. 

8.  Confirm  your  love  («vpoio-flnl7d7nji').  The  verb  is  found 
only  here  and  Gal.  iii.  15.  From  Kvpoi  supreme  power,  itu- 
thoriiy.  Hence  to  take  Judicial  resolution  to  treat  the  offender 
with  brotherly  love. 


A 


Ch.  ILJ        THE  Si£GOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  297 

9.  The  proof  of  you  (t^i^  So/afir)v  vfi&v).  See  on  Bom.  v. 
4.  Your  tried  quality.  See  on  1  Pet  L  7.  Compare  Philip, 
ii.  22. 

10.  In  the  person  {iv  irpoc<Snnp).  Better,  as  Bev.,  in  mar- 
gin, presence  /  or  facej  as  if  Christ  were  looking  on.  See  on 
ch.  i.  11. 

11.  Lest  Satan  should  get  an  advantage  of  us  (Jva  fiif 
trXeovexTfj^^fiep  inro  rov  Sarava).  Lit,  in  order  thai  we  he  not 
made  gain  of,  or  overreached^  by  Satam,,  Bev.,  thai  no  advant- 
age may  he  gadned  over  ue.  The  verb,  from  irKkov  m^yrCj  and 
exfo  to  han)e^  appears  in  the  noan  irXeoi^^^  greed  of  gava^  covet- 
oicsnees.     See  on  Bom.  i.  29. 

Are  Ignorant — devices  {aryvoovfiev — vo^fjMra).  A  paronom- 
asia (see  on  Bom.  i.  29,  31).  As  nearly  as  possible,  '^  not  know 
his  knowing  plots.'' 

12.  I  came  to  Troas.  Bengel  remarks:  ^^ The  whole  epistle 
is  an  itinerary."  The  fact  is  another  illastration  of  the  strong 
personal  feeling  which  marks  the  letter.  ''The  very  stages 
of  his  joarney  are  impressed  upon  it ;  the  troubles  at  Ephesns, 
the  repose  at  Troas,  the  anxiety  and  consolation  of  Macedonia, 
the  prospect  of  moving  to  Corinth." 

Troas.  The  fall  name  of  the  city  was  Alexandria  Troas. 
It  was  founded  by  Antigonus,  one  of  the  successors  of  Alex- 
ander the  Great,  and  originally  called  by  him  Antigonia  Troas. 
It  was  finished  by  Lysitnachus,  another  of  Alexander's  generals, 
and  called  by  him  Alexandria  Troas.  It  stood  upon  the  sea- 
shore, about  four  miles  from  ancient  Troy,  and  six  miles  south 
of  the  entrance  to  the  Hellespont.  It  was,  for  many  centuries, 
the  key  of  the  traffic  between  Europe  and  Asia,  having  an  ar- 
tificial port  consisting  of  two  basins.  Its  ruins,  with  their 
immense  arches  and  great  columns  of  granite,  indicate  a  city 
of  much  splendor.  The  Bomans  had  a  peculiar  interest  in  it, 
connected  with  the  tradition  of  their  own  origin  from  Troy ; 
and  the  jtis  Italicum  was  accorded  it  by  Augustus,  by  which 
its  territory  enjoyed  the  same  immunity  from  taxation  which 
attached  to  land  in  Italy.    Both  Julius  Caesar  and  Constantine 


298  WORD  STDDIBH  IM  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Cu.  II. 

coiiueived  the  desigii  of  niaking  it  a  capital.    The  ruins  eiicloBe 
a  circuit  of  several  miles,  and  include  a  vast  gymnasiuui,  a 
Btadium,  a  theatre,  and  an  aqueduct.     The  Turks  call  it  "  Old 
Constantinople."     The  harbor  is  now  blocked  np, 
A  door.     See  on  1  Cor.  xvi,  9. 

13,  Rost{av€o-iv).  Rev.,  relief.  See  on  fifterty,  Acts  xxiv.  23, 
Taking  my  leave  {aTrora^Atiaioi).  The  verb  means,  primar- 
ily, lo  set  apart  or  a&parate;  hence  to  s^arate  ones  self,  wUh- 
draw,  and  so  to  take  leave  of.  The  A.  V.  gives  this  seuee  in 
every  ease,  except  Mark  vi.  46,  where  it  wrongly  renders  sent 
away.  See  Luke  ix.  61 ;  Acts  xviii.  18,  21.  Ignatius,  tiwo- 
ra^dfievoi;  tco  ^'ufi  having  bid  farewell  to  the  life,  that  is,  this 
lower  life  (Epistle  to  Philadelphia,  xi.). 

14.  Causeth  to  triumph  {Sptanffevovrt).  Tliis  rendering  is 
inadmissible,  the  word  being  habitually  used  with  the  accus- 
ative (direct  objective)  case  of  the  person  or  thing  triumphed 
over,  and  never  of  the  triumphing  subject.  Ilenee,  to  lead  iti 
triumph.  It  occurs  only  here  and  Co!,  ii.  15.  It  is  not  found 
in  any  Greek  author  later  than  Paul's  date.  It  is  derived  from 
^plafi^tK  a  hymn  to  Baechua,  sung  in  festal  processions,  and 
was  used  to  denote  the  Roman  "triumph,"  celebrated  by  vic- 
torious generals  on  their  return  frem  their  campaigns.  Tlie 
general  entered  the  city  in  a  chariot,  preceded  by  the  captives 
i;nd  spoils  taken  in  war,  and  followed  by  his  troops,  and  pro- 
ceeded in  state  along  the  sacred  way  to  the  Capitol,  where  he 
offered  saci'iGces  in  the  temple  of  Jupiter.  He  was  accom- 
panied in  his  chariot  by  his  young  children,  and  sometimes  by 
confidential  friends,  while  behind  hiin  stood  a  slave,  holding 
over  his  head  a  jewelled  crown.  The  body  of  the  infantry 
brought  up  the  rear,  their  spears  adorned  with  laurel.  They 
shouted  "triumph!"  and  sang  hymns  in  praise  of  the  gods  or 
of  their  leader.  Paul  describee  himself  and  the  other  subjects 
of  Christ's  grace  under  the  figure  of  this  triumphal  pomp,  in 
wliich  they  are  led  as  trophies  of  the  Eedeemer's  conquest.'- 


■  vt:>p 


Sea,  further,  on  Col.  li   ir>,     O.  C.  Flnl&7,  In  >n  article  on  "Sb  Pkul'aUse 
i>t^pM>H£«<ii>"  (*'ExpoBltDr,''flratMries,x.,4D3),  tries  lo  show  thkt  the  eipr«s- 


d 


Ch.  IL]        THB  SBCOND  epistle  to  the  CORINTHIANa  299 

Bender,  as  Rev.j  which  ahjoays  leadeth  tis  m  trvwnyph  in  Christ. 
Compare  ch.  x.  5. 

The  savour  of  His  knowledge.  Acoording  to  the  Oreek 
usage,  savour  and  knowledge  are  in  apposition,  so  that  the 
knowledge  of  Christ  is  symbolized  as  cm  odor  communicating 
its  natnre  and  efficacy  through  the  apostle's  work,  ^'permeating 
the  world  as  a  cloud  of  frankincense  "  (Stanley).  For  a  similar 
usage  see  on  ch.  i.  22.  The  idea  of  the  Roman  triumph  is  still 
preserved  in  this  figure.  On  these  occasions  the  temples  were 
all  thrown  open,  garlands  of  flowers  decorated  every  shrine  and 
image,  and  incense  smoked  on  every  altar,  so  that  the  victor 
was  greeted  with  a  cloud  of  perfume.  Compare  Aeschylus  on 
the  festivities  at  the  return  of  Agamemnon  from  Troy : 

'*  The  altars  blaie  with  gifts ; 
And  here  and  there,  heaven-high  the  torch  uplifts 
Flame, — medicated  with  persuasions  mild. 
With  foul  admixture  unbeguUed — 
Of  holj  unguent,  from  the  clotted  chrism 
Brought  from  the  palace,  safe  in  its  abysm.** 

*'  Agamemnon/*  91-96,  Browning^s  Translation. 

15.  A  sweet  savour  of  Christ  (XpurroO  ewoSia).  Compare 
Eph.  V.  2 ;  Philip,  iv.  18.  As  so  often  in  Paul's  writings,  the 
figure  shifts;  the  apostolic  teachers  themselves  being  repre- 
sented as  an  odor,  their  Christian  personality  redolent  of  Christ 
It  is  not  merely  a  sweet  odor  produced  hy  Christ,  but  Christ 
Himself  is  the  savour  which  exhales  in  their  character  and 
work. 

16.  To  the  one  a  savour,  etc.  {wrfiij).  Betuming  to  the 
word  used  in  ver.  14,  which  is  more  general  than  evwSia  sweet 
savoury  denoting  an  odor  of  any  kind,  salutary  or  deadly,  and 
therefore  more  appropriate  here,  where  it  is  usckI  in  both  senses. 
The  two  words  are  combined,  Eph.  v.  2 ;  Philip,  iv.  18. 

sion  is  oast  in  the  figure  of  the  Bacohio  festival,  and  not  of  the  Roman  tri- 
umph. He  thinks  that  the  military  reference  is  not  borne  out  by  the  use  of 
the  verb  in  Plataroh,  Appian,  and  Herodian,  and  seems  to  imply  thAt  Paul 
was  ignorant  of  the  Roman  triumph.  At  least  he  says:  '*WhenPaal  wrote 
to  the  Corinthians  he  had  not  yet  seen  Rome.*' 


Of  death  («'*  SavdTov).  Rev,,  hotter,  giving  the  foice  uf  tlio 
■pre])OBitmi,  j»-nceeding  Jro-m,  wafted  from  death.  Tlie  figure 
is  carried  out  with  reference  to  Che  different  effects  of  the  (los- 
pel,  as  preached  by  the  npostlee,  upon  different  persons.  The 
divine  fragrance  itself  inaj"  liave,  to  Christ's  enemieB,  the  efl'ect 
of  a  deadly  odor.  The  figure  was  common  in  rabhinieal  writ- 
ings. Thus:  "  Whoever  bestows  labor  on  the  law  for  the  sake 
of  the  law  itself,  it  becomes  to  him  a  savour  of  life ;  and  who- 
ever does  not  bestow  labor  on  tiie  law  for  the  law's  sake,  it  be- 
comes a  eavour  of  death."  '^  Even  as  the  bee  brings  sweetness 
to  its  own  master,  but  stings  others,  bo  also  are  the  words  of 
the  law;  a  saving  odor  to  the  Israelites,  but  a  deadly  odor  to 
the  G-eiitiles."     These  are  specimens  of  a  great  many. 

Some  Bud  here  an  allusion  to  a  revolting  feature  of  the  Ro- 
man triumph.  Jnst  as  the  procession  was  ascending  the  Capitol- 
ine  Hill,  some  of  the  captive  chiefs  were  taken  into  the  adjoin- 
ing prison  and  put  to  death.  "  Tims  the  sweet  odors  which  to 
the  victor — a  Marina  or  a  Julius  Caesar — and  to  the  apectatoi-s 
were  a  symbol  of  glory  and  success  and  happiness,  were  to  the 
wretched  victims — a  Jiignrtha  or  a  Vercingetorix — an  odor  of 
death"  (Farrar).* 

Sufficient  (i'mivo^)-     See  on  Rom.  xv.  23. 

17.  Which  corrupt  («cfl7nj\euoi^«).  Only  here  in  the  New 
Testament.  From  KtimjXos  a  hitukster  or  jiedier  ;  a.\Bo  a  lavem- 
ksKpn:  Tlie  Ka-miXoi  formed  a  distinct  class  among  the  Greek 
dealent,  distinguished  from  the  eftwopoi  merchantu  or  wholesale 
dealers.  So  Plato :  "  Is  not  retailer  {«a7nj\ous)  the  teiiii  which 
ia  applied  to  those  who  sit  in  the  market-place  buying  and  sell- 
ing, while  those  who  wander  from  one  city  to  auother  are  called 
tnerc/iajif^?^'  ("Republic,"  371;  compare  "  Statesman,"  2611)- 
The  term  included  dealers  in  victuals  and  all  sorts  of  wares, 
but  was  especially  applied  to  retailL-rs  of  wine,  with  whom  adult- 
eration and  short  meai^nre  were  matters  of  course.  Galen 
speaks  of  wine-dealers  Kairr]\evotrre^  roiiv  otvo\K playing  tricks 

•  See  Cioerti,  "  Verrea,"  it.,  6,  30;  Plutarch,  '■  Muliu,"  12  ;  Livj-,  iitI., 


Cb.  IIL]       the  second  epistle  to  the  CORINTHIANS.  301 

wUh  t/teir  wines  /  mixing  the  new,  iiarah  wines,  so  as  to  make 
them  pass  for  old.  These  not  only  sold  their  wares  in  the 
market,  but  had  KairrfXela  wineshops  all  over  the  town,  where 
it  was  not  thonght  respectable  to  take  refreshments.  The 
whole  trade  was  greatly  despised.  In  Thebes  no  one  who  had 
sold  in  the  market  within  the  last  ten  years  was  allowed  to 
take  part  in  the  government.  So  Plato,  speaking  of  the  evils 
of  luxury  and  poverty :  "  What  remedy  can  a  city  of  sense  find 
against  this  disease  ?  In  the  first  place,  they  must  have  as  few 
retail  traders  as  possible"  (^^Laws,"  919.  The  whole  passage 
is  well  worth  reading).  The  moral  application  of  the  term 
was  familiar  in  classical  Greek.  Lncian  says :  '^  The  philoso- 
phers deal  out  their  instructions  like  hucksters."  Plato :  ^^  Those 
who  carry  about  the  wares  of  knowledge,  and  make  the  round 
of  the  cities,  and  sell  or  retail  them  to  any  customer  who  is  in 
want  of  them,  praise  them  all  alike  ;  though  I  should  not  won- 
der if  many  of  them  were  really  ignorant  of  their  effect  upon 
the  soul ;  and  their  customers  equally  ignorant,  unless  he  who 
buys  of  them  happens  to  be  a  physician  of  the  soul "  ("  Pro- 
tagoras," 313).  Paul  here  uses  the  term  of  those  who  trade  in 
the  word  of  Qod,  adulterating  it  for  the  purpose  of  gain  or 
popularity.  Compare  1  Tim.  vi.  5,  Rev.  In  the  "Teaching 
of  the  Twelve  Apostles"  occurs  the  word  ypMrrifiiropo^  a 
Christ-monger  (ch.  xiL,  5). 


CHAPTER  IIL 

1.  Do  we  begin  again.  Rev.,  a/re  we  beginning.  As  if 
anticipating  the  taunt  so  often  repeated,  that  he  had  no  com- 
mendatory letters,  and  therefore  was  forced  to  commend  him- 
self by  self-laudation  and  by  dishonest  means.  See  ch.  iv.  2 ; 
X.  12.  You  will  say,  ^^  Yon  are  beginning  again  the  old  strain 
of  self-commendation  as  in  the  first  epistle."  See  1  Cor.  ix. 
15-21. 

To  commend  {awurrdiHu).    See  on  Bom.  iii.  6. 


302  WORD  STUDUS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Cn.  m 

Some  others.  Others  is  auperfluoas.  The  reference  is  to 
certain  false  teachers  accredited  by  cliurcheB  or  by  other  well- 
known  teachers, 

2.  Our  epistle.  The  figure  which  follows  is  freely  and 
somewhat  loosely  worked  out,  and  presents  different  faces  in 
rapid  succession.  The  ligure  itself  ia  that  of  a  cominendaUvj 
letter  representing  the  Corinthian  Church :  "  Ye  are  our  letter." 
This  figure  is  carried  out  in  three  directions:  1,  As  related  to 
iAe  apmtlea'  own  consciousness.  The  Corinthian  Church  is  a 
letter  written  on  the  apostles'  hearts.  Their  own  conscious- 
nesB  testifies  that  that  Church  is  the  fruit  of  a  divinely  accred- 
ited, honest,  and  faithful  ministry.  3.  As  related  to  the  Cor- 
inthians themsel/oes.  The  Ciiurch  needs  no  letter  to  commend 
the  apostles  to  it.  It  is  its  own  commendation.  As  the  visible 
fruit  of  the  apostles'  iiiiniatry  they  are  a  commendatory  letter 
to  themselves.  If  the  question  arises  among  them,  "Were 
Paul  and  his  colleagues  duly  commissioned  t  " — the  answer  ie, 
"  We  ourselves  are  the  proof  of  it."  3.  As  rdated  to  otlters 
outside  of  the  Corinthian,  Church.  The  answer  to  the  charge 
that  the  Corinthians  have  been  taught  by  irregular  and  uncom- 
missioned teachers  is  the  same :  "  Behold  the  frnit  of  their 
labors  in  us.      We  are  their  commission." 

At  this  point  the  figure  again  shifts ;  the  letter  being  now 
conceived  as  written  on  the  Corinthians'  hearts,  instead  of  on 
the  hearts  of  the  apostles:  written  by  Christ  through  the 
apostlea*  ministry.  This  suggests  the  comparison  with  the  law 
written  on  tables  of  stone,  which  are  used  as  a  figure  of  the 
^^Mt,  fleshy  tables,  thus  introducing  two  incongruities,  namely, 
an  epistle  written  on  stone,  and  writing  imth  ink  on  stone  tahl^. 

Written  in  our  hearts.  See  above.  Compare  Plato:  "I 
am  speaking  of  an  intelligent  writing  which  is  graven  in  the 
soul  of  liim  who  has  learned,  and  can  defend  itself"  ("Phae- 
dms,"  2761 

3.  An  epistle  of  Christ  ministered  by  us  (^rrMrroX^  X^mt- 
ToO  ZuucovT^taa  vijt  tj/i&v).  An  epistle  written  by  Christ 
through  our  ministry;  that  is,  you,  as  the  converted  subjects  of 


J 


Ch.  m.]       THB  SECOND  BPISTLB  TO  THE  GORINTHIANB.  303 

oar  ministry,  are  an  epistle  of  Christ.  Others  explain :  an 
epistle  of  which  Christ  forms  the  contents,  thos  making  the 
apostles  the  writers.  For  the  expression  ministered  hy  vsj 
compare  ch.  viii.  19,  20  ;  1  Pet.  i.  12. 

ink  {fiiKaofC).  From  /xeXis?  hlack.  Only  here,  2  John  12 
(see  note),  and  3  John  13. 

The  Spirit.    Instead  of  ink. 

Fleshy  tables  of  the  heart  {ifKa^lv  tcapBla^  capieiiuusi). 
The  best  texts  read  tcapB{eu<:,  the  dative  case  in  apposition  with 
tables.  Bender,  as  Bev.,  tables  which  are  hearts  of  flesh.  Com- 
pare Ezek.  xi.  19  ;  Jer.  xvii.  1 ;  xxxi.  33.  For  of  fleshy  see  on 
Rom.  vii.  14. 

4.  Confidence.  In  the  fact  that  he  may  appeal  to  them, 
notwithstanding  their  weaknesses  and  errors. 

Through  Christ  to  God-ward  (Sih  rov  Xpurrov  irp^  rip 
Oeop).  Through  Christ  who  engenders  the  confidence,  toward 
God,  vnth  reference  to  Gk)d  who  gives  us  success,  and  to  whom 
we  must  account  for  onr  work. 

6.  Hath  made  us  able  ministers  (ikoMMrei'i^fia^  SuMovot;^). 
Kvi  unfortunate  translation,  especially  in  view  of  the  conven- 
tional seuse  of  able.  The  verb  i/cap6o>  from  Ucaiw  sufficient 
(see  on  Bom.  xv.  23),  means  to  make  sufficient  orflt.  It  occurs 
only  here  and  Col.  i.  12.  The  correct  sense  is  given  by  Bev., 
hath  made  us  sufficient  as  ministers.  Compare  enabled  {ipBtw- 
a/julHTairn)y  1  Tim.  i.  12. 

Of  the  new  testament  («mui%  £^0^/079).  See  on  Matt 
XX vi.  28,  29.  There  is  no  article.  Bender,  as  Bev.,  o/a  new 
covenant^  in  contrast  with  the  Mosaic.  See  on  Heb.  ix.  16. 
Of  course  the  term  is  never  applied  in  the  gospels  or  epistles 
to  the  collection  of  New-Testament  writings. 

Of  the  letter  (ypdfifiaro^).  Depending  on  ministers^  not  on 
covenant.  For  letter,  see  on  writings,  John  v.  47.  Here  used 
of  the  mere  formal,  written  ordinance  as  contrasted  with  the 
Gospel,  whidi  is  ^^  spirit  and  life."  Compare  Bom.  ii.  29; 
vii.  6. 


304 


WORD  STUDIES   IN  THK   NEW  TB8TAJIBST.  [Cii.  lH 


Killeth.  See  ou  Rom.  v.  12,  13;  vii.  9;  viii.  2.  Couipure 
1  Cor.  XV.  56.  "  The  liviug  teBtiuioiiv  borne  to  his  authority 
in  the  Corinthian  Churcli  suggests  strongly  tlie  contrast  of  the 
dreary,  death-like  atmosphere  which  surioonded  the  old,  graven 
characters  on  which  bia  opponents  rested  their  claiais"  (Stitn- 
ley). 

7.  The  ministration  of  death  {y  BuiKOpia  rov  Aavarav).  Be- 
cause it  is  the  luiiiifitry  of  the  letter  which  killeth.  The  law 
meant  death  to  the  sinner. 

Written  and  engraven  in  stones  {iv  ypd^ftaatv  ivrennra- 
fiipr}  \(3o(s).  Lit.,  engraven  on  stones  by  tneajis  of  letters.  The 
use  of  these  words  to  describe  a  ministration  is  peculiar.  The 
iniuistratiou  of  death  (see  above)  is  tliat  o£  Moses,  and  does  not 
apply  to  his  entire  career  as  Israel's  lawgiver,  but  to  his  partic- 
ular ministry  in  receiving  on  Sinai  and  transmitting  to  the 
people  the  law  of  God.  The  ministration  may  be  said  to  have 
hecu  graven  on  stones,  since  the  whole  purport  of  that  economy 
which  lie  represented  was  contained  in  the  tables,  and  he  was 
its  minister  in  being  the  agent  through  whom  God  delivered  it 
to  the  people. 

Was  glorious  (hfev^^  ev  ^^)-  A.  very  inadequate  trans- 
lation, 'Eyev^^T}  means  caine  to  pais  or  tookplace,  not  simply 
was.  A  glory  passed  from  God  to  Moses,  so  that  his  face  be- 
came shining.  It  Is  much  more  graphic  and  truthful  to  render 
iv  Sdf,7  literally,  in  or  with  glory,  than  to  convert  the  two  words 
into  a  single  adjective,  glorious.     Rev.,  much  better,  oatne  with 


See  on  Luke  iv.  20. 


ghry. 

Steadfastly  behold  (u 

Passing  away  {icaTapyov/j.itrr}v).     Lit.,  being  done  awaij  c 
hrowjht  to  nought.     See  on  Luke  xiii,  7;  Rom.  iii.  3. 


.  Glorious  (c'v  So'^i;).     As 


jr.  7,  with  glory. 


9.  Ministration  of  condemnation.  .Because  Moses  was 
the  mini*ierof  the  hnv.  For  the  relation  of  the  law  to  sin  and 
condemnation,  see  Rom.  v.  20;  vii.  7-18. 


J 


Cu.  IIL]       THE  SBGOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GOKINTHIAKS.  305 

10.  That  which  was  made  glorious  had  no  glory  in  this 
respect  {ov  SeBo^aarai  to  SeSofacr/Aci/oi/,  eV  rovrtp  r^  fiepei). 
Rev.<,  that  which  hath  been  mad-e  glorious  hath  not  been  fnade 
glorious.  The  peculiar  form  of  expression  is  taken  from  Exod. 
xxxiv.  29,  35,  Sept.,  ''Moses  knew  not  that  the  appearance 
of  the  skin  of  his  face  was  glcrijiedP  "  The  children  of  Israel 
saw  the  face  of  Moses  that  it  was  gloriJiecL^^  Much  uimeces- 
sarj  difficulty  has  been  made,  chiefly  al>out  the  connection  and 
meaning  of  in  this  respect.  That  which  hath  been  made  gloH- 
0(is  is  the  ministry  of  death  and  condemnation  (vv.  7,  9),  the 
ministry  of  Moses  in  the  giving  of  the  law,  which  ministry  was 
temporarily  glorified  in  the  shining  of  Moses'  face.  Ilath  not 
been  made  glorioles  is  only  another  way  of  expressing  was  pass- 
ing  away  (vor.  7) :  of  saying  that  the  temporary  glory  of  Moses' 
ministry  faded  and  paled  before  the  glory  of  the  ministry  of 
Christ.  The  figure  which  pervades  the  whole  passage  (7-11) 
is  that  of  a  glorified fa/ie.  The  ministration  of  the  law,  impers- 
onated in  Moses,  is  described  as  having  its  face  glorified.  It 
is  to  this  that  in  this  respect  refers.  Paul  says  that  the  minis- 
try of  the  law,  which  was  temporarily  glorified  in  the  face  of 
Moses,  is  no  longer  glorified  in  this  respect;  that  is,  it  no  longer 
appears  with  glorified  face,  because  of  the  glory  that  excellethj 
the  glory  of  Christ  ministering  the  Oospel,  before  which  it  fades 
away  and  is  as  if  it  had  not  been.  This  accords  with  ch.  iv., 
whore  the  theme  is  the  same  as  here,  ministry  or  ministration 
(ver.  1);  and  where  the  christian  revelation  is  described  as 
"  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ "  (ver.  6).  This 
is  tho  key  to  our  passage.  To  the  same  purpose  is  ver.  18, 
where  the  Christian  is  represented  as  gazing,  through  tho  Gos- 
pel, with  unveiled  face,  upon  tho  glory  of  God  in  Christ,  and 
as  being  changed  thereby  into  the  imago  of  Christ.  The  glory 
of  tho  law  in  the  face  of  Moses  has  faded  before  the  glory  of 
the  Gospel  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ 

11.  That  which  is  done  away  (to  Karapyovfievov).  Lit, 
which  is  being  done  away  /  in  course  of  abolition  through  the 
preaching  of  the  Gospel.  Both  the  A.  V.,  and  Bev.  jmmm^ 
fail  to  bring  out  the  idea  oi process. 

Vol.  m.— 90 


306  WORD  STUDIES    IN   THE  NKW   TESTAMENT.  ICu.  UL 

Was  glorious  {Bui  B6^).     Lit.,  iJinnigh  glory.     Rev.,  loUh 

glory.* 

12.  Plainness  {vap^Tfo-l^).  Rev.,  boldness.  See  on  openly, 
John  vii,  13;  confidence,  1  John  ii.  28;  freely.  Acts  ii.  29. 
The  contrast  ia  with  the  disBembling  with  whicli  his  adversariea 
charged  him. 

13.  Could  not  steadfastly  look.  'R&v.,ghould  not.  See 
Exod.  xxxiv.  30-35,  where  the  A.  V.,  by  the  use  of  till,  gives 
the  wrong  impresBion  that  Moeea  wore  the  veil  while  speaking 
to  the  people,  in  order  to  hide  the  glory  of  his  face.  The  true 
Bense  of  the  Ilebrew  is  given  by  the  Sept. :  '•  When  he  ceased 
speaking  he  put  a  veil  on  his  face ; "  not  because  the  Israelites 
cotd'i  not  endure  tiio  radiance,  but  that  tliey  should  not  eee  it 
fade  away.  "Whenever  Moses  went  into  the  presence  of  God 
he  removed  the  veil,  and  liis  face  was  again  illumined,  and 
shone  while  he  delivered  God's  message  to  the  people.  Then, 
after  the  delivery  of  the  message,  and  during  bis  ordinary  assoc- 
iation with  the  people,  he  kept  bis  face  covered. t 

To  the  end  (ew  to  t^Xot).  Rev.,  on  the  end.  The  termin- 
ation. 


*  Ueyer'B  remark,  thM  Fanl  is  fond  of  vorjing  the  prepoBlUons  in  delig- 
□atlng  the  Bune  retstion,  must  uot  be  pressed  loo  far.  A  atudj  of  the  pia- 
Mges  vLioh  ha  cites  In  Uloatratiou,  Bom.  UL  30 ;  v.  10  i  zt.  2  :  GkL  11.  16  ; 
Phllem.  0.  will,  I  think,  ahow  a  diSerenoe  ia  the  force  of  the  prepoeitiom: 
Thkt  tho  nloer  dUdactions  between  tlie  prepositloiu  were  mewnrablj  obllt- 
emled  in  later  Oreek,  is,  of  Doarttu.  true  (see  Winer,  N.  T.  Gramrou',  lec,  zlvii., 
MoultouH tiighlh  editiou! ;  bat  Elliootlii  remark  <Dote  on  Oal.  i.  I ) nerertheleia 
remains  true,  tliat  "there  are  feir  points  more  characteristic  o(  the  apoatle'a 
style  than  his  varied  but  accurate  ose  of  prepositiona,  eapecially  of  two  or 
more  in  the  same  or  in  immedlatelj  oontlguoas  clauses."  See  Rom.  xL  3fl  ; 
Epli.  !v.  6  ;  Col.  111.  IS.  And  Winer  :  "  It  Is  an  especial  peonllarit;  of  Paul'a 
style  to  UBe  different  prepositiona  in  reference  to  one  noon,  that  b;  meanD  of 
these  prepoaitions  collectivelir  tbe  idea  may  be  defined  on  every  side,"  1  am 
looUned,  therefore,  to  hold  the  distinction  between  the  prepositions  here  as 
implying  the  transient  natnre  of  the  glory  which  attached  to  the  lav,  and  Its 
permanency  as  attached  to  the  Gospel.  The  law  whiah  passes  away  was 
through  glory  as  a  temporary  medium ;  the  Gospel  which  remains  abiden  in 
glory. 

f  See  the  ezei^esis  of  Ezod.  zzziv.  29-35,  by  Professor  Charles  A.  Biiggs, 
"  Presbyterian  Eeviaw,"  f.,  p.  565. 


J 


Oh.  m.]        THB  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  307 

Of  that  which  is  abolished  (tov  tearapyovfiivov).  See  ver. 
11.  The  temporarily  glorified  ministration  of  Moses.  The 
end  of  this,  which  the  veil  prevented  the  Israelites  from  seeing, 
wsLB  the  disappearance  of  the  glory — the  type  of  the  termina- 
tion of  Moses'  ministry.  PauPs  comparison  is  betveeen  the 
ministry  of  Moses,  interrupted  by  intervals  of  concealment,  and 
the  gospel  ministry,  which  is  marked  by  frank  and  full  proclam- 
ation. '^The  opposition  is  twofold:  1.  Between  the  veiled 
and  the  unveiled  ministry,  as  regards  the  mere  fact  of  conceal- 
ment in  the  one  case,  and  openness  in  the  other.  2.  Between 
the  ministry  which  was  suspended  by  the  veiling  that  its  end 
might  not  be  seen,  and  that  which  proceeds  ^from  glory  to 
glory,'  having  no  termination  "  ( Alf ord).  The  face  of  Moses 
needed  a  continually  renewed  illumination:  in  the  face  of 
Christ  the  glory  abides  forever. 

14.  Minds  {voi^fuiTa).  Originally,  things  which  proceed  oui 
of  the  mind.  Compare  hearts  and  minds,  Philip,  iv.  7,  and 
devices,  2  Cor.  ii.  11.  Hence,  derivatively,  the  minds  themn 
Behes.  The  word  occurs  but  once  outside  of  this  epistle,  PhUip. 
iv.  7.     Some  render  here  thoughts.     So  Rev.,  in  margin. 

Were  blinded  {(hrmptoBr/).  See  on  the  kindred  noun  iroipa^' 
o-t9  hardening,  Mark  iii.  6.     Rev.,  correctly,  we?*e  hardened. 

The  same  veil  {t6  avrb  KoXvfifia).  The  expression  their 
minds  were  hardened  is  carried  out  figuratively.  There  is  a 
veil  over  their  minds  when  the  law  is  read,  as  there  was  over 
Moses'  face.  They  cannot  yet  recognize  the  end  of  the  Mosaic 
ministry. 

Untaken  away  (ji^  avcuca\\nrr6fi£vov).  Rev.,  admirably — 
giving  the  force  of  avd  up — ardifted.  But  both  A.  V.  and 
Rev  construe  unlifted  with  veil :  tlie  same  veil  remai/neth  un- 
taken  away  {urdifted).  This  is  objectionable,  because  KaTapyel- 
rat  is  done  away  is  used  throughout  tiie  chapter  of  the  glory 
of  the  Mosaic  ministry,  while  another  word  is  employed  in  ver. 
16  of  the  taking  away  of  the  veil.  Further,  the  reading  of  the 
best  texts  is  art  that  or  because^  and  not  o  t*  which.  Because  is 
not  true  to  the  fact,  since  the  veil  remains  unlifted,  not  because 


SOS 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


[Cu.  IlL 


it  is  done  away  in  Ciiriet,  but  because  of  the  liardness  of  tlieir 
lieat'ts.  It  is  better,  therefore,  to  take  fiij  aveucaXtmraiievov  un- 
lifted,  as  a  nominative  absolute,  and  to  render,  il  not  being  ?v- 
vealed  that  it  (the  veil)  is  beitig  done  aioay  in  Christ.  Tills  falla 
in  naturally  with  the  drift  of  the  whole  passage.  The  veil  re- 
mains on  their  hearts,  since  it  is  not  revealed  to  them  that  the 
Mosaic  economy  is  done  away  in  Christ. 

16.  It  shall  turn.     The  heart  of  Israel. 

Shall  be  taken  away  {■TreptaipeiTai).  Rev.,  correctly,  is 
taken  away.  The  verb  occurs  twice  in  Acts  (xxvii.  20,  40)  of 
the  taking  away  of  hope,  and  of  the  unfastening  of  the  anchors 
in  Paul's  shipwreck ;  and  in  Ileb.  x.  11,  of  the  taking  away  of 
sins.  There  is  an  allusion  here  to  the  removal  of  the  veil  from 
Moses'  face  whenever  he  returned  to  commune  with  God.  See 
Exod.  xxxiv,  34. 

17.  Now  the  Lord  is  that  Spirit.  Kvpiot  the  Lord  is  used 
in  Exod.  xxxiv.  34  for  Jehovah,  The  Lord  Christ  of  ver.  16  is 
the  Spirit  who  pervades  and  animates  the  new  covenant  of 
which  wG  are  ministers  (ver.  6),  and  the  ministration  of  which 
is  with  glory  (ver.  8).  Compare  Rom.  viii.  9-11 ;  John  xiv 
16,  18. 

Liberty.     Compare  Rom.  viii.  15;  Gal.  iv.  7. 

IS.  All.  Contrasted  with  Moses  as  the  sole  representative 
of  the  people. 


I 


Open  {avaK€icaKvfi.fUvifi). 

when  the  veil  was  removed. 


Rev.,  correctly,  unveiled,  as  Moset 


"  Vainly  Ihey  tried  the  deeps  to  sound 
E'bq  of  tlieir  own  prophetic  thought, 
When  of  Christ  ornoified  and  crowu'd 
His  Spirit  in  them  tanght  : 

But  He  their  aching  gale  represi'd 
Which  sought  behind  thi;  veil  to  as*, 

For  not  without  us  fully  btsas'd 
Or  perfect  might  they  be. 


Cb.  m.1       THB  8BC0ND  EPISTLB  TO  THB  COBINTHIAN&  809 

The  rajB  of  the  Almighty's  face 

No  sinner's  eye  might  then  reoeiye; 
Only  the  meekest  man  found  grace 

To  see  His  skirts  and  lire. 

But  we  as  in  a  glass  espy 

The  glory  of  His  countenance, 
Not  in  a  whirlwind  hurrying  by 

The  too  presumptuous  glance, 

Bat  with  mild  radiance  every  hour 

From  our  dear  Savior's  face  benign 
Bent  on  us  with  transforming  power, 

Till  we,  too,  faintly  shine. 

Sprinkled  with  His  atoning  blood 

Safely  before  our  God  we  stand, 
As  on  the  rock  the  prophet  stood, 

Beneath  His  shadowing  hand.  ** 

Keble,  **  Christian  Year,"  '1  hirteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

Beholding  as  in  a  glass  {KaT07rTpi^6p,€Poi).  So  American 
Rev.  Kev.,  reflecting.  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 
The  verb  in  the  active  voice  means  to  show  in  a  mirror  /  to 
cause  to  be  reflected.  In  the  middle  voice,  to  look  at  or  behold 
one^sselfin  a  mirror.  Rev.,  reflecting  seems  to  be  preferred 
on  internal  grounds,  as  better  suiting  the  comparison  with  the 
divine  glory  as  mirrored  in  the  unveiled  face  of  Moses.  But 
tliis  is  unwarranted  by  usage.  Stanley,  wlio  adopts  this  render- 
ing, admits  that  there  is  no  actual  instance  of  the  sense  of  re- 
flecting This  sense,  however,  is  not  sacrificed  by  the  translation 
beholding^  but  is  conveyed  by  the  succeeding  clause,  changed 
into  the  same  image^  ete.  As  Heinrici  observes,  beholding  ex- 
presses the  fact  from  which  the  process  of  change  into  Ood's 
image  proceeds.  When  Moses  behel/l  Jehovah's  glory,  his  own 
face  reflected  that  glory.  The  mirror  is  the  Oospel,  which  is 
called  the  Gospel  of  the  glory  of  Christy  ch.  iv.  4. 

Are  changed  (fieTa/jLop<f>ovfi€^a\  Rev.,  transformed.  See 
on  Matt.  xvii.  2.  The  present  tense  expresses  the  change  as  in 
progress  ;  are  beimg  changedy  which  is  further  defined  hjfrom 
glory  to  glory. 


310  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE   NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Cu.  IT 

The  same  image  (t^i'  aur^v  €«<!«»).  See  on  Apoc.  xiii.  14. 
Compare  especially  1  John  iii.  2 ;  also  Rom.  viiL  29 ;  Jolin  xvii, 
24;  Col.  iii.  4;  Rom.  viii.  17;  1  Cor.  xv.  48-53. 

By  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  (a-n-a  KvpUtu  ttvcv^mto;).  Better, 
as  Rev.,  from  the  Lord  the  Spirit.  Compare  ver,  17.  The 
preposition  airofrom  depieta  the  traneformation  as  proceeding 
■from  rather  than  as  caused  by. 


I 


CHAPTER  IV. 

1.  As  we  have  received  mercy.  Construe  with  vm  have 
this  ministry.  Having  this  ministry  as  a  gift  of  divine  mercy. 
Compare  1  Cor.  vii.  25.  Bengel  says:  "The  mercy  of  God,  by 
whicii  the  ministry  is  received,  makes  iia  earucet  and  sincere." 

2.  Dishonesty  {rfls  omt^^wij?).  Rev.,  more  correctly,  ahams. 
Compare  Eph.  v.  13. 

Craftiness  {travovpyia).     See  on  Lake  xx.  33. 

Handling  deceitfully  (SoXoih^^f).  Only  here  in  the  New- 
Testament.  Primarily,  to  ensnare;  then  to  corrupt.  Used  of 
adulterating  gold,  wine,  etc.  See  on  which  corrupt,  cli.  ii.  17. 
This  verb  has  a  narrower  meaning  than  the  one  used  there 
{KatrTJKfvuv) ;  for,  wliile  that  means  also  to  co'rrupt,  it  adds  the 
sense yb/-  gain's  sake.  The  Vnlgate  renders  both  by  the  same 
word,  adtdterantes.     Compare  Dante : 

"  Thus  did  SabelUas,  Arina,  and  Ihosa  foola 
Who  liave  beun  even  sa  swords  unto  the  SoriptareB 
In  reudaring  di8torl«d  their  atrklghi  faces." 

"  Paradiao,"  lill.,  ISS-lSft 

S.  Hid  (xeKaXvftiiivav).  Rev.,  veiled,  iu  accordance  with 
the  imagery  of  cli.  iii. 

4.  The  god  of  this  world  {o  3€oe  to5  aUivo'j  tovtov).  The 
phrase  occurs  only  here.  Compare  Eph.  ii.  2;  vi.  12;  John 
xii.31;  xiv.  30,     Satan  is  called  ^(k^  in  the  rabbinical  writings. 


A 


Ch.  IV.]       THB  SBOOKD  BPISTLE  TO  THE  GORINTHIANa  311 

"The  first  Ood  is  the  true  Ood ;  bat  the  second  god  is  SamaeL" 
"  The  matron  said,  '  Our  god  is  greater  than  thj  God ;  for 
when  thy  Gk>d  appeared  to  Moses  in  the  bush,  he  hid  his  face ; 
when,  however,  he  saw  the  serpent,  which  is  my  god,  he  fled.' " 

The  light  {rbv  (fxima/jLov).  Only  here  and  ver.  6.  Lit.,  the 
iUuminatioTij  act  of  enligktening. 

Image  of  God.  Compare  Col.  i.  15 ;  John  xvii.  5 ;  Philip, 
ii.  6 ;  iii.  21.  Christ's  light  is  also  Gkxl's.  Compare  Heb.  i.  3, 
lie  v.,  effvlgence  {iiravyaafuiy  compare  avydatu  shine,  in  this 
passage).  Theodoret  says:  "  The  efFulgence  is  both  from  the 
fire  and  with  the  fire,  and  has  the  fire  as  its  cause,  yet  is  not 
divided  from  the  fire ;  for  whence  comes  the  fire,  thence  also 
comes  the  effulgence." 

Shine  {avyda-tu).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  From 
avyij  brightness,  which  also  occurs  but  once,  Acts  xx.  11,  day- 
hreak.  In  classical  Oreek  of  the  sun  especially.  Rev.,  davm 
is  legitimate  as  a  translation,  but  hardly  here,  since  Paul  is 
going  back  to  the  figure  of  ch.  iii.  18. 

6.  Who  commanded  the  light  to  shine  (o€Z7rQ>i;^a>9Xa/i'^^ 
aC).  The  correct  reading  is  Xa/i'^ci  shaU  shine  /  so  that  we 
should  render,  it  is  Ood  thai  said  light  shall  shine.     So  Rev. 

To  give  the  light  of  the  knowledge  (irpo^  if>oma-/jLov  r^ 
yiHoaeay:),  lAt.yfor  the  illumination,  as  ver.  4.  In  order  that 
the  knowledge  may  lighten.     Knowledge,  if  not  diffused,  is  not 

of  the  nature  of  light. 

In  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ.  Containing  the  thought  of 
ch.  iii.  18.  The  knowledge  of  the  divine  glory  becomes  clear 
revelation  to  men  in  the  face  of  Christ  as  it  appears  in  the  Oos- 
pel :  ^'  So  that  in  this  seen  countenance  that  clear-shining 
knowledge  has  the  source  of  its  light,  as  it  were,  its  focus" 
(Meyer).* 

7.  This  treasure.  The  divine  light  which  is  the  guide  and 
inspiration  of  the  apostolic  ministry. 

*  The  student  wiU  be  interested  in  Stanlej's  wammmrj  of  the  images  of  iht 
preceding  section.     '*Coinmenttrj,'*  p.  405. 


312 


WOHD   STUUIES   IN   THE   HEW   TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IV, 


In  earthen  vessels  {ev  o<rTpaitiiioK  rrKeveiriv).  Theadjeitive 
occurs  only  here  and  2  Tim.  ii.  10,  Herodotus  saya  of  tlie  king 
of  Persia:  "The  great  kiug  stores  away  the  tribute  whicli  he 
receives  after  this  fashiou  :  he  melts  it  dowD,  and,  while  it  is 
in  a  liquid  state,  runs  it  into  earthen  vessele,  which  are  after- 
ward removed,  leaving  the  metai  in  a  solid  mass"  (iii.,  yS). 
Stanley  cites  the  story  of  a  Rabbi  who  was  taunted  with  his 
mean  appearance  by  the  emperoi^'s  daughter,  and  who  replied 
by  referring  to  the  earthen  vessels  in  which  ber  father  kept  his 
wines.  At  her  request  the  wine  was  shifted  to  stiver  vessels, 
whereupon  it  turned  sour.  Then  the  Ilabbi  observed  that  the 
humblest  vessels  contained  the  highest  wisdom.  The  idea  of 
light  in  eartlien  vessels  is,  however,  best  illustrated  in  the  story 
of  the  lamps  and  pitchers  of  Gideon,  Judges  vii.  16.  In  the 
very  breaking  of  tlie  vessel  the  light  is  revealed. 

Excellency  [inrep^oXii).  Lit.,  a  throwimj  heyond.  Hence 
pretrninence,  excellence.  See  on  exc-eeding,  Rom.  vii.  13.  Rev, 
renders  exceeding  greatness.  The  reference  is  to  the  fulness  of 
power  apparent  in  tlie  apostolic  ministry. 

Of  God — of  us  [Tov  Seov — ef  fffiSiv).  The  A.  V".  misses  the 
difference  between  the  two  expressions.  Of  GoA  is  belonging 
to  God  ;  God's  property :  from  (^f)  ts  proceeding  from  our- 
selves.    Rev.,  of  God— from  ourselves. 

S.  Troubled  (S-Xi^ofj.ei'oi).  See  on  trihulatton.  Matt.  xiii. 
21.  Tlie  verb  also  has  the  meaning  of  to  straiten,  contract,  as 
Matt.  vii.  14,  wheio  reSXi/i/UtrTj,  A,  V,  narrmo,  is  properly 
rendei'ed  by  Rev.  straitened. 

Distressed  (trrevoxtopovfitvoi).  Only  here  and  ch.  vi.  12. 
From  <TT£C(Ji;  7iarrow,  and  x^P°^  "  f?****'^-  Hence  craned. 
Tlie  A.  V,  gives  no  suggestion  of  the  figurative  paradox.  We 
are  pressed  closely,  yet  not  crarnped.  Rev.,  pressed  on  every 
tide,  yet  not  straitened 

Perplexed  (awopovfievoi).  From  d  not,  and  iro^o9  apoMoge. 
Lit.,  to  lie  unable  tojind  a  way  out. 

In  despair  {e^avopavp-euoi).  Rev.,  very  neatly,  renders  tmto 
desjiair.     The  word  expresses  an   advance  of  thought  on  per- 


Co.  IV.]       THB  8BGOND  BPISTLB  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  313 

j>lexedy  yet  on  the  same  line.  We  ?iTe  j>erjilexed,  bat  not  utterly 
pei-plexed.  The  play  between  the  Oreek  words  cannot  be  rend- 
ered. 

9.  Persecuted — forsaken  {Su^tcofiepoi — iytcaraXenrSfiepfn). 
Rev.,  ior  persecuted^  jpur9iiedy  the  primary  meaning  of  tlie  verb, 
thus  giving  vividness  to  the  figure.  Forsaken^  lit,  left  behind 
in  (some  evil  plight).  The  figure  i^  pursued  by  enemies^  hut 
not  left  to  their  power  :  left  in  the  lurch. 

Cast  down  —  destroyed  {KarafiaXKofjLevoi — awoKKvfiepoi). 
Tliis  carries  on  the  previous  figure.  Though  the  pursuers  over- 
take and  smite  doum^  yet  are  we  not  killed.  Bev.,  smitten 
down.  In  all  these  paradoxes  the  A.  V.  fails  to  bring  out  the 
metaphors. 

10.  Bearing  about.  Ignatius,  addressing  the  Ephesians, 
says :  "  Ye  are  God-bearers,  shrine-bearers,  Christ-bearers  '* 
(^^  Epistle  to  Ephesians,"  ix.).  In  the  Antiochene  Acts,  Trajan 
alludes  to  Ignatius  as  '^the  one  who  declares  that  he  bears 
about  the  crucified."  Ignatius  was  known  as  Beo^po^  Ood 
bearer^  and  so  styles  himself  in  the  introductions  of  his  epistles. 

Dying  {veKpo^av).  Only  here  and  Rom.  iv.  19.  Primarily 
a  putting  to  deaths  and  thence  the  state  of  deadnesSy  as  Rom.  iv. 
19.  Here  in  the  former  sense.  Paul  says,  in  efFect,  "our 
body  is  constantly  exposed  to  the  same  putting  to  death  which 
Jesus  sufFered.  The  daily  liability  to  a  violent  death  is  some- 
thing which  we  carry  about  with  us."  Compare  1  Cor.  xv.  31 ; 
Rom.  viii.  36.  This  parallel  with  Christ's  death  is  ofFset  by  the 
parallel  with  Christ^s  triumph — life  through  resurrection. 

That  the  life  also  {Jva).  In  order  that.  The  purport,  ac- 
cording to  Ood's  purpose,  of  this  daily  dying  is  to  set  forth  the 
resurrection-life  through  Christ  in  us.     Compare  Rom.  v.  10. 

13.  The  same  spirit  of  faith.  The  same,  namely,  which  is 
set  forth  in  the  following  passage.  Spirit  of  faith :  not  dis- 
tinctly the  Iloly  Spirit,  nor,  on  the  other  hand,  a  human  faculty 
or  disposition,  but  blending  both  ;  faith  as  a  gift  of  the  Spirit 
of  God.     See  on  Spirit,  Rom.  viii.  4,  sec.  6. 


WORD  STDDIEa  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

I  believed,  etc.  Cited  from  Sept.,  Ps.  cxt.  10.  The  Sep- 
tuagint  mis  translates  the  Hebrew,  which  is,  '^  I  believed  t/tou^h 

I  said,"  etc. 

15.  The  abundant  grace  (^  x'^P"'  irXeovdaaa-a).  Lit.,  t/ie 
grace  ha/oing  ed>owuh<l.  liev.,  the  grace  bein-g  Ttntltipli^d. 
Grace  ia  the  divine  gift  of  spiritual  energy  which  is  shown  in 
the  labor,  suffering,  and  triamph  of  the  apostles. 

Might  through  the  thanksgiving  of  many  redound  {Bm 
Twi*  irXeiovoji'  rifv  evyapLaTiav  treptaaeva^).  Numerous  arrange- 
ments of  these  words  are  proposed.  Thnnigh  (Swi)  should 
govern  the  ■nutnxj,  not  tJiank^giving ;  and  redaund  should  be 
transitive,  cause  to  abound,  and  govemiiig  thankagi-oing.  So 
Rev.,  the  grace,  being  multipUed  through  the  many,  may  eauae 
the  thanksgiving  to  abound.  The  thought  is  on  tlie  line  of  ver. 
12,  that  the  sufferings  and  risks  of  the  apostles  promote  spirit- 
ual life  in  the  Church.  The  grace  of  God,  thus  manifest  in 
the  apostles,  shall  be  multiplied  tiirough  the  increasing  number 
of  those  who  share  it,  and  shall  thus  make  thanksgiving  more 
abundant  for  the  fruits  of  this  grace  as  exhibited  in  the  apos- 
tles and  in  the  Church. 

Redound  (A.  V.)  ia  from  the  Latin  redundare  to  surge  hack. 
Therefore,  primarily,  of  a  fulness  or  overflow  from  the  setting 
hack  of  a  tide.     So  Milton : 

"  The  evil,  BOOH 
Driven  buk,  redounded  u  K  flood  on  tbow 
From  whom  It  ipruig." 

(Generally,  to  abound.  From  this  arises  the  secondary  sense, 
to  conduce,  contribute  to;  that  ia,  to  make  the  causes  mount  nji, 
or  abound,  bo  as  to  produce  the  effect.  So  Addison :  "  The 
care  of  our  national  commerce  redounds  more  to  the  riches  and 
prosperity  of  the  public,"  etc. 

16.  Outward  man — inward  man.  The  material  and  spir- 
itual natures. 

Perish  (Sia^eijaeroi).  Rev.,  much  better,  u  decaying.  Per- 
ish implies  destruction:  the  idea  is  that  oi progressive  decay. 


Ch.  v.]         THB  second  BPISTLB  to  THB  CORINTHIANS.  315 

Is  renewed  {auoMuvwrcu).  Better,  is  being  renewed^  the 
jyroce88  of  renewal  going  on  along  with  the  process  of  decay. 
Stanley  cites  a  line  attributed  to  Michael  Angelo :  '^  The  more 
the  marble  wastes  the  more  the  statue  grows."  Compare  Eurip- 
ides: "Time  does  not  depress  your  spirit,  but  it  grows  young 
again :  your  body,  however,  is  weak  "  ("  Heraclidae,"  702,  703). 

Day  by  day  {fifUpa  icai,  ^fiipa).  Lit.,  by  day  and  day,  A 
Hebrew  form  of  expression. 

17.  Our  light  affliction  which  is  but  for  a  moment  (to 
irapavrUa  iKa<f>p6v  rrj^  S\{y^(09  fifiAv).  Lit.,  the  present  light 
(burden)  of  our  affliction. 

Worketh  {Karepyd^erai).     Works  cn^;  achieves. 

A  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory  {/eaS* 
xnrepfidkrjv  ek  irrrepfidX^v,  auivu)v  fidpo^  Bo^ff^).  Rev.,  more  and 
more  exceedingly  an  eternal  weighty  etc.  An  expression  after 
the  form  of  Hebrew  superlatives,  in  which  the  emphatic  word 
is  twice  repeated.  Lit,  exceedingly  unto  excess.  The  use  of 
such  cumulative  expressions  is  common  with  Paul.  See,  for 
example,  Philip,  i.  23,  lit,  m%Lch  more  better ;  Rom.  viii.  37, 
ahtmdcmUy  the  conqaerors  ;  Eph.  iii.  20,  exceeding  dbwndamily^ 
etc.  Note  how  the  words  are  offset :  for  a  mom^nty  eternal  / 
lighty  weight ;  affliction^  glory. 

18.  Seen — not  seen.  Compare  the  beautiful  passage  in 
Plato's  "  Phaedo,"  79. 


CHAPTER    r. 

1.  Our  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  (ij  iirlyeu^  fifi&v 
oUla  Tov  vKTivov^).*  Earthly y  not,  fnade  of  eoHhy  which  would 
be  X'^^'^^^y  ^^  ^  ^^^'  ^^'  ^'^  9  b^^  upon  the  earthy  terrestricU,  as  1 


*  Wbj  has  the  Rev.  rendered  '*  the  earthlj  honse  of  our  tabernacle  ?"  It 
is  true  that  the  article  is  often  properly  rendered  bj  the  posseflsiye  pronoun,  so 
that  TOV  <ntf\vovs  might  be  translated  o^ir  tabernacle  ;  but  lifuip  our  clearlj  be- 
longs with  ?iause,  and  the  article  maj  therefore  yerj  properlj  bear  its  ordin- 
ary sense  of  t?ie.     This  of  A.  V.  is  nnnecessar  j. 


316  WORD  STUDIK8  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  JCu.  V, 

Cor.  XV.  40 ;  Philip,  ii.  10.  Taberriacle  (ffuf^vos)  teiit  or  Aid. 
Id  later  writere,  especially  tlie  Flatuniete,  Pythagoreans,  autl 
medical  authors,  used  to  denote  the  body.  Thus  Hippocratee  : 
"  A  great  vein  by  which  the  whole  bodi/  (aK^vo<;)  is  noorished." 
Some  expositors  thiuk  that  Paul  uses  the  word  here  simply  in 
tliis  sense — t/ts  house  which  is  the  body.  But  while  Paul  does 
mean  the  body,  he  preserves  the  figurative  sense  of  the  word 
tahffrnacle  ;  for  he  never  uses  this  term  elsewhere  as  synony- 
mous with  the  body.  The  Sgnre  of  the  tent  suits  the  contrast 
with  the  hii'Uding,  and  would  naturally  suggest  itself  to  the 
tent-maker,*  The  phrase  earthly  house  of  the  tabernacle  ex- 
presses a  single  conception — the  dioeUing  which  ia,  orcotisisls  in 
the  tabernacle,  the  tent-houae.  The  transient  character  of  the 
body  is  thus  indicated.  Compare  homes  of  day.  Job  iv.  19. 
See  on  the  kindred  words  irxiji^^ui  tahemacle,  2  Pet.  i.  13 ; 
and  (TKJjvoto  to  dwell  in  or  to  Jix  a  tabernacle,  John  i,  14, 
Tabernacle  is  ho  habitually  associated  with  a  House  of  worshij), 
and  is  so  often  applied  to  durable  structnres,  that  the  original 
sense  of  a  tunt  is  in  danger  of  being  lost.  It  would  be  better 
to  translate  here  by  teiU.  The  word  (abemacle  is  a  diminutive 
of  the  Latin  taberria  a  hut  or  shed,  which  appears  in  ta-eent. 
Its  root  is  ia,  tan,  to  stretch  or  spread  out. 

Dissolved  (waraXuSp).  Lit.,  loosened  down.  Appropriate 
to  taking  down  a  tent.  See  on  Mark  xiii.  2;  Luke  ix.  12; 
Acts  v.  38 ;  and  compare  2  Pet.  iii.  11,  12,  and  the  figure  of 
the  parting  of  the  silver  cord  on  which  the  lamp  is  suspended, 
Ecel  xii.  6.  Also  Job  iv.  21,  where  the  correct  rendering  ia: 
Is  not  t/ieir  ieiU-oord plucked  up  within  t/iejn  f     So  Rev.  O,  T. 

We  have.  The  building  from  God  is  an  actual  possession  in 
virtue  of  the  believer's  union  with  Christ.  It  is  just  as  we  say 
of  a  minor,  before  he  cornea  into  possession  of  his  property, 
that  he  has  so  much.     Compare  Matt.  xix.  21. 

Building  of  God  (oUoBofiiip  ix  SeoS).  In  contrast  with 
tent.     Tlie  reference  is  to  the  resurrection-body.     Compare  ilie 

*  It  should  be  noted  tliit  the  ^ptaagint  often  renders  the  Hebrew  bfil  hj 
■Imi  dteetling.     Slioilu'lj  the  Hebrew  to  dietU  l»  freqaentlj  tranalftted  b;  mra- 


d 


Ca.  v.]         THE  SBCOND  EPISTLB  TO  THB  CORINTHIAN&  317 

city  which  hxUh  the  foimdatianay  Heb.  xL  10.  For  of  God, 
read,  as  Rev.,yVw?*  God ;  proceeding  from  {itc).  Heinrici,  von 
QoU  her :  compare  Ood  giveth^  1  Cor.  xv.  38,  and  ^erc  airo 
0€ov  ye  have  from  God,  where  the  reference  is  to  the  natural 
body,  1  Cor.  vi.  19.  Construe  from  Ood  with  luUding^  not 
with  we  have. 

In  the  heavens.    Construe  with  we  home. 

2.  In  this.  Tabernacle.  As  if  pointing  to  his  own  body. 
See  on  1  Cor.  xv.  64. 

Earnestly  desiring  {etrvn-oSouirres:).  The  participle  has  an 
explanatory  force,  as  Acts  xxvii.  7,  "  becauee  the  wind  did  not 
suffer  us."  We  groan  because  we  long.  Rev.,  lotiging.  The 
compounded  preposition  hrl  does  not  mark  the  intensity  of  the 
desire,  but  its  direction. 

To  be  clothed  upon  {hrepSwraaSiu).  Only  here  and  yer. 
4.  Compare  iwepSvrff^  fsher^s  coatj  John  xxi.  7  (see  note). 
Lit.,  to  put  on  over.  The  metaphor  changes  from  building  to 
clothing^  a  natural  transformation  in  the  mind  of  Paul,  to  whom 
the  hair-cloth  woven  for  tents  would  suggest  a  vesture. 

House  {oucffTTipiov).  Not  oucia  hotise^  as  ver.  1.  This  word 
regards  the  house  with  special  reference  to  its  inhabitant.  The 
figure  links  itself  with  building^  vcr.  1,  as  contrasted  witli  the 
unstable  tent. 

From  heaven  (ef  oifpavov).    As  from  Qodj  ver.  1. 

8.  If  so  be  {el  ye).     Assuming  that. 

Being  clothed.     Compare  Job  x.  11. 

Naked  (yvfivoi).  Without  a  body.  The  word  was  used  by 
Greek  writers  of  disembodied  spirits.  See  the  quotation  from 
Plato's  "  Gorgias "  in  note  on  Luke  xii.  20 ;  also  "  Cratylus," 
403,  where,  speaking  of  Pluto,  Socrates  says:  '^The  foolish 
fears  which  people  have  of  him,  such  as  the  fear  of  being  al- 
ways with  him  after  death,  and  of  the  soul  denuded  (yvfiv^)  of 
the  body  going  to  him."  Stanley  cites  Herodotus'  story  of 
Melissa,  the  Corinthian  queen,  who  appeared  to  her  husband 
after  death,  entreating  him  to  bum  dresses  for  her  as  a  cover- 


318  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  (Ca.  V. 

ing  for  her  disembodied  spirit  {v.,  92).  The  whole  espreBsion, 
being  clotlted — naked  is  equivalent  to  vse  shall  not  be  found 
naked  because  we  s/udl  be  clothed. 

4.  Being  burdened  (^apoiifievoi).  Compare  weiglU  {0dpo<;) 
ofgl'Ory,  ch.  iv.  17. 

Not  for  that  we  would  be  unclothed  (€<j>^ov  MXofiev  ix- 
ZvamrSai).  Lit.,  because  we  are  rwt  willing  to  divest  ouraetven 
(of  the  mortal  body).  Ilegarding  the  coming  of  the  Lord  as 
near,  the  apostle  contemplates  the  possibility  of  living  to  be- 
hold it.  The  oppression  of  soul  {groan)  is  not  from  pains  and 
afflictions  of  the  body,  nor  from  the  fear  of  death,  bnt  from 
the  natural  shrinkiug  from  death,  especially  if  death  is  to  de- 
prive hiui  of  the  body  (unclothe)  only  to  leave  him  without  a 
new  and  liigher  organism.  Therefore  he  desires,  instead  of 
dying,  to  have  the  new  being  come  down  upon  him  while  still 
alive,  investing  him  with  the  new  spiritual  organism  (clothed 
upon),  aB  a  new  garment  is  thrown  over  an  old  one,  and  ab- 
sorbing (swallowed  up)  the  old,  sensnous  life. 


"  For  who, 
ThiH  pleu 
Left  the  i 


to  dumb  forgetful n ess  a  pre;, 
ing  anxious  being  e'er  resigned, 
arm  preolnctB  a(  Ibe  oheerful  A»j, 
[le  longing,  lingering  look  behind  ?" 


Swallowed  up.     A  new  metaphor.    Compare  1  Cor.  xv.  54. 

5.  Wrought  (iicaTe^<Mra/i««>9).  The  compound  is  significant, 
indicating  an  accomplished  fact.  Through  the  various  opera- 
tions of  His  Spirit  aud  the  processes  of  His  discipline,  God  has 
vmrked  us  out  (Stanley,  worked  up)  for  this  change.  The  pro- 
cess includes  the  dissolution  of  what  is  mortal  no  less  than  the 
renewal.     The  one  is  a  step  to  the  other.     See  1  Cor.  xv.  36, 

Earnest  of  the  Spirit.  See  on  ch.  i.  22,  and  compare  Rom. 
viii.  11.     Of  the  Spirit  is  appositional,  the  Spirit  as  the  ea/mest. 

6.  At  home  'ei/Sij^ofwrw).  'Ek  ?m,  5^/m>5  people.  Only  in 
tins  chapter.  To  be  among  one's  own  people,  and  not  to  travel 
abroad. 


A 


ch.  v.]      the  second  epistlb  to  the  cx>rinthians.         319 

We  are  absent  {ixSfffiovfAevy  Lit.,  toe  live  abroad.  Only 
in  this  chapter.  Compare  Philip,  i.  23 ;  iii.  20 ;  Heb.  xi.  13  ; 
xiii.  14.  There  is  a  play  upon  the  words  which  might  be  ex- 
pressed by  at  home^Jrom  home. 

7.  By  sight  {Biii  cZSouv).  The  correct  rendering  is  appear- 
ance. The  word  is  not  used  actively  in  the  sense  of  vision. 
Faith  is  contrasted  with  the  actual  appearance  of  heavenly 
things.  Hence  the  marginal  reading  of  the  Rev.  should  go 
into  the  text. 

8.  Are  willing  {evSo/covfAev).  The  translation  might  well  be 
made  stronger  as  well  as  more  literal :  toe  a/re  weU-jpleaaed. 

To  be  absent— present  {iK&rffAtjo'ai  —  iv^fjwjacU).  The 
same  verbs  as  in  ver.  6 :  to  he  from,  home,  at  home. 

9.  We  labor  (^Xori/u>i;/Ae9a).  Used  by  Paul  only,  here, 
Eom.  XV.  20  (note),  1  Thess.  iv.  11.  Labor  is  a  feeble  trans- 
lation, not  bringing  out  the  idea  of  the  end  contemplated,  as 
the  motive  of  the  toil.     Rev.,  toe  make  it  our  aim. 

10.  Appear  {(f>auep<D37jvai).  Rev.,  better,  he  made  mwnifest. 
Appear  is  not  strong  enough,  since  it  implies  only  presence  at 
the  judgment-seat  The  important  fact  is  our  heing  revealed 
as  we  are. 

Judgment-seat  (firnMrosi).     See  on  Acts  vii.  5. 

May  receive  {jcop.UrriTai).  See  on  1  Pet  i.  8.  Compare 
Eph.  vi.  8 ;  Col.  iii.  25. 

In  the  body  {]iid).    Lit.,  ikrough  the  body  as  a  medium. 

Bad  (^i)Xoi/).     See  on  Jas.  iiL  16. 

11.  Terror  of  the  Lord  (^/Soy  rot)  Kvpiov).  Rev.,  better, 
the  fear  of  the  Lord.  Not  thai  which  is  terrible  tn  ihe  Lordj 
but  hevng  conscious  of  fearing  the  Lord. 

We  persuade  {mlSofiev).     Convince  of  our  int^rity. 

13.  We  are  beside  ourselves  (i^iarrifiev).  See  on  Luke 
xxiv.  22 ;  Acts  ii.  7;  and  on  the  kindred  exaraai^  astonishment^ 
Mark  v.  42.  Some  such  charge  appears  to  have  been  made,  as 
at  Acts  xxvi.  24. 


320 


WORD   STUDIES   IN   THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Cu.  Y 


14.  The  love  of  Christ.  Cfariat'a  love  to  men.  See  on  1 
Jolm  iL  5. 

Constraineth  ((rwex")-  See  on  taken,  Luke  iv.  38 ;  Actg 
xviii.  5.  It  is  tlie  word  rendered  /  am  in  a  strait,  Phiiip.  i. 
23.  Compare  Lnke  xii,  50.  The  idea  is  not  ur<jing  or  driving, 
but  shutting  up  to  one  line  and  pnrpose,  as  in  a  narrow,  walled 
road. 

16.  After  the  flesh  (kbt^  o-a/uca).  "lie  who  knows  no  man 
after  the  flesh,  haa,  for  example,  in  the  case  of  the  Jew,  entirely 
lost  sight  of  hid  Jewish  origin ;  iti  that  of  the  rich  man,  of  his 
riches;  in  that  of  the  learned  of  his  learning;  in  that  of  the 
slave,  of  his  servitude"  (Alford).     Compare  Gal.  iii,  28. 

Yea  though  (ei  koX).  Kot  with  a  climactic  force,  as  A.  V., 
and  not  with  the  eniphaBis  on  Christ,  but  on  Iiave  known.  The 
proper  sense  will  be  broiight  ont  in  readhig  by  emphasizing 
hive.  We  know  no  man  lienceforth  after  the  flesh :  even  if 
we  home  known  Christ  after  the  flesh,  yet  now,  etc.  Paul  re- 
fers to  Ilia  knowledge  of  Christ  before  his  conversion,  a  hearsay 
knowledge,  confined  to  reports  of  Ilia  personal  appearance,  Ilis 
deeds,  Ilis  relations  to  the  Jews,  Ilia  alleged  crime  and  punish- 
ment When  the  glorified  Christ  first  spoke  to  him  out  of 
heaven,  lie  asked,  "Who  art  thoul"  Compare  to  reveal  His 
Son  in  ine.  Gal.  i.  IG. 

17.  A  new  creature  {uaivi}  ktIitk).  Or  creation.  Compare 
Gal.  vi.  15.  The  word  ktivk  is  nsed  in  three  senses  in  the 
Xew  Testament.  The  act  of  creating,  as  Rom.  i.  20.  The  mim 
of  created  thiiigs,  as  Ajkjc.  iii,  14;  Mark  xiii.  19.  A  created 
thing  or  creature,  as  Kom.  viii.  39.  The  Ilabbins  used  the 
word  of  a  man  converted  from  idolatry.  "He  who  brings  a 
foreigner  and  makes  him  a  proselyte  is  as  if  he  created  him." 

Old  things  (tA  ap-xata).  Kev,,  correctly,  tfie  old  things. 
See  on  1  Jolin  ii.  7,  and  Apoc.  xii.  9, 

Passed  away  (Trop^XSei').  \Ai., passed  hy.  So  Lake  xviiL 
37 ;  Mark  vi.  48.    As  here.  Jas.  i.  10 ;  Matt.  v.  8 ;  xxiv.  .34.  etc. 

Behold.  As  if  contemplating  a  rapidly  shifting  scene.  As 
in  a  flash,  old  things  vanish,  and  all  things  become  new. 


Cb.  y.i        THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  321 

18.  And  (Si),  Better,  Bev.,  biU;  as  if  anticipating  a  pos- 
sible failure  to  discern  the  primary  agency  of  God  in  this  moral 
transformation.  All  things — all  that  are  involved  in  this 
mighty  change — are  from  God, 

Reconciled.  God  is  the  prime-mover  in  the  work  of  recon- 
ciliation.    See  on  Bom.  v.  10,  ihnmgh  Christy  as  the  medium. 

19.  God.    Emphatic.    It  was  Qod^  as  in  ver.  18. 

Was — reconciling  (j)v  KwriMsjiaamf).  These  words  are  to 
be  construed  together ;  the  participle  with  the  finite  verb  mark- 
ing the  process  of  i*econciliation.  The  emphasis  is  on  the  fact 
that  God  was  reconciUng,  not  on  the  fact  that  God  was  in 
Christ.  Gt)d  was  all  through  and  behind  the  process  of  recon- 
ciliation. The  primary  reference  of  the  statement  is,  no  doubt, 
to  God's  reconciling  manifestation  in  the  incarnation  and  death 
of  Christ ;  yet,  as  a  fact,  it  includes  much  more.  God  was  en- 
gaged in  reconciling  the  world  from  the  very  beginning,  and 
that  in  Christ.     See  on  John  i.  4,  5,  9, 10. 

Hath  given  to  us  {Sifji^po^  iv  fjiuv).    Lit.,  lodged  in  us. 

20.  We  are  ambassadors  {irpeafievofLcii).  Only  here  and 
Eph.  vi.  10. 

21.  For.  Omit  It  is  a  later  addition,  in  order  to  soften 
tlie  abruptness  of  the  following  clauses. 

Made  to  be  sin  {ofiapriap  iiroiffa-ev).  Compare  a  curse. 
Gal.  iii.  13.  Kot  a  sin-offering^  nor  a  sinner,  but  the  repre- 
sentative of  sin.  On  Him,  representatively,  fell  the  collective 
consequence  of  sin,  in  His  enduring  ^'the  contradiction  of  sin- 
ners against  Himself"  (Heb.  xii.  3),  in  His  agony  in  the  garden, 
and  in  His  death  on  the  cross. 

Who  knew  no  sin  (t6v  fi)f  yvovra  ofiapriaii).  Alluding  to 
Christ's  own  consciousness  of  sinlessness,  not  to  GK)d's  estimate 
of  Him.  The  manner  in  which  this  reference  is  conveyed,  it 
is  almost  impossible  to  explain  to  one  unfamiliar  with  the  dis- 
tinction between  the  Greek  negative  particles.  The  one  used 
Vol.  IIL— 21 


332  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Cii.  VL 

here  implies  the  fact  of  sinleasnese  aB  preeent  to  the  conecioue- 
iieBB  of  the  person  concerning  whom  the  fact  Ib  stated.  Com- 
pare John  Tiii.  46. 


CHAPTER   VI. 

1.  As  workers  together  with  Him  {(rwepyovvres:).  Lit., 
working  togetlier.  With  Him.  is  implied  in  the  compounded 
<7vv  wUh.  That  it  refers  to  God,  not  to  the  fellow-Chriatiane, 
is  evident  from  the  parallel  1  Cor.  iii.  9,  laborers  iogeilier  with 
God,  and  because  the  act  of  exhortation  or  entreaty  in  which 
tlie  fellowship  is  exhibited  is  ascribed  to  God  in  ch.  v.  20. 
The  phrase  Beov  TrdpeBpoi  assessors  of  God,  occurs  in  Ignatius' 
letter  to  Polycarp.     Compare  Mark  xvi.  20. 

In  vain  {ei<!  Kcvov).  Lit.,  to  what  is  vain.  Equivalent  to  the 
phrase  to  no  purpose. 

2.  He  saith,  etc.  From  Isa.  zlix.  8,  after  Septuagint.  The 
Hebrew  is:  "  In  the  time  of  f amor  I amjswer  t/iee,  and  in.  the 
day  of  salvation  I  succor  thee."  The  words  are  addressed  to 
the  servant  of  Jehovah,  promising  to  invest  him  with  spiritual 
power,  that  he  may  be  a  light  to  Israel  and  to  others.  Panl, 
taking  the  words  in  their  messianic  sense,  urges  that  now  is 
the  time  when  God  thus  dispenses  His  favor  to  Christ,  and 
through  Him  to  men.  The  application  turns  on  tlie  words  ac- 
ceptable tinie  ;  a  time  in  which  God  receives.  As  He  receives, 
receive  ye  Him. 

The  accepted  time  (mu^  eww^trScKrw).  Rev.,  aocept- 
abls.  Paul  uses  for  the  simple  adjective  of  the  Septuagint  a 
compound  "  ww^received,"  which  Ib  stronger,  and  which  occurs 
mostly  in  his  own  writings.  See  Kom.  xv.  16,  31 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  5  ; 
and  compare  acceptable  year,  Luke  iv.  19. 

3.  Ministry.     TXerr.,  ministraiion.     See  on  Rom.  xii.  7. 

Blamed  C/mo/mj^^).  Only  here  and  ch.  viii.  20,  The  kind- 
red fioifio':  blemish,  is  found  2  Pet.  ii.  13,  and  in  the  Septnagint 


A 


Ch.  YL]       THE  BfiGOND  BPISTLB  TO  THE  CORINTHIAN&  323 

of  bodily  defects.  Similarly  the  Septuagint  afuofuy;  spotless^ 
without  hodUy  defect ;  and,  in  the  moral  sense,  1  Pet.  i.  19,  ap- 
plied to  Christ.     Compare  Heb.  ix.  14 ;  Eph.  v.  27 ;  Jade  24. 

4.  Necessities  {avdrfKav;).     See  on  1  Cor.  vii.  26. 
Distresses  (arevfyxf^ptais:).     See  on  Horn.  ii.  9. 

5.  Imprisonments  {<f>vKoucaif;).     See  on  Acts  v.  21. 

Tumults  (aKaraaraalcusi).  See  on  Luke  xxi.  9,  and  com- 
pare oucardaraTOfi  wnstablej  Jas.  i.  8.  This  is  one  of  the  words 
which  show  the  infiaence  of  political  changes.  From  the  original 
meaning  of  tmsettlednesSy  it  developed,  through  the  complica- 
tions in  Greece  and  in  the  East  after  the  death  of  Alexander, 
into  the  sense  which  it  has  in  Luke— j>oUtic€tl  mstability.  One 
of  the  Greek  translators  of  the  Old  Testament  uses  it  in  the 
sense  of  dread  or  anxious  care. 

Watchings  (aripxnrvlaif;).  Only  here  and  ch.  xi.  27.  See  on 
the  kindred  verb,  Mark  xiii.  33.  For  the  historical  facts,  see 
Acts  xvi.  25 ;  xx.  7-11,  31 ;  2  Thess.  iii.  8. 

Fastings  {yriareUu^).  Mostly  of  voluntary  fasting,  as  Matt, 
xvii.  21 ;  Acts  xiv.  23;  but  voluntary  fasting  would  be  out  of 
place  in  an  enumeration  of  hardships. 

7.  Right — left.  Righ^hand  and  left-hand  weapons.  Of- 
fensive, as  the  sword,  in  the  right  hand,  defensive,  as  the  shield, 
in  the  left 

8.  Deceivers.  See  ch.  ii.  17  ;  iv.  2.  The  opinions  concern- 
ing Paul  as  a  deceiver  are  mirrored  in  the  Clementine  Homilies 
and  Kecognitions,  spurious  writings,  ascribed  to  Clement  of 
Eome,  but  emanating  from  the  Ebionites,  a  Judaizing  sect,  in 
the  latter  half  of  the  second  century.  In  these  Paul  is  covertly 
attacked,  though  his  name  is  pas^d  over  in  silence.  His  glory 
as  the  apostle  to  the  Gentiles  is  passed  over  to  Peter.  The 
readers  are  warned,  in  the  person  of  Peter,  to  beware  of  any 
teacher  who  does  not  conform  to  the  standard  of  James,  and 
come  with  witnesses  (compare  2  Cor.  iii.  1 ;  v.  12 ;  x.  12-18). 
Paul  is  assailed  under  the  guise  of  Simon  Magus,  and  with  the 
same  words  as  those  in  this  passage,  deceimer  and  tifJcnown. 


324  WORD  8TUDIB8  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT,  [Ch.  VL 

9.  Chastened.  See  cli.  xii.  7-9,  and  compare  Pa.  cxviii 
18. 

10.  Having — possessing  (^^^re? — ncaT^ovres).  The  con- 
traet  is  twofold :  between  having  and  not  having,  and  between 
temporajy  and  permaneni  having,  or  haviiig  and  keejnng.  Com- 
pare Luke  viii.  15;  1  Cor.  xv,  2  ;  1  TheBe.  v.  21 ;  Heb.  iii.  6. 

11.  Ye  Corinthians.  The  readers  are  addressed  bj  name  in 
only  two  other  epistles.  Gal.  iii.  1 ;  Philip,  iv.  15, 

Is  enlarged  (Tren-XuTuvrai).  Only  here,  ver.  13,  and  Matt 
xxiii.  5,  where  it  is  used  of  widening  the  piiylacteries.  From 
wXfflTu?  hroad.  Quite  common  in  the  Septnagint,  and  with  var- 
ious shades  of  meaning,  but  UBually  rendered  enlarge.  Of 
worUUij  prosperity,  "waxed  fat,"  Deut.  xxxii.  15  ;  compare 
Gen.  ix.  27.  Ot  prUh;  Dent,  xi.  16.  Of  deliverance  in  dis- 
tress, Ps.  iv.  1.  Eepand  wiikjinj.  Pa.  cxix,  32.  The  ides  of 
enlargement  of  heart  in  the  sense  of  increased  breadth  of  sym- 
pathy and  understanding,  as  here,  is  also  expressed  in  the  Old 
Testament  by  other  words,  as  concerning  Solomon,  to  whom 
God  gave  largeness  of  heart,  Sept.,  ^/ut  outpouring.  Compare 
Isa.  Ix.  5. 

12.  Not  straitened  in  us.  It  is  not  that  our  hearts  are  too 
narrow  to  take  you  in.    Straitened  in  antithesis  with  enlarged. 

In  your  own  bowels  (rot?  tnrKarf)(voi<t  vfiStv).  See  on  I 
Pet.  iii,  8;  Jae.  v,  11.  Rev.,  affections.  It  is  your  love  that 
is  contracted. 

14.  Unequally  yoked  {erepo^vyimnes:).  Only  here  in  the 
New  Testament.  Not  in  claBsicai  Greek,  nor  in  Septnagint, 
though  the  kindred  adjective  irtpo^vyoi  of  a  diverse  kind,  oc- 
eurs  Lev.  xix.  19.  UnequaUy  gives  an  ambiguous  sense.  It  is 
not  inequality,  but  difference  in  kind,  as  is  shown  by  the  suc- 
ceeding words.  The  sugi^etion  was  doubtless  due  to  the  pro- 
hibition in  Deut.  xxii.  9,  against  yoking  together  two  different 
animals.  The  reference  is  general,  covering  all  forms  of  intim- 
acy with  the  heathen,  and  not  limited  to  marriage  or  to  idol- 
feHSts. 


i 


Ch.  VL]       the  second  epistle  to  the  CORINTHIANS.  325 

The  cli£Ferent  shadeB  of  fellowship  expressed  by  five  differ- 
ent words  in  thi^  and  the  two  following  verses  are  to  be  noted. 

Fellowship  (/acto;^).  Only  here  in  the  'New  Testament. 
The  kindred  verb  tieri:x(o  to  he  jHii'taJcer  is  fonnd  only  in  Paul's 
epistles  and  in  Hebrews :  fierfrxp^ partner^partaker^  only  in  He- 
brews and  Luke  v.  7.  Having  part  vnth  is  the  corresponding 
English  expression. 

Righteousness — unrighteousness  {Bixaioavvfi — avo/jklif). 
Lit.,  whcU  sharing  is  there  unto  righteousneee  and  lawlessness  f 
AiicaioawQ  righteousness^  though  the  distinctively  Paaline  sense 
of  righteoasness  by  faith  underlies  it,  is  used  in  the  general 
sense  of  rightness  according  to  God's  standard. 

Communion  {/coiv^pm).     See  on  Luke  v.  10 ;  Acts  ii.  42. 

15.  Concord  {arvfufxivrfat^).  Only  here  in  the  New  Test- 
ament. From  aw  together^  ifwvi]  voice.  Primarily  of  the 
concord  of  sounds.  So  the  kindred  arvfufxavia^  A.  Y.,  rnvsicj 
see  on  Luke  xv.  25.  Compare  av/Kfxovo<:  with  consent^  1  Cor. 
vii.  5  ;  and  arv/Kfxovim  to  agree^  Matt,  xviii.  19  ;  Luke  v.  36,  etc 

Belial  (fieKlap),  Bdiar.  Belial  is  a  transcript  of  the  He- 
brew, meaning  worthlessness  or  wickedness.  The  Septuagint 
renders  it  variously  by  trafisgressory  impious^  foolish^  pest.  It 
does  not  occur  in  the  Septuagint  as  a  proper  name.  The  form 
Beliary  which  is  preferred  by  critics,  is  mostly  ascribed  to  the 
Syriac  pronunciation  of  Belial^  the  change  of  1  into  r  being 
quite  common.  Others,  however,  derive  from  Belyar^  lord  of 
the  forest.  Here  a  synonym  for  Satan.  Stanley  remarks  that 
our  associations  with  the  word  are  colored  by  the  attributes 
ascribed  to  Belial  by  Milton  ("  Paradise  Lost,"  B.  ii.),  who  uses 
the  word  for  sensual  profligacy. 

16.  Agreement  {avy/eardSeaif;).  Only  here  in  the  New 
Testament.  Compare  the  kindred  verb  ovyKararlBefuu  to  con- 
senty  Luke  xxiii.  51.  Lit.,  a  ptUting  down  or  depositing  along 
loiih  one.    Hence  of  voting  the  same  way  with  another,  and  so 

agreeing. 

Ye  are.    Read,  as  Bev.,  we  are. 


326  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  THSTAltENT.        [Ch.  VIL 

God  hath  said,  etc.  The  quotation  U  combined  and  con- 
densed from  Lev.  xxvii.  11,  12;  and  Ezek.  sxxvii,  27,  after  tlie 
Septuagint.  Paul  treats  it  as  if  directly  affirmed  of  the  clirist- 
ian  Cliurch,  tlius  regarding  that  Church  as  spiritually  identical 
with  tlie  true  church  of  Israel. 

17.  Come  out,  etc.  Isa.  lii.  11,  12,  after  the  Septuagint, 
with  several  changes. 

18.  I  will  be  to  you,  etc.  From  2  Sam.  vii.  14,  where  the 
Septuagint  and  Hebrew  agree.  Panl  says  eons  wnd  dauglUers 
for  aon. 

Almighty  {Train-oKpartap).  The  word  ia  peculiar  to  the  Apoc- 
alypse, occurring  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament.  Here 
it  ie  a  quotation.    Frequent  in  the  Septuagint. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

1.  Filthiness  {ftoXvafwv).  Eev.,  dejilemeni.  Only  here  in 
the  New  Testament.  For  the  kindred  verb  /*o\uva  to  defile, 
see  on  Apoc.  xiv.  4.     Compare  1  Cor.  viii.  7. 

2.  Receive  (;^(t)^i7aTe).  From  xSipot! place  or  ^aoe.  Prim- 
arily, to  home  a  space,  make  room  for.  See  on  coiUainiTig, 
John  ii.  6 ;  viii,  37.  The  meaning  here  is  make  room  for  us. 
Rev.,  open  your  hearts  to  ua,  which  is  felicitons  in  view  of  the 
reference  to  ch.  vi.  12.  It  is  equivalent  to  saying  enlarge  your 
hearts  to  take  us  in,  as  our  heart  is  enlarged  (ch.  vi.  11). 

Defrauded  {(vXeoveicrr^aafttv).  Used  by  Paul  only.  It  adds 
the  idea  of  vfroagfor  the  sake  of  gain,  which  is  not  necessarily 
implied  in  either  of  the  other  verbs. 

4.  My  boldness.  Note  the  change  for  the  first  time  to  the 
flrat  person  singular. 

Comfort.  The  Greek  has  the  comfort,  the  article  appar- 
ently pointing  to  the  special  comfort  he  had  received  through 
the  coming  of  Titus  (ver.  6), 


k^ 


i 


Ch.  YIL]     the  second  EPIBTLE  to  the  OOBINTHIAlSr&  327 

I  am  exceeding  joyful  {vvepiTrepuraevofuu  t§  XVf)'  ^^^'9 
I  ^uperabound  with  the  jay.  Rev,,  /  overflow  with  joy.  Note 
the  article  again,  the  joj. 

5.  Rest  {Sveaw).  Bev.,  relief.  See  on  libertyj  Acts  xxiv. 
23. 

6.  God.  The  Bev.  improves  on  the  A.  Y.  by  putting  Ood 
in  its  emphatic  place  at  the  end  of  the  clause.  ^^  He  that  com- 
f orteth,"  etc.—"  eoen  Ood:' 

Those  that  are  cast  down  (to^  ranruiH^).  Bey.,  th^ 
lowly.  See  on  Matt  zL  68.  Here  the  A.  Y.  is  more  nearly 
tme  to  the  idea,  which  is  that  of  depresaion  through  ciTCum- 
stances  J  rather  than  of  lowH/neee  of  chomjyoter.  The  neater  rend- 
ering would  be  the  dovmocut. 

7.  Comfort.  The  manner  in  which  Paul,  so  to  speak,ybfu22tftf 
this  word,  is  most  beautiful.    Compare  ch.  L  4-6. 


lourning  {oSvpfiov).  Only  here  and  Matt  ii.  18.  It  im- 
plies a  verbal  expression  of  grief.  Cebes,  a  disciple  of  Socrates, 
in  his  Pinax*  represents  Awni  Zupe,  Sorrow^  as  a  woman,  with 
her  head  bowed  upon  her  breast;  *Oivvff  Odune^  oonet^minff 
Gfriefj  follows,  tearing  her  hair.  By  her  side  is  ^Oivpfii^  Odttr- 
mo8y  Lcmientation,  a  revolting,  emaciated  figure,  whose  sister  is 
^ASvfila  AthwnUa^  Despondency. 

8.  Repent  {lurait^koyya^.  See  on  Matt  xxi.  29.  Bev., 
regret  it. 

Though  I  did  repent.  Punctuate  as  Am.  Bev.,  /  do  not 
regret  it :  though  (even  if)  /  did  regret  it  {/or  I  see  that  that 
epistle  made  you  sorry j  though  hut  for  a  season)  I  now  rejoice. 

9.  Repentance  (jAerdvoiav).  See  on  the  kindred  verb  re- 
pent^  Matt.  iii.  2,  and  compare  on  Matt.  xxL  29.  Hepentance 
is  different  from  regret  of  ver.  8,  indicating  a  moral  change,  as 
is  shown  by  the  next  clause. 


*  Tablet,  a  philosophioal  explanation  of  a  table  on  which  hnman  life  with 
its  dangers  and  temptations  is  sjmbolioallj  represented. 


■A28 


'LDibM   IN   THE   NEW    TKSTAMKNT.  [Cii.  VU 


Vs  might  receive  damage  {^fifuaS^e).  Rev.,  mig/U  nuj'er 
loss.  See  on  lUatt.  xvi,  20;  LnUe  ix.  25,  This  eoniewliat  ob- 
scure scDtetice  means  tliat  the  salutary  moral  results  of  the 
apoBtle'B  letter  compensated  for  the  sorrow  which  it  caused. 
The  epistle  which  won  them  to  repentauce  was  no  damage  to 
them. 

10.  Sorrow— repentance  (Xuttt; — fxertipoutp).  Paul's  words 
Btrike  effectively  at  the  popular  identification  of  sorrow  with 


Not  to  be  repented  of  {afierafteKifroi').  Construe  widi  re- 
penta-nce.  The  Rev.,  in  order  to  bring  out  tins  connection, 
amplifies  the  translation  :  a  repentance  ■which-  hrhigHh  no  re- 
gret. The  oxymoron  (see  on  Rom.  i.  20 ;  iv.  18)  is  in  the  A.  V. 
rather  than  in  the  Greek.  It  should  be  carefully  observed  that 
the  two  words,  repentance,  not  to  be  rej^enit'd  of,  represent  dif- 
ferent roots  and  different  ideas:  repeniaaiee  (fierdvoiav)  denot- 
ing the  tnoral  cliange,  and  to  he  repented  o/" denoting  the  senti- 
ment of  misgivhig  or  regret  {see  on  Matt.  \xi.  29),  and  so  an- 
swering to  XiWnj  sorrow.  The  Rev.  brings  out  the  distiDCtion 
by  substituting  regret  for  repentance.* 

Sorrow  of  the  world.  Antithesis  with  tAe  sorrow  which  is 
according  to  God  (A.  V.,  goiRg  sorrow).  Sorrow  whicli  ia 
characteristic  of  the  world ;  grief  for  the  consequences  rather 
than  for  the  sin  aa  sin. 

Worketh  {KaT€p-yd%evai).  Brings  to  pass.  Notice  that  the 
simple  verb  epyd^erai  ia  used  in  the  previous  clause,  the  distinc- 
tion from  this  verb  being  obliterated  by  rendering  bothworketh. 
The  difference  is  between  contrihtUing  to  a  result  and  achiev 
ing  it. 


•  Mfljer  imlita  on  oanneetiDg  'wf  to  b«  rapenUd  of  with  talvation,  wgaing 
that.  It  it  beloogsd  to  repeatanee,  it  would  fmmediktet;  folloir  it  It  ia  >  suf- 
Qoient  aasver  to  this  to  say  that  repcnlano'  unto  talraUon  maj  be  taken  m  * 
Biagle  conasptlon.  Helnrioi  juMl;  obBPrves  that  this  explanation  giTU  to 
iiitraiiiXTtTw  only  a  rlietorieal  foroe,  and  deatrojB  the  paralleliBin  of  the  antith- 
esis of  Hfilvafiori  and  'ieoCA.  Meyer  ie  followtid  hj  Iteet,  Plumptro.  aud  A1- 
tord.  Stanlej  dove  not  aammft  himself ;  bat  his  citation  of  Rom.  zi.  S9,  in 
■npport  of  M«7er'B  view,  is  quits  beside  the  mark. 


Ch.  VIL]      THB  SBGOND  EPISTLB  to  THB  CORINTHIANS.  329 

11.  Sorrowed  (Xi/th^mu).  Bev.,  correctly,  were  made 
Borry.  The  verb  is  in  the  passive  voice,  and  is  so  rendered  by 
the  A.  Y.  in  ver.  9,  but,  inconsistently,  eorrowed  in  the  next 
clause. 

Carefulness  ((nrouSiji/).  See  on  diligence,  Bom.  xii.  8. 
Rev.,  earnest  ca/re. 

Clearing  of  yourselves  {pnroKo^laaf),  See  on  1  Pet.  iii.  15. 
Eixculpation  or  edf -defence  from  complicity  with  the  incestuous 
person  by  their  neglect  and  refusal  to  humble  themselves. 

Indignation  {arfavdKTfi<TUf).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. Compare  the  kindred  verb  ayauatcrim  to  be  indignantj 
Matt.  XX.  24 ;  Mark  x.  14,  etc 

Revenge  (itchlicriaiv).  An  unfortunate  rendering,  because 
of  the  personal  feeling  of  vvndictweness  which  attaches  to  the 
popular  usage.  Rev.  avenging  is  little,  if  any,  better.  It  is 
rather  meting  ottt  of  justice  ;  doing  justice  to  all  parties.  See 
on  Luke  xviii.  3 ;  xxi.  22.  The  word  has,  however,  the  sense 
of  requital  (see  on  Bom.  xii.  19 ;  compare  2  Thess.  L  8),  and 
carries  with  it,  etymologically,  the  sense  of  vindication,  as  Luke 
xviii.  7,  8.  Bengel  remarks  that  the  six  results  of  godly  sorrow 
fall  into  pairs :  clearing  and  indignation  relating  to  the  dis- 
grace of  the  Church  ;yi^r  and  longing  (vehement  desire)  to 
the  apostle ;  zeal  and  avenging  to  the  ofFender. 

12.  Our  care  for  you  (r^i/  awovSffv  fifi&v  rifv  virkp  vfi&p). 
The  correct  text  reverses  the  pronouns  and  reads  your  care  for 
us.  This  diflScult  passage  means  that  while  Paul  did  desire 
the  punishment  and  reformation  of  the  offender,  and  the  vindi- 
cation of  the  wronged  party,  his  main  object  was  that  the  fidel- 
ity and  zeal  of  the  Church  toward  God  should  be  manifested, 
as  it  was  (ver.  11).  This  would  appear  in  the  manifestation  of 
their  zealous  interest  for  him  as  God's  minister.  He  states 
this  as  if  it  were  his  onJ/y  object.  Manifest  urdo  you  is  rather 
amxmg  you  (w/wf?),  as  in  ch.  i.  12 ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  7. 

13.  Were  comforted  in  your  comfort  {irapaKeKXiifie!^  hrl 
r$  TTopaxXijaei  vfjL&p).    The  best  texts  place  a  period  after  toere 


330  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Cb.  vni. 

comforted,  transfer  the  5«  and  (j'ea)  from  after  TepiaaoTepoK 
exceediiigly  ths  more  to  directly  after  eiri  in  (your  comfort),  and 
iDBtead  of  your  read  our.  The  whole,  as  Rev.,  tJierefore  we 
have  been  coTnforted.  And  in  ow  comfort  -we  joyed  the  more 
Kcceedingly,  etc. 

In  our  comfort  {^-kI)-  Iu  additiou  to.  Stanley,  vnth  thi» 
comfort  before  me,  I  loas  still  vwre  rejoiced,  etc, 

16.  I  have  confidence  in  you  {Sappat  iv  v/uv).  Wrong. 
Rev.,  correctly,  /  ajn  of  good  courage.  In  you  expresses  the 
ground  of  his  encooragement  as  lying  171  them. 


CHAPTER   VIII. 

1.  We  do  you  to  wit  {yvtupl^oficv).  An  obsolete,  though 
correct  rendering.  Do  is  used  iu  the  sense  of  cause  or  make, 
as  Chaucer : 

"  She  thkt  dotlt  me  all  this  woe  endnra." 

To  wit  is  to  know:  Anglo-Saxon,  witan;  German,  witfen ; 
English,  wit.  So  "  Legend  of  King  Arthur : "  "  Now  go  thou 
and  do  me  to  wit  (make  me  to  know)  what  betokeneth  that 
noise  in  the  field."  Rev.,  we  make  known. 
2,  Trial  of  affliction  (8ow/ip  3A.iifreo>?).  Rev.,  better,  proof. 
See  on  &tperienee,  Rom.  v.  i.  In  much  affliction,  which  tried 
and  proved  their  cbrietian  chsracter,  their  joy  and  liberality 
abounded. 

Deep  {Karh.  ^a^w).  An  adverbial  expreseion:  their  pov- 
erty which,  went  dow7i  to  the  deptlu. 

Liberality  (dTrXoi^ro?).  Or  singleness.  See  on  simplicity, 
Uiim.  xii,  8.  It  is  better  to  throw  the  verse  into  two  parallel 
clauses,  instead  of  making  abundance  of  Joy  and  de^  poverty 
the  joint  subject  of  abounded.  Render ;  Mow  that  in  much 
proof  of  agiiciion  was  the  abundance  of  their  joy,  and  tfieir 
deep  poverty  abounded  unto  the  riohes,  etc 


Ch.  Vm]    THB  SECOND  EPIBTLB  TO  THE  CORINTHIAN&  331 

3.  They  were  willing  {aiAalperoC),  The  adjective  stands 
alone.  Only  here  and  ver.  17.  Lit.,  BeLf-choBen^  and  so  Bev., 
of  their  own  accord, 

4.  Praying  us— that  we  would  receive  the  gift  and  take 
upon  us  the  fellowship  {Seofievoi  fifjL&v  rifp  x<^^^  ^^  '^^  '^'^ 
vfovlap).  Rev.,  he^eechmg  uSj  etc,  in  regard  of  this  ffra^ce  and 
the  felloipship  in  the  ministering.  The  Greek  reads  simply, 
praying  tcs  for  the  favor  and  the  feUowehvp  of  the  mi/nist/ry. 
The  renderings  of  both  A.  Y.  and  Bev.  are  clumsy.  Paul 
means  that  they  earnestly  besought  him  as  a  favor  that  they 
might  have  a  share  in  ministering  to  the  poor  saints.  Xdp^ 
means  grace^  gift^  SAi^fanxyr,     Here  the  last. 

5.  As  we  hoped  {tca^w  fikirCaaiiev).  Better,  expected. 
They  took  part  in  this  contribution  in  a  manner  beyond  our 
expectation.  Supply,  as  A.  Y.,  this  they  did,  or,  Bev.,  a/nd 
this. 

Their  own  selves.  Their  liberality  began  in  setf-surrender 
to  God  and  to  the  apostles  as  His  agents  i  to  vshy  the  wiU  of 
God. 

6.  Had  begun  {irpoetn^p^ro).  Only  here  and  ver.  10.  Bev., 
giving  the  force  of  irpo  "before,  had  made  a  beginning  before  : 
on  his  first  visit  to  Corinth. 

Complete — ^this  grace  also  {hnreKka-ji  teal  rifv  ^dp^y  raih 
rriv).  Should  complete  among  you  the  act  of  love  (^cipiv),  the 
contribution  already  begun,  in  addition  to  whatever  else  He 
has  yet  to  complete  among  you  (jcaX  also). 

8.  Sincerity  {yifija-iop).  Used  by  Paul  only.  Oontracted 
from  yevi^io^  legitimately  bom:  hence  genidne.  Paul  calls 
Timothy  his  lawful  son  in  the  faith  (1  Tim.  L  2).  The  kindred 
adverb  yvriaUof:  svnoerely  (A.  Y.  naturally),  occurs  once,  Philip, 
ii.  20.     See  nota 

9.  He  became  poor  {hrrwxi^vaev).  Only  here  in  the  New 
Testament.  Primarily  of  abject  poverty,  beggary  (see  on  Matt 
V.  3),  though  used  of  poverty  generally.  "  Becamfie  poor  "  is 
correct,  though   some  render  ^'^was  poor,'^  and  explain   that 


WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Cu.  VllL 

Christ  was  both  rich  and  poor  BimultaiieouBtj ;  combining  di- 
vine power  and  excellence  witli  human  weakness  and  suffering. 
But  this  idea  is  foreign  to  the  general  drift,  of  tbe  passage. 
The  other  explanation  falls  in  better  with  tbe  ke^'-iiote— u»  act 
of  eelf-ddvoticni — in  ver,  5.  The  aorist  tense  denotes  the  ert- 
trance  into  the  condition  of  poverty,  and  the  whole  accords 
with  the  magnificent  passage,  Philip,  ii.  C-8.  Stanley  has  some 
interesting  remarks  on  tbe  influence  of  this  passage  in  giving 
rise  to  the  orders  of  mendicant  friars.  See  Dante,  "  Paradise," 
si.,  40-139;  xii.,  130  sqq. 

11.  Out  of  that  which  ye  have  (iK  toO  exuvl  Wrong. 
Meyer  justly  remarks  that  it  would  be  an  indelicate  compli- 
ment to  the  inclination  of  tbe  readers,  that  it  had  originated 
from  their  possession.  Render,  accordhig  to  your  ability  ; 
better  than  Rev.  out  of  your  ab-ilUy. 

12.  If  there  be  first  awilling  mind  {ei '^  •trpoSvfila  irpoiefi- 
ratj.  The  error  of  tiie  A.  V.  consists  in  regarding  -n-po  in 
■n-poKtiToi.  as  indicating  jfriority  in  time;  hejirat;  whereas  it 
signifies  position,  before  one ;  as  "  tbe  bo]^ie,  or  the  race,  or  tlie 
joy  which  M  «ei  ifi/ore  w«."  Heb.vi.18;  xii.  1,2;  or"tbeex- 
ample  which  is  set  forth^''  Jude  7.  Hence  Rev.,  correctly,  if 
the  readiness  is  there. 

14.  By  an  equality  («|^  la6-nfTo<t).  '£f,  as  in  ver.  11,  ac- 
cording to.  I  speak  on  the  principle  that  your  abundance 
should  go  to  equalize  the  difference  created  by  their  want. 

15.  The  brother  whose  praise  is  in  the  Gospel.  Is 
should  be  joined  with  iliroughaut  all  the  churc/ies  ;  as  Rev., 
whose  praise  in  the  Gospel  is  spread  throughout,  etc.  The  per- 
son referred  to  has  been  variously  identified  with  Titus'  brotlier, 
Barnabas,  Mark,  Luke,  and  Epaenetug,  mentioned  in  Rom.  xvi. 
5.  The  reference  to  Epaeiietns  has  been  urged  on  the  ground 
of  a  supposed  play  npon  tlie  word  praise,  epainos ,'  Epaenetus 
meaning praisetoorthy  ,■  and  the  parallel  is  cited  in  tbe  case  of 
Onesimas  j>roJitable,  of  whom  Paul  says  that  he  will  henceforth 
he  useful,  Pbilem.  ll.» 


^ 


*  Bee  an  irtiale  bj  Juaes  E.  DenlMQ,  "  Expositor,"  Moond  Mriee.  ilL .  154. 


Ch.  VUL]    THB  second  BPISTLB  to  the  CORINTHIANS.  333 

19.  With  this  grace  {ip  r§  ;^apiTi  ravry).  An  obscure  rend- 
ering, not  much  bettered  by  Bev.  Grace  is  ambigaous.  The 
reference  is,  of  course,  to  the  contribation  as  a  work  of  love ; 
X<^>^  being  used  in  the  sense  of  benefaction  or  bounty.  Paul 
says  that  the  brother  was  appointed  as  his  fellow-traveller  in 
the  matter  of  this  bounty  ;  in  the  prosecution  of  this  kindly  act 
For  aj>po!ntedj  see  on  Acts  xiv.  23 ;  x.  41. 

20.  Avoiding  this  {rreXKofjkevoi  rovro).  The  verb,  which 
occurs  only  here  and  2  Thess.  iii.  6,  means  to  arrange  or  provide 
for.  As  preparation  involves  a  getting  together  of  things^  it 
passes  into  the  meaning  of  coUectj  gather  :  then  contract^  as  the 
furling  of  sails;  so,  to  dra/vo  back,  draw  one^a  adf  away^  as  2 
Thess.  iii.  6.  Connect  with  we  have  eentj  ver.  18.  Compare 
ch.  xii.  17,  18,  where  it  appears  that  he  had  been  charged  with 
collecting  money  for  his  own  purposes.* 

Abundance  (dBporriTi).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 
Lit.,  thicknees^  and  so,  of  the  vigor  or  strength  of  the  human 
body  or  of  plants.  Thus  Hesiod  speaks  of  the  ears  of  com  nod- 
ding in  their  thickneee.  Herodotus :  "  When  the  harvest  was 
ripe  or  full  growix  {^fMfi)^  he  (Alyattes)  marched  his  army  into 
Milesia "  (L,  17).  Homer  of  Patroclus :  "  His  soul  departed, 
leaving  behind  his  strength  (oSfxiT^a,''  f  "  Diad,"  xvi.,  857). 
Herodotus  uses  it  of  thickly-falling  snow  (iv.,  31).  In  the  Sep- 
tuagint  it  is  used  of  the  rich  or  greats  1  Kings  i.  9,  princes 
(A.  v.,  men  qfJudah)  ;  2  Kings  x.  6,  great  msn.  The  A.  V. 
abundance  is  better  than  Bev.  bounty^  which,  though  properly 
implying  abundance,  is  currently  taken  as  synonymous  with 
gift.     The  reference  is  to  the  large  contribution. 

21.  We  take  thought  (irpovooviievoC).  Beforehand  {irp6). 
See  on  Rom.  xii.  17.  The  words  are  from  Prov.  iii.  4,  where 
the  Septuagint  rehdsj  take  thought  for  honoroMe  things  in  ths 
sight  of  the  Lord  andof  msn. 


*  See  Dean  Plamptre's  article,  "  St.  Paul  as  a  Man  of  Biuinefli,*'  '*  Exposi- 
tor," first  series,  i.,  265. 

f  Some  read  kvt^vnrra,  manly  vigor. 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE   NEW   TESTAMENT. 


CHAPTER  JX. 

4.  Confident  boasting  (yirotrraaet).     Primarily  Bomething 

put  under,  foundation,  ground-;  eo  substance  {swi,  etans,  stavul- 
ing  under),  substantial  qtudiiy :  tlieuce  steadiness,  conjideiwe. 
Compare  Heb.  iii.  14;  xi.  1.  In  tLe  Septuagiiit  the  word  rep- 
resents  fifteen  different  Hebrew  worda. 

5.  Go  before.  Notice  tlie  tbrice  repeated  before,  eniphaeiz- 
ing  tlie  injunction  to  have  everything  ready  before  Paul's  ar- 
rival. 

Make  up  beforehand  {TrpoKarapTlvtoatv).  Adjust.  See  on 
Matt.  iv.  21 ;  xsi.  16 ;  Luke  vi.  40 ;  1  Pet.  v.  10. 

Bounty  (eiXoylav).  Lit,  blessing.  In  this  sense  only  here 
in  the  New  Testaiaent.  In  the  Septuagint  indifferently  oi  giji 
or  blessing.  See  Gen.  xxxiii.  11 ;  Jndg.  i.  15 ;  Ezek.  xxxiv.  26. 
Id  Prov,  xi.  25,  liheral  soul  is  rendered  by  Sept,  evXoyov/d,€v^ 
blessed. 

Whereof  ye  had  notice  before  (irpoetrTjyyeXaifihnjv).  Rev., 
better,  your  qfoj'e-promised  bounty.  The  bouuty  promiaed  by 
you,  or  by  me  on  your  behalf. 

6.  Bountifully  (i7r  fuXoyiiw!).  Lit.,  wiih  blessings.  Com- 
pare 1  Cor.  ix.  10,  "  plow  in  hope  («r'  eXTrtSt)." 

7.  Purposeth  {irpoatptiTai).  Head  irpo^pijrat,  perfect  tense, 
hath  purposed. 

Grudgingly  {ix  XiJtmj?).     Lit,  out  of  sorrow. 

Cheerful  (iXa^v).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament  See 
on  the  kindred  (XopdriT?  c-heer fulness,  note  on  Rom.  xii.  8. 

God  loveth,  etc.  From  Prov.  xxii.  9,  where  the  Hebrew  is, 
a  kind  man  shaU  be  blessed.  Sept.,  6od  blesseth  a  man  who 
is  cheerful  and  a  giver. 

8.  Always— all— in  everything.  Nearly  reproducing  the 
play  on  the  word  all  in  the  Greek. 


d 


Ch.  DL]       THB  second  EPIBTLB  to  the  OORINTHIAN&  335 

Sufficiency  (aurdptceiav).  Only  here  and  1  Tim.  vL  6.  The 
kindred  adjective  aurdpteff^,  A.  Y.,  conient,  occurs  Philip,  iv.  11 
(see  note).  The  word  properly  means  setf-suJUciencj/,  and  is 
one  of  those  which  show  Paul's  acquaintance  with  Stoicism, 
and  the  influence  of  its  vocabulary  upon  his  own.  It  expressed 
the  Stoic  conception  of  the  wise  man  as  being  sufficient  in  him- 
self, wanting  nothing  and  possessing  everything.^  Here,  not 
in  the  sense  of  sufficiency  of  worldly  goods,  but  of  that  moral 
quality,  bound  up  with  self-consecration  and  faith,  which  rend- 
ers the  new  9df  in  Christ  independent  of  external  circum- 
stances. 

9.  He  hath  dispersed  abroad  {iaicofyiruraf).  As  in  sowing, 
ver.  6.  Ps.  cxii.  9.  Almost  literally  after  the  Hebrew  and 
Septnagint. 

10.  Ministereth  {hnx^pvrfSiv),  Rev.,  supplieth.  See  on 
addj  2  Pet.  i.  5. 

Both  minister  bread,  etc.  Construe  bread  with  eupplieth^ 
as  Rev.,  supplieth  seed  to  the  sower  and  hread for  food. 

Minister  and  multiply  {xopnTO<^^  ^^  irkq^vvcu).  The 
correct  reading  is  the  future,  yppfffffat^  teal  irXffSwel  shall  sup- 
ply and  mtUttph/, 

The  fruits  (r^  yevi^fuiTa).  lit,  what  has  been  begotten  or 
bom.  Used  of  men,  Matt.  iii.  7,  A.  V.,  generation,  Rev.,  off- 
spring.     Elsewhere  oi  fruits,  ^a  fruit  of  the  vine,  Mark  xiv.  25. 

11.  Liberality  (inrXon^a).  Better  singleness  or  simplicity 
of  heart.     See  on  Rom.  xii.  8. 

12.  Service  QsjevrovfrfUv;).  Also  rendered  ministry  or  minr 
istration  (A.  Y.  and  Rev.),  as  Luke  i.  23  ;  Heb.  viii.  6 ;  ix.  21. 
See  on  Luke  i.  23.  The  word  is  used  of  this  same  contribution, 
Rom.  XV.  7. 

Supplieth  {itrrXv  irpaaavairXfipovtra).  JAt,  Jills  up  by  add- 
ing to.  Only  here  and  ch.  xi.  9.  Supplementing  what  the 
saints  lack. 


*  See  Bishop  Lightfoot*8  essaj,  "  Paul  and  Seneca,**  In  Us  '<  Commentary 
on  Philippiana/*  where  he  has  ooUeoted  a  number  of  similar  instanee%. 


Through  many  thanksgivings.  The  need  of  the  poor  is 
filled,  like  an  empty  vessel,  lo  the  brim,  and  the  siippW  over- 
flows in  the  thankBgivIng  wiiich  it  calls  out.  Thus  christian 
beneficence  does  a  double  work,  in  giving  relief  and  in  generat- 
ing thaiikfiilncBB. 

13.  Experiment  of  this  ministration  (Soxt/t^  t^Sumoi'uk 
■ravnjs).  Coinmentators  differ  as  to  the  interpretation ;  the 
difference  hinging  on  the  question  whether  the  trial  (experi- 
ment) applies  to  the  service  itself,  or  to  those  who  render  it : 
hence  either  "  the  proving  of  you  by  this  ministration,"  as  Rev., 
or  t/ie  tried  cUaraeter  of  this  ministration,  ^oki/h}  may  mean 
either  the  process  of  proving  or  the  state  of  being  approved,  op- 
proveditess.     The  difference  is  immaterial. 

Your  professed  subjection  (tnroTorf^  t^s  6fu>Xoyia<{  v/*ii)v). 
A  vicious  hendiadys.  Lit.,  as  Rev.,  the  obedience  of  your  con- 
fession ;  that  is,  the  obedience  which  results  from  yonr  christ- 
ian confession.  'OiutKo^la  is  once  rendered  in  A.  V.  confes- 
sion,  1  Tim.  vi.  13;  and  ehewhere  jnvf ess  ion.  Both  render- 
ings occur  in  1  Tim.  vi.  12,  13.  Rev.,  in  every  case,  confesmon. 
A  simitar  variation  occnrs  in  the  rendering  of  Quokoyka,  though 
in  all  but  five  of  the  twenty-three  instances  confess  is  used. 
Rev.  ntaxQa  prof  ess  iu  Matt.  vii.  23  ;  Tit.  i.  16,  and  changes  to 
confess  in  1  Tim.  vi.  12.  In  Matt.  xiv.  7,piwused  (A.  V.  and 
Rev.,  see  note),  and  in  Ileb.  xiii.  15,  giving  than  As ;  Rev., 
which  ?Hake  confession.  Etymologicalty,  confession  is  the  lit- 
eral rendering  of  ofioXoyla,  which  is  fram  ofMV  together,  X^eo 
to  say ;  con  together,  fateor  to  say.  The  fundamental  idea  is 
that  of  saying  the  same  thing  as  another,'  whWe  profess  {pro 
forth,  fateor  to  say)  is  to  declare  openly.  Hence,  to  profess 
Christ  is  to  declare  Him  publicly  as  onr  Loi-d:  to  con/fwsl'liiiet 
is  to  declare  agreement  with  all  that  Ho  says.  When  Christ 
confesses  His  followers  before  the  world,  lie  makes  a  declara- 
tion in  agreement  with  what  is  in  His  heart  concerning  them. 
Similarly,  when  He  declares  to  the  wicked  "I  never  knew  you" 
("then  will  1  jrrofess,  6fu>\xyfQ<Tm^'),  a  similar  agreement  be- 
tween His  thought  and  His  declaration  is  implied.  The  two 
ideas  run  into  each  other,  and  the  Rev.  is  right  in  the  few  cases 


Ch.  X.]         THB  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GORINTHIANa  337 

in  which  it  retains  prof 688,  since  o(mfe88  would  be  ambigaons. 
See,  for  example,  Tit.  i.  16. 

Liberal  distribution  {pnfKlrrriT^  1%  Kowm^Uvi).  Bev.,  cor- 
rectly, liberality  of  your  contribiUion.  Koivfovla  commv/nian 
inclndes  the  idea  of  communication  of  material  things,  and 
hence  sometimes  means  that  which  i8  com%  'nicated.  See  on 
Acts  ii.  42 ;  so  Rom.  xv.  26 ;  Heb.  xiii.  16.  Oompare  the  sim- 
ilar use  of  KOiiwvifOj  £om.  xii  13,  distribviting  ;  Philip,  iv.  15, 
ixnnm/um,icaled. 

15.  Thanks,  etc.  These  abrupt  thanksgivings  are  common 
in  Paul's  writings.  See  Rom.  ix.  5 ;  xi.  33 ;  1  Con  xv.  57 ; 
Gal.  i.  5;  Eph.  iii.  20. 

Unspeakable  (opexBiriyifrq)).  Lit.,  not  to  be  told  throughout. 
Only  here  in  the  New  Testament 


CHAPTER  X. 

1.  I  Paul  myself.  ^^  This  emphatic  stress  on  his  own  person 
is  the  fit  introduction  to  the  portion  of  the  epistle  which,  be- 
yond any  other  part  of  his  writings,  is  to  lay  open  his  individual 
life  and  character"  (Stanley).  "Paul  boldly  casts  into  the 
scales  of  his  readers  the  weight  of  his  own  personality  over 
against  his  calumniators  "  (Meyer). 

Meekness— gentleness.    See  on  Matt.  v.  5 ;  1  Pet  ii.  18. 

Base  {jairuvi^.  Better,  as  Rev.,  lowly.  The  sneer  of  his 
opponents  that  he  was  unassuming  in  their  presence,  but  bold 
when  absent.  "  It  was  easy  to  satirize  and  misrepresent  a  de- 
pression of  spirits,  a  humility  of  demeanor,  which  were  either 
the  direct  results  of  some  bodily  affliction,  or  which  the  con- 
sciousness of  this  affliction  had  rendered  habitual.  We  feel  at 
once  that  this  would  be  natural  to  the  bowed  and  weak  figure 
which  Albrecht  Diirer  has  represented ;  but  that  it  would  be 
impossible  to  the  imposing  orator  whom  Raphael  has  placed 
on  the  steps  of  the  Areopagus  "  (Farrar). 
Vol..  ni.— 32 


33S 


WORD  STUDIES   IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Cii.  X. 


This  is  the  odI^  passage  in  the  New  Testament  in  vrhicli 
TflTreifos  lowly,  bears  t!ie  contemptuous  sense  which  attaclies  to 
it  in  classical  usage,  an  illustration  of  which  m&y  be  found  in 
Xenophou's  story  of  Socrates'  interview  with  the  painter  Par- 
rhaeius.  "  Surely  meanness  and  servility  {to  Tairdvov  ri  Koi 
dveKev^pov)  show  themBelves  in  the  looks  {hih  trpouanrov,  the 
same  word  as  Paul's)  and  gestures  of  men  "  ("  Memorabilia," 
iii.,  10,  5).  So  Aristotle  says  that  frequently  to  submit  to  re- 
ceive service  from  another,  and  to  disparage  whatever  he  him- 
self has  done  well,  are  signs  of  littleness  of  soul  (jiiKpoyln^iav) 
and  mea?mes8  {TaireivoTrp-oi;).  In  the  Septuagiiit  the  words 
Tre'i"?!  j>oo>;  Trpads  tneck,  •mm^ot  destitute,  and  Taireifo?  lowly, 
are  nsed  interchangeably  to  translate  the  same  Hebrew  words; 
the  reference  ordinarily  being  to  tiie  oppressed,  in  contrast  with 
their  rich  and  powerfnl  oppressors,  or  to  the  quiet,  in  contrast 
with  lawless  wrong-doers.  Compare  Deut.  xv,  11 ;  2  Sam. 
xxii.  28;  Pa.  xviii.  (Sept.  xvii.)  27 ;  Isa-xxvi.  6;  Pa.  x.  17  (Sept. 
ix.  3S) ;  Prov.  xiv.  21 ;  iii.  34 ;  Num.  xii.  3 ;  Exod.  xxiii.  6, 11 ; 
Isa.  xxxii.  7 ;  Exod.  xxiii.  3  ;  Ruth  iii.  10  ;  Isa.  xi.  4 ;  2  Sam. 
xii.  1,  3,  4;  Prov.  xiii.  8;  1  Sam.  xviii.  23.  The  Septuagint 
usage  therefore  goes  to  show  that  these  four  words  are  all 
names  for  one  class — -the  poor  peasantry  of  an  oppressed  coun- 
try, the  victims  of  ill-treatment  and  plunder  at  the  hands  of 
tyrants  and  rich  neighbors.* 

2.  But  I  beseech  you  (Sco^mu  %k).  In  ver.  1,  irixpaKaKat  is 
used  for  beseech.  It  is  doubtful  whether  the  two  words  can  be 
strictly  distinguished  as  indicating  different  degrees  of  feeling. 
It  may  be  said  that  heofuu  and  its  kindred  noun  iet)ai.<s  are  fre- 
quently used  of  prayer  to  God,  while  irapaKoKia  occurs  only 
twice  in  this  sense,  Matt.  xxvi.  53 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  8.  On  the  other 
hand,  irafxucaKSi  is  used  of  God's  pleading  with  men,  while  in 
the  same  passage  Sioftat  is  used  of  men's  entreating  men ;  ch. 
v.  20.  Rev,,  in  ver.  1,  renders  entreat,  which,  according  to  older 
English  nsage,  is  the  stronger  word,  meaning  to  prevail  by  en- 


Cb.  X.]         THB  SECOND  BPISTLE  TO  THB  CORINTHIAN&  339 

treaty,  jnst  as  jpersuadsy  which  originally  meant  to  use  perdvas- 
iofij  now  signifies  to  prevail  by  persitasion. 

The  construction  of  the  passage  is  difficult  Literally  it  is : 
I  pray  the  not  showing  courage  when  present^  with  the  con- 
Jidence^  etc.  The  sense  is :  I  pray  you  that  you  may  not  make 
it  necessary  for  me  to  show,  when  I  am  present,  that  official 
peremptoriness  which  I  am  minded  to  show  against  those  who 
charge  me  with  unworthy  motives. 

May  not  be  bold— think  to  be  bold  {Stip/niaM — To\fA/f)aai). 
The  A.  Y.  thus  misses  the  distinction  between  the  two  verbs. 
The  former  signifies  to  he  stout-hearted  or  resolutely  confident 
in  view  of  oner's  conscious  strength  or  capacity ;  the  latter,  to 
carry  this  feeling  into  action;  to  dare.  The  distinction  is  not 
easy  to  represent  by  single  English  words.  It  might  be  ap- 
proximately given  by  hrave  and  bold,  though,  in  common  usage, 
this  distinction  practically  disappears.  Oapfnja-ai  does  not  so 
much  emphasize  Jearlessness  as  the  more  positive  quality  of 
cheerful  confidence  in  the  presence  of  difficulty  and  danger,  the 
sense  which  appears  in  the  earlier  usage  of  In^ve  as  gay  (see 
the  various  uses  in  Shakspeare).  Hence  Bev.  is  on  the  right 
line  in  the  use  of  courage^  from  cor  hearty  through  the  Fi*ench 
coeur.  Rev.  renders,  show  courage — he  hold.  In  classical  Greek, 
the  kindred  noun  Bdpao^  is  sometimes,  though  not  often,  used 
in  a  bad  sense,  audacity^  as  in  Homer,  where  Minerva  is  re- 
buking Mars  for  exciting  strife  among  the  gods  with  stormy  or 
furious  courage  {Sdpco^  aryrovj  "Iliad,"  xxi.,  395).  So  the 
reckless  daring  of  Hector  is  described  as  Siipao^  fivlfj^  the  ef- 
frontery ofafy  ("  Iliad,"  xvii.,  570). 

3.  In  the  flesh.  Being  human,  and  subject  to  human  con- 
ditions. 

War  {(rrparet/ofieSa).  Serve  as  soldiers :  carry  on  our  cam- 
paign.     See  on  Luke  iii.  14 ;  Jas.  iv.  1. 

After  the  flesh.  Or  according  to  (Rev.).  Quite  a  different 
thing  from  being  in  the  fiesh. 


340  WOHD  8TDDIE8  IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  S. 

4.  Carnal.  Rev.,  better,  of  the  jUsh,  thus  preserving  the 
plaj'  on  the  words.  The  idea  of  weakness  attachea  to  that  of 
Jleshliness.     See  on  adp^JtesA,  sec.  4,  Rom.  vii.  5. 

Through  God  (t^  Seai).  Lit.,  mighty  unio  God,  in  G-od*a 
siglit.     See  on  exceeding  fair.  Acts  vii,  20.     Kev.,  before  God. 

Pulling  down  ((co^o/peo-ii/).  Only  in  this  epistle.  Compare 
Luke  i.  52.     Also  used  of  taking  down  pride,  or  refuting  argn- 

mecits. 

Of  strongholds  (pxvpattiaTuv).  Only  here  in  the  Xew  Test- 
anieiit.  From  e)(tD  to  hold^  bo  that  holds  ie  an  accurate  render- 
ing. Compare  keep,  a  dungeon.  The  word  is  not  common  in 
claBsical  Greek,  hut  occurs  frequently  in  the  A^xicrypha.  In 
its  use  here  tliere  may  lie  a  reminiecence  of  the  rock-forts  on 
tlie  coast  of  Paul's  native  CUicia,  whicli  were  pulled  down  by 
the  Romans  in  their  attacks  on  the  Ciliciau  pirates.  Pompey 
inflicted  a  crushing  defeat  upon  their  navy  off  the  rocky  strong- 
hold of  Coracesinm  on  the  confines  of  Cilicia  and  Pisidia. 

5.  Casting  down  {K.u^aipovvTt'i).      Not  the  vKapona,  but 

we  :  we  war,  casting  down,  etc. 

High  thing  (iJ^^).  Only  here  and  Rom.  viii.  39.  Fall- 
ing in  with  the  metaphor  of  strongliolda.  High  military  works 
thrown  up,  or  lofty  natural  fastnesses  vrith  tlieir  battlements  of 
rock.  The  word  is  also  used  in  the  Septuagint  and  Apocrypha 
of  mental  elevation,  as  Job  xxiv.  24,  where  the  Septuagint  reads 
"hie  haughtiness  hath  harmed  many." 

Exalteth  itself  {hratpofixvao).  Rev.,  is  exalted.  Aeschylus 
uses  a  similar  metaphor  iu  Atossa'a  dream  of  the  two  women 
whom  Xerxes  yoked  to  his  chariot:  "And  the  one  Unoered 
{ivovpyovTo)  loftily  in  these  trappings "'  {"  Persae,"  190}. 

Bringing  into  captivity  {alxfiaXarl^ovre^).  Or  leading 
avjay  captive.  The  military  metaplior  is  continued  ;  the  lead- 
ing away  of  the  captives  after  the  storming  of  the  stronghold. 
See  on  captives,  Luke  iv.  18.  The  campaign  against  the  Cilic- 
isn  pirates  resulted  in  tiie  reduction  of  a  hundred  and  twenty 


Ca.  X.]         THE  8BCOND  BPISTLB  TO  THE  CORINTHIAN&  341 

strougholds  and  the  capture  of  more  than  ten  thousand  pris* 
oners. 

Thought  (y6i7/Aa).     See  on  ch.  iii.  14. 

To  the  obedience  of  Christ.  In  pursuance  of  the  meta- 
phor. The  obedience  is  the  new  stronghold  into  wliich  the 
captives  are  led.  This  is  indicated  by  the  preposition  ek  into 
or  unio. 

6.  To  avenge  all  disobedience,  etc.  The  military  meta- 
phor continued.  After  most  Iiave  surrendered  and  thus  ful- 
filled their  obedience,  some  rebels  may  remain,  and  these  will 
be  punished. 

9.  That  I  may  not  seem.  The  construction  is  abrupt.  Prob- 
ably something  is  to  be  supplied,  as  I  say  this  in  order  that  I 
may  not  seem,  etc. 

10.  They  say  {(^curlv).  The  correct  reading  is  ^n^alsays  he. 
The  Revisers  retain  they  say^  but  read  ^ifqal  he  says  in  their 
text.  The  reference  is  to  some  well-known  opponent.  Compare 
one^  a/ny  one  in  ch.  x.  7 ;  xi.  20.  The  only  instance  of  the  very 
words  used  by  Paul's  adversaries. 

Weighty  (fiapetai).  In  classical  Greek,  besides  the  physical 
sense  of  hewvy^  the  word  very  generally  implies  something^ui- 
fvl  or  oppressive.  As  applied  to  persons,  severe^  stem.  In 
later  Greek  it  has  sometimes  the  meaning  of  grave  or  dignified, 
and  by  the  later  Greek  rhetoricians  it  was  applied  to  oratory, 
in  the  sense  of  impressimj  as  here. 

Weak.  ^^  Ko  one  can  even  cursorily  read  St  Paul's  epistles 
without  observing  that  he  was  aware  of  something  in  his  aspect 
or  his  personality  which  distressed  him  with  an  agony  of  humili- 
ation— something  which  seems  to  force  him,  against  every  nat- 
ural instinct  of  his  disposition,  into  language  which  sounds  to 
himself  like  a  boastfulness  which  was  abhorrent  to  him,  but 
which  he  finds  to  be  more  necessary  to  himself  than  to  other 
men.  It  is  as  though  he  felt  that  his  appearance  was  against 
him.  .  .  .  His  language  leaves  on  us  the  impression  of  one 
who  was  acutely  sensitive,  and  whose  sensitiveness  of  temper- 


342  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE   NEW   TEaTAMENT.  [Cu.  X, 

ament  has  beeu  aggravated  by  a  meanaeBB  of  preaence  which 
is  indeed  forgotten  by  the  friends  who  know  Iiira,  but  which 
raises  in  strangers  a  prejudice  not  always  overcome  "  (Farrar). 

Bodily  presence.  All  the  traditions  as  to  Paul's  personat 
appearance  are  late.  A  bronze  medal  discovered  in  the  ceme- 
tery of  St.  Domitilla  at  Home,  and  ascribed  to  t)ie  first  or  sec- 
ond centnry,  represents  the  apostle  with  a  bald,  round,  well- 
developed  head  ;  rather  long,  curling  beard  ;  high  forehead  ; 
prominent  nose ;  and  open,  staring  eye.  The  intellectual  char- 
acter of  the  face  is  emphasized  by  the  contrast  with  the  por- 
trait of  Peter,  which  faces  Paul's.  Peter's  forehead  is  fiat, 
the  head  not  so  finely  developed,  the  face  commonplace,  the 
cheek-bones  high,  the  eye  small,  and  the  hair  and  beard  short, 
thick,  and  curling.  An  ivory  diptych  of  the  fourth  century, 
reproduced  in  Mr.  Lewin's  "Life  of  Paul,"  contains  two  por- 
traits. In  the  one  he  is  sitting  in  an  official  chair,  with  uplifted 
hand  and  two  fingers  raised,  apparently  in  the  act  of  ordina- 
tion. The  face  is  oval,  the  beard  long  and  pointed,  the  mous- 
tache full,  the  forehead  high,  the  head  bald,  and  the  eyes  small 
and  weak.  The  other  portrait  represents  him  in  the  act  of 
throwing  off  the  viper.  A  forgery  of  the  fourth  century,  under 
the  name  of  Lucian,  alludes  to  him  as  "  the  bald-headed,  hook- 
nosed Galilean."  In  the  "Apocryphal  Acts  of  the  Apostles" 
mention  is  made  of  one  Dio&corus,  the  bald  shipmaster,  who 
followed  Paul  to  Kome,  and  was  mistaken  for  him  and  be- 
headed in  his  stead.  In  the  "Acts  of  Paul  and  Tliekla," 
a  third-century  romance,  he  ia  described  as  "short,  bald,  bow- 
legged,  with  meeting  eyebrows,  hook-nosed,  full  of  grace." 
John  of  Autiocli,  in  the  sixth  century,  says  that  he  was  round- 
shouldered,  with  aquiline  nose,  greyish  eyes,  meeting  eye- 
brows, and  ample  beard.* 

Contemptible  (i^ovSevijfihfoi).  Lit.,  made  nothing  qf.  Rev., 
<^no  account. 


*  See  Mn.  jBmeaon'B  "  S»ored  tni  Lagand&ry  Art,"  vo\.  i.  ;  »nd  NorthooU 
d  Brownlow'a  "Boma  Sottersne*."     A  ■nmrnarj  U  giren  by  Furu. 


i         k, 


i 


Ch.  X-l         THE  SECOND  EPISTLE   TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  343 

12.  Make  ourselves  of  the  number  {iyKpXvai  eowrows). 
Rev.,  better,  to  number  ourselves.  Lit.,  to  judge  ourselves  to  be 
among :  to  place  in  the  same  category  with. 

13.  Of  things  without  measure  (ew  rh.  afierpa).  Of 
(htjigs  is  wrong  ;  tlie  translators  failing  to  see  that  the  article 
forniB,  with  the  following  word,  an  adverbial  pliraee.  Rev.,  cor- 
i-ectly,  glory  beyond  our  jneasure. 

Rule  {Kavoim).  Used  by  Paul  only.  Originally,  astraighi 
rod  or  ruler.  Hence  a  carpenter's  ^•ule.  Metaphorically,  that 
which  measures  or  determines  anything,  in  morals,  art,  or  lan- 
guage. The  Alexandrian  grammarians  spoke  of  the  classic 
Greek  authors  collectively  as  the  canon  or  standard  of  the  pnre 
language.  In  later  Greek  it  was  used  to  denote  a  fixed  lax. 
lu  christian  literature  it  came  to  signify  the  standard  of  faith 
or  of  christian  teaching;  the  creed;  the  rule  of  Church  dis- 
cipline, and  the  authorized  collection  of  sacred  writings.  Hence 
canon  of  Scripture. 

To  understand  this  expression,  it  is  to  be  remembered  that 
Paid  regarded  his  ministry  as  specially  to  the  Gentiles,  and 
that  he  habitually  refused  to  establish  himself  permanently 
where  any  former  Christian  teacher  had  preached.  The  Jew- 
ish teachers  at  Corinth  had  invaded  his  sphere  as  the  apostle  to 
the  Gentiles,  and  had  also  occupied  the  ground  which  he  had 
won  for  himself  by  his  snccessful  labors  among  the  Corinthians, 
as  they  did  also  at  Antioch  and  in  Galatia.  lie  says  here, 
therefore,  that  his  boasting  of  h  is  apostolic  labors  is  not  without 
measnre,  like  that  of  those  Jewish  teachers  who  establish  them- 
selves everywhere,  but  Is  confined  to  the  sphere  appointed  for 
him,  of  which  Corinth,  thns  far,  was  the  extreme  limit.  Hence 
the  measure  of  the  rule  is  the  measure  delined  by  the  line  which 
God  has  drawn.  The  image  is  that  of  surveying  a  district,  so 
as  to  assign  to  different  persons  their  different  parcels  of  ground. 
1  see  no  good  reason  for  Jiev.  j^rovince.  The  measure  is  given 
by  God's  measuring-line :  "  "Which  God  hath  apportioned  to 
us  as  a  measure  ;"  and  his  boasting  extends  only  to  this  limit. 

To  reach  even  unto  you.  Corinth  being  thus  far  the  ex- 
treme limit  of  the  field  measured  out  for  him. 


J 


344 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TEBTAMEST. 


[Ch.  X. 


14.  We  stretch  not  ourselves  beyond  our  measure  (/iif 
{nr€p€KT€ivofiei'  iavroin;).  The  verb  only  here  in  the  New  Test- 
ament. The  A.  V.  IB  needlessly  verbose,  liev.,  better,  stretch 
not  ourselves  overmuch. 

As  though  we  reached  not  unto  you.  Lit.,  as  not  reacJi- 
int/.  Paul  would  say :  It  is  not  as  iE  God  had  not  appointed 
otir  apostolic  labor  to  reach  to  you.  If  He  had  not  tliua  ap- 
pointed, then  onr  desire  to  labor  among  you  would  have  been 
an  overetretching  of  ourselves.  Therefore,  in  boasting  of  our 
labor  in  Corinth,  we  do  not  boast  beyond  our  measure. 

We  are  coma  {itpAdtraiiev).  Rev.,  we  came.  The  verb  orig- 
inally means  to  come  before,  anticipate,  ae  1  Thess.  iv,  15  (A. 
Y., prevent;  Rev., precede) ;  hut  it  gradually  loses  the  idea  of 
priority,  and  means  simply  corns  to,  arrive  al.  So  Matt.  xii. 
28 ;  Philip,  iii.  16.  It  may  possibly  be  used  here  with  a  hint  of 
the  earlier  meaning,  were  tkejir^  to  come.     See  Rev.,  margin. 

15.  Be  enlarged  by  you — according  to  our  rule  abund. 
antly  (ec  iifiiv  fieyoKw^jvcu — et?  irtpttraelav).  Paul  means 
that,  as  the  faith  of  the  Corinthians  increases,  he  hopes  that 
his  apohtolic  efficiency  will  increase,  so  that  Corinth  shall  be- 
come the  basis  of  larger  efforts,  extending  into  other  regions. 
The  verb  fieyaXvvm  also  means  tf> praise  or  cetebraie,  as  Luke  i,  46; 
Acts  V.  13 ;  X.  46,  and  is  so  explained  by  some  interpreters  here. 
But  this  would  be  inconsistent  with  the  figure,  to  which  Paul 
adheres.  "  lie  who  can  work  far  off  is  a  man  of  great  statui-e, 
who,  without  overstretching  himself,  reaches  afar"  (Meyer). 

According  to  our  rule.  Ilis  wider  labors  will  still  be  i-eg- 
nlated  by  God's  measuring-line. 

10.  In  another  man's  line  (ev  oKKorplip  «:afof().  Lirw  is 
the  word  previously  rendered  rule.  lie  will  not  boast  within 
the  line  drawn  for  another;  in  another's  field  of  activity.* 


*  Perbapa  no  portiaa  of  the  New  Te«tameDt  fiimiBLes  a  belter  illuEtration 
of  the  need  of  religion  tban  tbe  A.  V.  of  this  and  the  eacceeding  chapters. 
It  is  not  too  much  to  aay  that,  in  that  vemlon,  much  of  the  matter  is  anin- 
telliglble  to  the  average  English  reader.  With  llie  hrat  version  it  requires  the 
coinmentator'a  aid. 


d 


Ch.  XL]        THB  SECOND  EPISTLB  TO  THB  COBINTHIAN&  345 


CHAPTER  XL 

1.  Folly.  As  mj  boasting  may  seem  to  jou.  Ironically 
spoken  of  that  legitimate  self-vindication  demanded  by  the 
circumstances.     lij&v.^foolishneM, 

Bear  with  me  (ai^ccr^c).  Some  render  as  indicative:  ye 
do  hear  with  me. 

2.  I  am  jealous  ((Ti/Xo)).  The  translation  is  correct.  The 
word  is  appropriate  to  the  image  which  follows,  in  which  Paul 
represents  himself  as  the  marriage-friend  who  has  betrothed 
the  bride  to  the  bridegroom,  and  consequently  shares  the  bride- 
groom's jealousy  of  his  bride  (see  on  John  iii.  29).  Compare 
the  Old-Testament  passages  in  which  Ood  is  represented  as 
the  spouse  of  His  people :  Isa.  liv.  5 ;  Ixii.  5  ;  Jer.  iii.  1 ;  Ezek. 
xvi.  8 ;  Uos.  ii.  18, 19.  For  the  different  senses  of  the  word, 
see  on  envying^  Jas.  iii.  14.^  Theodoret's  comment  on  the 
passage  is :  '^  I  was  your  wooer  for  your  husband,  and  the  med- 
iator of  your  marriage;  through  me  you  received  the  bride- 
groom's gifts ;  wherefore  I  am  now  affected  with  jealousy." 

I  have  espoused  {^pfjunrdfirfv).  Only  here  in  the  New  Test- 
ament. Lit.,  have  fitted  together.  Used  in  the  classics  of 
carpenter's  or  joiner's  work ;  of  arranging  music,  tuning  in- 
struments, and  fitting  clothes  or  armor.  As  here,  of  betrothing 
or  taking  to  wife.  The  Septuagint  usage  is  substantially  the 
same. 

Present.     Compare  Eph.  v.  27. 

3.  The  serpent.  Paul's  only  allusion  to  the  story  of  the 
serpent  in  Eden. 

Eve.  In  accordance  with  the  representation  of  the  Church 
as  the  bride. 

*  Stanlej  is  entirelj  wrong  in  sajing  that  the  word  is  used  exolosivelj  for 
wud  or  affection,  and  that  the  idea  of  jealougy  does  not  enter  into  it  See  Norn. 
T.  14;  Gen.  xxxvii.  11;  AoU  rii.  9. 


346  WORD  STUDIES   IN  THE   NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Ca.  XI. 

Simplicity  that  is  in  Christ.  Rev.  adds,  and  the  punCy, 
following  WeBtcott  and  Ilort's  text.  Simplicity,  single-hearted 
loyalty.     In  Christ ;  better,  as  Rev.,  towards  {cl<t). 

4.  Another  Jesus — another  Spirit  {SXKov — h-epov).  Rev,, 
another  Jeeus,  a  differeiU  Spirit.  See  on  Matt.  vi.  24.  An- 
other denies  the  identity  ;  a  different  denies  the  aimilarUy  of 
nature.     It  is  the  difference  of  "  indveiduality  and  hind"  (Al- 

ford).     See  on  Gal.  i.  6,  7. 

Ye  might  well  bear  (xsXaW  ^veix^v^).  Following  the 
reading  which  makes  the  verb  in  the  imperfect  tense,  putting 
the  matter  as  a  supposed  ease.  The  Rev.  follows  the  reading 
avnyeaAe,  present  tense,  and  puts  it  as  a  fact :  ye  do  well  to 
bear.  Lit.,  ye  endure  them,  finely.  The  expression  is  ironical. 
You  gladly  endure  these  false  teachers,  why  do  yon  not  endure 


5.  The  very  chiefest  apostles  (t^k  inrepKiav  awoirroKuv). 
Lit.,  those  who  are  preHminfulJy  apostle.  Not  referring  to 
the  genuine  apostles,  but  ironically  to  the  false  teachers,  tJte 
false  apostles  of  ver.  13.  Compare  ch,  xii.  11.  Farrar  renders 
the  extra-super  apostles. 

G.  Rude  ((Smbtj;?).     See  on  1  Cor.  xiv.  16. 

Have  been  made  manifest  (^aveptDdeWe?).  The  correct 
reading  is  <pavepti>a-ain€<;,  active  voice,  we  hwue  jnade  U  mani- 
fest. 

7.  Abasing  myself.     By  working  at  his  trade. 

Preached  the  Gospel — freely  (Saypt^y)  gratuitously.  Rev,, 
fornougld,,  is  not  an  improvement,  but  is  quite  as  ambiguous  as 
freely.  Without  ohargie  would  be  better.  Paul's  very  self-de- 
nial in  this  matter  had  been  construed  to  his  injury  by  his  op- 
ponents, as  indicating  his  want  of  confidence  in  the  Corinthian 
Church,  and  his  making  gain  for  himaelE  under  the  guise  of 
disinterestedness.  It  was  also  urged  that  a  real  apostle  would 
not  thue  relinquish  his  right  to  claim  subsistence  fi-om  the 
Church.     lience  his  question,  I}id  /commit  a  sin,  etc, I 


A 


Ch.  XI.]        THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  347 

8.  I  robbed  {iavkffa-a).  Only  here  in  the  Kew  Testament, 
though  it  appears  in  the  verb  iepoovXio)  to  commit  sacrilege^  Rom. 
ii.  22,  and  in  iepoavKoi  robbers  of  churches^  Acts  xix.  37.  Orig- 
inally to  strip  off^  as  arms  from  a  slain  foe,  and  thence,  gener- 
ally, to  roh^plundery  with  the  accompanying  notion  of  violence. 
Paul  thus  strongly  expresses  the  fact  that  he  had  accepted  from 
other  churches  more  than  their  share,  that  he  might  not  draw 
on  the  Corinthians. 

Wages  (o^i/M>y).     See  on  Bom.  vi.  23. 

9.  I  was  chargeable  {icarevdpicqaci).  Only  in  this  epistle. 
From  vdpieq  numbnesSy  deadness  ;  also  a  torpedo  or  gymnotvSy 
which  benumbs  whatever  touches  it.  Ck>mpare  Homer :  ^^  His 
hand  grew  stiff  at  the  wrist "  ("  Iliad,"  viii.,  328).  Meno  says 
to  Socrates :  ^  You  seem  to  me  both  in  your  appearance  and  in 
your  power  over  others,  to  be  very  like  tlie  flat  torpedo-fish 
{vdptcfjf),  who  torpifies  {vaptcav  iroiei)  those  who  come  near  him 
with  the  touch,  as  you  have  now  torpified  (vap/cav)  me,  I  think" 
(Plato,  "Meno,"  80).  The  compound  verb  used  here  occurs 
in  Hippocrates  in  the  sense  of  growi/ng  quite  stiff.  The  simple 
verb  occurs  in  the  Sept.,  Gen.  xxxii.  25,  32,  of  Jacob's  thigh, 
which  was  put  out  of  joint  and  shrank.  Compare  Job  xxxiii. 
19.  According  to  the  etymology  of  the  word,  Paul  would  say 
that  he  did  not  benumb  the  Corinthians  by  his  demand  for 
pecuniary  aid.     Rev.,  rather  mildly,  I  was  not  a  burden. 

10.  No  man  shall  stop  me  of  this  boasting  (17  teavxna-t^ 
avTfj  ov  <f>pa/^<TeTai  ek  if^)-  Lit.,  this  boasting  shall  not  be 
blocked  up  as  regards  me.  The  boasting  is  that  of  preaching 
gratuitously.  For  the  verb,  compare  Rom.  iii.  19;  Heb.  xi. 
33. 

12.  I  will  do.    Will  continue  to  do ;  refuse  to  receive  pay. 

Cut  off  (iteteoy^).  Lit.,  cut  out.  See  on  Luke  xiii.  7,  and 
compare  Rom.  xi.  24. 

Occasion  (r^i/  cuf>opfi'^v).  The  force  of  the  article  must  be 
carefnlly  noted  ;  the partictdar  occasion  of  fault-finding  which 
concerned  his  pecuniary  relations  with  the  Corinthians.    His 


348  WOKD  STUDIES  IN   THE   NEW    TE3T\MBKT.  [l^'u,  XL 

refosal  to  receive  pay  out  out  from  among  other  cauaes  of  com- 
plaint this  one. 

They  may  be  found  even  as  we.  I  can  find  no  satisfac- 
tory explanation  of  this  clause,  and  will  not  attempt  to  add  to 
the  hopeleas  muddle  of  the  commentators.  It  is  evident  that 
the  false  teachers  had  sought  oocaaioji  for  glorifying  themselveB 
in  comparison  with  Paul ;  that  they  consequently  caught  eagerly 
at  every  pretext  for  disparaging  him  ;  and  that  this  disparage- 
ment was  in  some  way  connected  with  Paul's  refusal  to  receive 
compensation  from  the  Corinthians.  Farther,  that  Panl's  way 
of  counteracting  their  attempts  was  by  persisting  in  this  refusal. 
The  intimation  in  the  last  clause  is  apparently  to  the  effect  thiit 
by  tliis  course  he  will  not  only  remove  the  occasion  for  attack, 
bnt  that  the  result  will  show  both  his  opponents  and  himself 
in  their  true  light.     Compare ^W  and  hefrmmi,  ch,  xii.  20. 

13.  Transforming  themselves  (^eroa^^Ti^o/icivt).  Eev., 
\xitte,r,  fashioning,  thus  preserving  the  distinctive  force  of  <r)(7jfia 
outioardfathion,  which  forms  part  of  the  compound  verb.  See 
on  Matt  xvii.  2;  1  Cor.  iv.  6. 

14.  Satan.  See  on  Luke  x.  18.  The  rabbinical  writings 
i-eprosent  the  devil  rather  as  the  enemy  of  man  than  of  Ood  or 
of  good.  Tliey  use  none  of  the  New-Testament  names  for  the 
Evil  One  except  Satan,  and  contain  no  mention  of  a  kingdom  of 
Satan.  Edersheim  says  :  "Instead  of  the  personified  principle 
of  evil  to  which  there  is  response  in  us — we  have  only  a  clumsy 
and  often  a  stupid  hater."*  Itis  also  to  he  observed  that  in  the 
Septuagint  the  usage  is  limited  to  the  enemy  of  man,  as  is  that 
of  St^oXm  devil,  by  which  Satan  is  translated.  See  I  Chron. 
xxi.  1 ;  Esther  vii.  4 ;  viii.  1 ;  Ps.  cviii.  (cix.)  5  ;  Job  i.  6 ;  Zech. 
iii.  1,  2. 

17.  Confidence  {vTroarwrei).     See  on  ch.  ix.  4. 

20.  Bringeth  you  into  bondage  {KaTa£ov\oi).  Only  here 
and  Gal.  ii.  4.  where  it  is  used  of  the  efforts  of  the  Jewish 


Ca.  XL]        THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OOBIl!rrHIAK&  349 

party  to  bring  the  christian  Church  under  the  ceremonial  law. 
Compare  Gal.  v.  1. 

Devour  {fcarecBUi).  Your  property.  Compare  Matt,  zziii 
14. 

Take  {Xofjifidvei).  A.  Y.  supplies  of  you,  evidently  with 
reference  to  property,  which  has  already  been  touched  upon  in 
devour.    The  meaning  is  to  take  as  a  prey  ^  as  Luke  v.  5. 

Exalteth  himself  {htratperoA).  As  ch.  x.  5.  It  is  noticeable 
that  these  are  the  only  two  instances  out  of  nineteen  in  the 
New  Testament  where  the  word  is  used  figuratively. 

Smite  you  on  the  face.  The  climax  of  insult  Compare 
Matt  V.  39  ;  Luke  xxii.  64 ;  Acts  xxiil.  2.  Also  the  injunction 
to  a  bishop  not  to  be  a  striker ^  1  Tim.  iii.  3  ;  Tit.  i.  7.  Stanley 
notes  the  decree  of  the  Council  of  Braga,  a.d.  675,  that  no 
bishop,  at  his  will  and  pleasure,  shall  strike  his  clergy. 

2L  As  concerning  reproach  {icarh  arifUop).  Better,  Bev., 
by  way  of  disparaffement.  Intensely  ironical.  Yes,  you  have 
borne  with  these  enslavers  and  devourers  and  smiters.  I  could 
never  ask  you  to  extend  such  toleration  to  me.  I  speak  as  one 
without  position  or  authority,  having  shown  myself  weak  as  you 
know. 

I  speak  foolishly  {h  a^poavvrf).  Bev.,  in  foolishness.  My 
pretensions  are  equal  to  theirs,  but,  of  course,  it  is  folly  to  ad- 
vance them,  and  they  amount  to  nothing.  Tet,  even  speaking 
in  this  foolish  way,  I  possess  every  qualification  on  which  they 
plume  themselves. 

22.  Hebrews.     See  on  Acts  vi.  1. 

Israelites.  See  on  Acts  iii.  12,  and  compare  Philip.  iiL  5, 
and  the  phrase  Israel  of  Qod^  Oal.  vi.  16,  and  an  Israeliie  in* 
deed^  John  i.  48. 

Seed  of  Abraham.  Compare  Matt  iii.  9;  John  viii.  33; 
Rom.  ix.  7 ;  xi.  1 ;  Oal.  iii.  16 ;  Heb.  ii.  16.  The  three  names 
are  arranged  climactically,  Hebrews  pointing  to  the  nationality ; 
Israelites  to  the  special  relation  to  God's  covenant;  seed  of 


>  abundant  (Treptaaorepw's).     Lit.,  more  abundantly,  e 


350  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  JCn.  XL 

Ahraliam  to  the  luessiaaic  privilege.    Compare  with  the  whole, 
Pliilip.  iii.  4,  5. 

23.  Ministers  of  Christ.  Hefemugto  his  opponents*  claim 
to  have  a  closer  conoection  with  Christ  than  he  had.  See  the 
note  on  1  Cor.  i.  13. 

As  a  fool  {wapaippov&v).  Only  liere  in  the  New  Testament. 
See  the  kindred  irapa^pavia  madness,  2  Pet.  ii.  16.  Lit.,  being 
beside  7iiysdf.  Rev.,  as  one  beside  mi/aelf.  This  e."ipreBBion  is 
stronger  than  that  in  ver.  21,  because  the  statement  which  it 
characterizes  is  stronger.  Up  to  tliis  point  Paul  has  been  as- 
serting eqiuzlity  with  the  other  teachers.  Now  )ie  . 
superiority,^^!  more;"  and  ironically  characterizes  this  si 
ment  from  their  stand-point  as  madness. 

Mo 
Rev. 

Stripes  above  measure  (vTrepiSaXXaWo?).  Ttiis  peculiar 
form  of  suffering  is  emphasized  by  details.  He  specifies  three 
Roman  scourginga,  and  five  at  the  hands  of  the  Jews.  Of  the 
former,  only  one  is  recorded,  that  at  Philippi  (Acts  xvi.  22,  23. 
See  on  Acts  xxii.  25),  and  none  of  the  latter.  Tlie  Jewish 
scourge  consisted  of  two  thongs  made  of  calf's  or  ass's  skin, 
passing  through  a  hole  in  a  handle.  Thirteen  blows  were  in- 
flicted on  the  breast,  thirteen  on  the  right,  and  thirteen  on  the 
left  shoulder.  The  law  in  Deut.  xxv.  3  permitted  forty  blows, 
but  only  tUirty-nino  were  given,  in  order  to  avoid  a  possible 
miscount.  During  the  punishment  the  chief  judge  read  aloud 
Dent,  xxviii.  58,  5ft ;  Deut.  xxix.  9 ;  Ps.  Ixviii.  38,  39.  The 
possibility  of  death  under  the  infliction  was  contemplated  in 
the  provision  which  exonerated  the  executioner  unless  he  should 
exceed  the  legal  number  of  blows.  Paul  escaped  Roman  scoui^- 
ingat  Jerusalem  on  the  ground  of  his  Roman  citizenship.  It 
is  not  related  that  he  and  Silas  urged  this  privilege  at  Philippi 
nntil  after  the  scourging.  It  is  evident  from  the  narrative  that 
they  were  not  allowed  a  formal  hearing  before  the  magistrates  ■ 
and,  if  they  asserted  their  citizenship,  it  may  have  been  that 
their  voices  were  drowned  by  the  mob.     That  this  plea  did  not 


J 


Ch.  XI.]        THB  SECOND  EPISTLB  TO  THB  CORINTHIANa  351 

always  avail  appears  from  the  case  cited  by  Cicero  against 
Verres,  that  he  scourged  a  Boman  citizen  in  spite  of  his  con- 
tinued protest  under  the  scourge,  ^^  I  am  a  Koman  citizen  "  (see 
on  Acts  xvi.  37),  and  from  well-known  instances  of  the  scourg- 
ing of  even  senators  under  the  Empire. 

Prisons.    At  Philippi,  and  other  places  not  recorded. 

Deaths.  Perils  of  death,  as  at  Damascus,  Antioch  in 
Pisidia,  Iconium,  Ljstra,  Thessalonica,  Beroea. 

25.  Beaten  with  rods.    Boman  scourgings. 

Stoned.    At  Lystra,  Acts  xiv.  19. 

Thrice  I  suffered  shipwreck.  The  shipwreck  at  Malta, 
being  later,  is,  of  course,  not  referred  to;  so  that  no  one  of 
these  three  is  on  record.* 

A  night  and  a  day  {wx^M^pov).  A  compound  term  occur- 
ring only  here  in  the  !New  Testament,  and  rarely  in  later  Oreek. 

Have  I  been  in  the  deep  {iv  ro)  fivSw  iren-otriKa).  Lit,  / 
Juive  made  (spent)  a  night  a/nd  a  day  in  the  deep.  For  a  simi- 
lar use  of  iroiAfo  to  mdke^  see  Acts  xv.  33 ;  xviii.  23 ;  xx.  3 ; 
Jas.  iv.  13.  fivSo^  bottom  or  d^th  occurs  only  here.  Of  the 
event  itself  there  is  no  record. 

26.  Perils  of  rivers.  From  the  sudden  swelling  of  moun- 
tain streams  or  flooding  of  dry  water-courses.  "  The  rivers  of 
Asia  Minor,  like  all  the  rivers  in  the  Levant,  are  liable  to  vio- 
lent and  sudden  changes,  and  no  district  in  Asia  Minor  is  more 
singularly  characterized  by  its  water-floods  than  the  mountain- 
ous tract  of  Pisidia,  where  rivers  burst  out  at  the  bases  of  huge 
clifiFs,  or  dash  down  wildly  through  narrow  ravines  "  (Conybeare 
and  Howson,  i.,  ch.  vi.). 

Robbers.  The  tribes  inhabiting  the  mountains  between  the 
table-land  of  Asia  Minor  and  the  coast  were  notorious  for  rob- 
bery. Paul  may  have  encountered  such  on  his  journey  to  the 
Pisidian  Antioch,  Acts  xiii.  14. 


*  See  Le win's  note.  vol.  ii.,  29,  where  a  table  of  Paul's  TOjages  up  to  the 
time  of  writing  this  epistle  is  j^yen. 


352 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW   THBTAMENT.  [Cn.  XL 


Mine   own   countrymen.     Conspiracies  of   the  Jews   at 
Daiiiaacus,  Lystra,  Thesaalonica,  Beroea,  etc. 
The  Gentiles.     As  at  Philippi  and  Ephesua. 
False  brethren.     Judaizing  CliriBtiane,  as  Gal.  ii.  i. 

27.  Watehings.    See  on  ch.  vi.  5. 

28.  Those  things  that  are  without  (Ttitv  irapexro?).  Some 
eKp\&iu,  external  calamities;  others,  M^  things  which  areleft 
out  in  the  cjiumeration,  as  Matt.  v.  32 ;  Aets  xxvi.  29.  Better, 
the  latter,  so  that  the  literal  meaning  is,  apartjrom  the  things 
which  are  beside  and  outside  my  enumeration  :  or,  as  Alford, 
not  to  mention  those  which  are  beside  these.  The  word  does 
not  occur  in  classical  Greek,  aud  no  instance  of  its  nsage  in  the 
former  sense  occurs  in  the  New  Testament  or  in  the  Septua- 
gint.     See  Rev.,  margin. 

That  which  cometh  upon  me {eVtowrafft?).  VA.,agatfur- 
ing  togetlier  against.  Both  here  and  Acta  xxiv.  12,  tlie  best 
texts  read  itrltrraaK  onset.  Kev.,  that  which  j)resaeth  upon  me. 
"  The  crowd  of  cares." 

Farrar  remarks  upon  vv.  23-28,  that  it  is  "  the  most  marvel- 
lous record  ever  written  of  any  biography ;  a  fragment  beside 
which  the  most  imperilled  lives  of  the  most  suffering  saints 
shrink  into  insignificance,  and  which  shows  UB  how  fractional 
at  the  best  is  our  knowledge  of  the  details  of  St.  Panl's  life." 
Eleven  of  the  occnrrences  mentioned  here  are  not  alluded  to  in 
Acts. 

29.  Burn.  With  sorrow  over  the  stumbling  or  with  indig- 
nation over  the  cause.  This  and  1  Cor.  vii.  9  are  the  only  in- 
stances in  whicli  the  word  is  used  figuratively. 

30.  The  things  which  concern  mine  infirmities  (ri  T79 
aaSeveiaii  imO).  lie  will  he  attested  as  a  true  apostle  by  the 
sufferings  which  show  his  weakness,  which  make  him  contemp- 
tible in  his  adversaries'  eyes,  and  not  by  the  strength  of  which 
his  opponents  boast. 

Blessed,  etc.     See  on  Kom.  ix.  5,  and  compare  Rom. 


Cb.  XII.]      THB  SBOOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OORINTHIANa  353 

32.  The  governor  {i^vapxf^)'  Only  here  in  the  New  Test- 
ament.   A  governor  mling  in  the  name  of  a  king :  SLj)refect. 

Aretas.  Or  Haretky  the  father-in-law  of  Herod  Antipas. 
His  capital  was  the  rock-city  of  Petra,  the  metropolis  of  Arabia 
Petraea.  Herod's  unfaithfulness  to  his  daughter  brought  on  a 
quarrel,  in  which  Herod's  army  was  defeated,  to  the  great  de- 
light of  the  Jews.  The  further  prosecution  of  the  war  by  Ro- 
man troops  was  arrested  by  the  death  of  Tiberius,  and  it  is 
supposed  that  Caligula  assigned  Damascus  as  a  free  gift  to 
Aretas. 

Kept  with  a  garrison  {i<^f)ovp€i).  Imperfect  tense,  was 
maintaining  a  constat  watch.  Compare  Acts  ix.  24 :  They 
watched  the  gates  day  and  night. 

To  apprehend  {iruurai).    See  on  Acts  iii.  7. 

33.  Through  a  window  (Si^  JhipiSo^).  Only  here  and  Acts 
XX.  9.  Diminutive  of  Svpa  a  door.  The  same  expression  is 
used  in  Sept.,  Josh.  ii.  15,  of  the  escape  of  the  spies  from 
Jericho,  and  1  Sam.  xix.  12,  of  David's  escape  from  Saul  by 
the  aid  of  Michal. 

Basket  {aafrydinj).  Lit,  braided  work;  a  rope-basket  or 
hamper.  Luke,  in  his  narrative  of  the  incident,  uses  tnrvpkt 
for  which  see  on  Matt  xiv.  20. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

1.  Revelations  i^imoicaKir^v^.    See  on  Apoc.  L  1. 

2.  I  knew  (olSa).     Rev.,  correctly,  I  know. 

Above  fourteen  years  ago  {irp6  ir&v  Beteareaadp^v).  Above, 
of  A.  Y.,  is  due  to  a  misunderstanding  of  the  Oreek  idiom. 
Lit.,  before  fourteen  years^  that  i^^  fourteen  years  ago^  as  Rev. 

Caught  up  {apTrarfhrra).     Compare  Dante : 

<'  Thou  knowest,  who  didst  Uft  me  with  thy  light" 

"Pmradiso,''!,  75. 
Vol.  m.— 83 


354 


WORD  STDDIEB  IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


[On.  2 


The  verb  suite  the  ewift,  reeistlesB,  impetuous  seizure  of  epirit- 
uul  ceetasj'.  See  on  Matt.  xi.  12 ;  and  compare  Acts  viii.  39 ;  1 
Thefis,  iv,  17;  Apoc.  xii,  5, 

Third  heaven.  It  is  quite  useless  to  attempt  to  explain  this 
espressioD  according  to  any  scheme  o£  celestial  gradation.  The 
coDception  of  seven  heaveus  was  familiar  to  the  Jews ;  bnt  ac- 
cording to  some  of  the  Rabbins  tliere  were  tioo  heavens — the 
visible  clouds  and  the  sky ;  in  which  ease  the  third  heaven 
would  be  the  invisible  region  bejond  the  sky.  Some  think 
that  Paul  describes  two  stages  of  his  raptare ;  the  first  to  the 
third  heaven,  from  which  he  was  borne,  as  if  from  a  halting- 
point,  up  into  Paradise. 

4.  Paradise,     See  on  Luke  xxiii.  43. 

Unspeakable  words  {appfjra  pi^fiaTo).  An  oxymoron, speak- 
ings which  may  iioi  be  spoken. 

1.  Abundance  {virep^dK^).  Rev.,  more  correctly,  <A«  «e- 
ce&ling  greatti^ss. 

Thorn  (irieoXo^).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  Fre- 
quent in  classical  Greek  in  the  sense  of  a  j>aU  or  stake.  It 
occurs  once  in  Euripides,  meaning  a  stump  ("Bacchae,"  983). 
It  is  a  stake  for  a  palisade,  or  for  impaling ;  a  surgical  instru- 
ment ;  the  point  of  a  fish-hook.  la  the  Septuagint  it  occurs 
three  times,  translated  thorn  in  Hos.  ii.  6,  where,  however,  it  is 
distinguished  from  aKa.vSai<i  thorns  ;  brier  in  Ezek.  xxviii.  24, 
and  prick  in  Num.  xxxiii.  55,  Nine  different  Hebrew  words 
are  rendered  by  thorny  for  which,  in  the  great  majority  of  cases, 
Septuagint  gives  aKovSa.  The  rendering  t/toni  for  trKoXtn^  has 
no  support.  The  figure  is  that  of  the  inipaling-stake.  Herod- 
otus, alluding  to  this  punishment,  uses  (IcaemcoXoTriJeo'  {i.,  128; 
iii.,  132).  In  the  ninth  book  of  his  history,  Lampon  says  to 
Pansanias:  "  When  Leonidas  was  slain  at  Thermopylae,  Xerxes 
and  Mardoniiis  beheaded  and  crucified  {avfOTavpattrav)  him. 
Do  thou  the  like  by  Mardonius,  ...  for  by  crucifying 
{avauTKo\o-rr[(Ta<i)  thou  wilt  avenge  Leonidas "  (ix.,  78).  The 
verb  seems,  therefore,  to  have  been  need  interchangeably  with 
crucify ;  and  clear  instances  of  this  occur  in  Fhilo  and  Liician. 


A 


Ch.  Xn.]      THB  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GOBINTHIAN&  355 

At  least  one  text  of  the  Septuagint  gives  ioHJuncoT^joiTrU^  in 
Esther  viL  10,  of  Haman's  being  hcmged.*  See  further,  on 
OaL  ii.  20.  The  explanations  of  the  peculiar  nature  of  this 
affliction  are  numerous.  Opinions  are  divided,  generally,  be- 
tween mental  or  spiritual  and  bodily  trials.  Under  the  former 
head  are  sensual  desires,  f aint-heartedness,  doubts,  temptations 
to  despair,  and  blasphemous  suggestions  from  the  devil.  Under 
the  latter,  persecution,  mean  personal  appearance,  headache, 
epilepsy,  earache,  stone,  ophthalmia.  It  was  probably  a  bodily 
malady,  in  the  flesh  /  but  its  nature  must  remain  a  matter  of 
conjecture.  Yery  plausible  reasons  are  given  in  favor  of  both 
epilepsy  and  ophthalmia.  Bishop  Lightfoot  inclines  to  the 
former,  and  Archdeacon  Farrar  thinks  that  it  was  almost  cert- 
ainly the  latter.f 

Messenger  of  Satan  (0776X09  Xarav),  The  torment  is  thus 
personified.  Messenger  is  the  word  commonly  rendered  a/ngel 
in  the  New  Testament,  though  sometimes  used  of  human  mes- 
sengers, as  Luke  vii.  24,  27 ;  ix.  52 ;  Jas.  ii.  25 ;  see  also  on 
the  amgds  of  the  churches,  Apoc.  i.  20.  Messenger  and  Satan 
are  not  to  be  taken  in  apposition — a  messenger  who  was  Satan 
— because  Satan  is  never  called  arfyeXo^  in  the  New  Testament 
Messenger  is  figurative,  in  the  sense  of  agent.  Satan  is  con- 
ceived in  the  New  Testament  as  the  originator  of  bodily  evil. 
Thus,  in  the  gospel  narrative,  demoniac  possession  is  often  ac- 
companied with  some  form  of  disease.  Compare  Luke  ziiL  16 ; 
Acts  X.  38,  and  see  on  1  Cor.  v.  5. 

BufFet  {/e6X4ut>ify).  Connect  with  messenger^  which  better 
suits  depart  /  not  with  thorny  which  would  be  a  confusion  of 
metaphor,  a  stake  huffeting.  For  the  verb,  meaning  to  strike 
with  the  fljsty  see  Matt.  xxvi.  67 ;  Mark  xiv.  65 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  20. 


*  Srovp^f  crro9%^  is  originallj  an  uprigJU  $take  or  pdU,  Herodotus  uses  it  of 
the  pUM  of  a  foundation,  and  Thuoydides  of  the  tUihf  or  paUtades  of  a  dock. 
^K^Aoif^  for  ffremp^^  occurs  in  Gelsus. 

fSee  Farrar's  "Paul,"  i.,  excursus  x.;  Stanley's  '* Gommentarj,"  p.  647 
sqq.;  Lightfoot,  *<  Commentary  on  Galatians."  additional  note  on  ch.  It.  14. 
Dr.  John  Brown,  in  **  Horae  Subeeciyae,"  presents  the  ophthalmic  theory  very 
attraetively. 


356  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Cu.  XIL 

Compare  Job  ii.  5,  7,  where  the  Septuagint  has  a^frai  touch,  and 
firatffe  smote. 

8.  For  this  thing  (trjrepTourou),  Rev.,  coTt^eiftitu/ tAie  tAiiu/. 
But  it  is  better  to  refer  this  to  ineasenger :  concerning  this  or 
■whom.    For,  of  A,  V.,  is  ambiguous. 

9.  He  said  {elpr)Kev).  Kev.,  correctly,  He  liaih  said.  Tlie 
force  of  the  perfect  tense  is  to  be  insisted  on.  It  shows  that  the 
affliction  was  stiil  chnging  to  Paul,  and  that  there  was  lying  in 
his  inind  when  he  wrote,  not  only  the  memory  of  the  incident, 
but  the  sense  of  the  still  abiding  power  and  value  of  Christ's 
grace;  so  that  because  the  Lord  hath  said  "my  grace,"  etc., 
Paul  can  tiow  Bay,  imder  the  continued  affliction,  wherefore  I 
take  pleasure,  etc.,  for  Christ's  sake  /  for  when  I  am  weak, 
then  am  /strong.  A  more  beautiful  use  of  the  perfect  it  wonid 
be  dtfflcult  to  find  In  the  Jsew  Testament, 

My  strength.  The  best  texts  omit  nti/,  thus  turning  the 
answer  into  a  general  proposition :  stretujth  is  perfected  in 
weakness  ;  but  besides  the  preeminent  frigidity  of  replying  to 
a  passionate  appeal  with  an  aphorism,  the  reference  to  the 
special  power  of  Christ  is  clear  from  the  frorda  power  of  Christ, 
which  almost  immediately  follow.  Compare  1  Cor.  ii.  3,  4;  2 
Cor,  iv,  7;  Ileb.  xi.  3i.     Rev,,  rightly,  retains  my  italicized. 

May  rest  upon  {eVurKTjiwjj).  Only  here  in  the  New  Test- 
ament. The  simple  verb  amivoa  to  dwell  in  a  tent  is  used  by 
John,  especially  in  the  Apocalypse.  See  on  John  i.  14,  The 
compound  verb  here  means  to  Jix  a  tent  or  a  habitation  npmi  ; 
and  the  figure  is  that  of  Christ  abiding  upon  him  as  a  tent 
spread  over  him,  during  his  temporary  stay  on  earth. 
' '  For  Christ's  sake.  This  may  be  taken  with  all  the  preced- 
ing details,  weahiesses,  etc.,  endured  for  Christ's  sake,  or  with 
/  take  pleasure,  assigning  the  specific  motive  of  his  rejoicing : 
T  take  pleasure  for  Chrisfs  sake. 

11.  I  am  become  a  fool  in  glorying.  Ironical.  By  the 
record  I  have  presented  I  stand  coTivicted  of  being  foolish. 

I  ought  to  have  been  commended  of  you.  You  ought  to 
have  saved  me  the  neeeseity  of  recounting  my  sufferings,  and 


A 


Ch.  XIL]     THB  BBGOND  EPI8TLB  TO  THB  CORINTHIANS.  357 

thus  commending  myself  as  not  inferior  to  those  preeminent 
apostles  (ch.  xi.  5). 

12.  Signs  {ofiiuid).  See  on  Matt  xxiv.  24.  Stanley  ob- 
serves that  the  passage  is  remarkable  as  containing  (what  is 
rare  in  the  history  of  miracles)  a  direct  claim  to  miraculous 
powers  by  the  person  to  whom  they  were  ascribed.  Compare 
1  Cor.  ii.  4 ;  Kom.  xv.  19. 

Were  wrought  (Kar^ipyda'Sfji),  The  testimony  was  decisive. 
They  were  fully  wrought  out. 

13.  Except  that  I  was  not  a  burden.  Alluding  to  the 
possible  objection  that  his  refusal  to  receive  pay  was  a  sign 
either  of  his  want  of  power  to  exact  it,  or  of  his  want  of  affec- 
tion for  them  (ch.  xi.  7). 

Forgive,  etc.    Ironical. 

15.  Be  spent  {iKSaTrainil^cofjuu).  Only  here  in  the  New 
Testament.  To  spend  tUterly.  Later  Oreek  writers  use  the 
simple  verb  Barravdfo  to  expendj  of  the  consumption  of  life. 

16.  With  guile.  Alluding  to  a  charge  that  he  availed  him- 
self of  the  collection  for  the  poor  to  secure  money  for  himself, 
lie  uses  his  adversaries'  words. 

20.  Strifes  {ipiSeiai).  Rev.,  better,  factions.  See  on  Jas. 
iii.  14. 

Wraths  {SvfioC).  For  the  plural,  compare  deaths^  ch.  xi.  33 ; 
drunkennesses^  Gal.  v.  21 ;  hloodsj  John  i.  13  (see  note) ;  the  wiU- 
ings  of  the  flesh,  Eph.  ii.  3 ;  mercies^  Philip.  iL  1.  Excitements 
or  outbursts  of  wrath. 

Whisperings  {^^tl^purfioC).  Psithurismoi^  the  Bound  adtipted 
to  the  sense.  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament  Secret  slan- 
ders. In  Sept.,  Eccl.  x.  11,  it  is  used  of  the  murmuring  of  a 
snake-charmer.*     ViSvpumj^  whisperer y  occurs  Bom.  i.  29. 

Svi eWings  {<f>viTia>a'€K).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament 
Conceited  inflation.  For  the  kindred  verb  ^wridn  to  puff  up^ 
see  on  1  Cor.  iv.  6. 

*  See  the  interesting  note  of  Ginibnxg,  **  Goheleth,"  on  thii 


WORD  STUDIES   IN   THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.        [Co.  XIU. 


Tumults  {aKaraa^aataC).     See  on  ch.  vi.  5. 

21.  Among  you  {irpo<t  u/ia;).     Better,  as  Rev.,  hefore. 


In 


my  relutiou  to  you. 

Shalt  bewail  (xei'3i)<r<u).  Lament  with  a  true  pastor's  sor- 
row over  the  eio. 

Many  (ttoXXous).     With  special  reference  to  the  unchaste. 

Sinned^already  {trporifiapniicoTrov).  llev.,  heretofon.  Only 
here  and  cli.  xiii.  a.  Tlie  perfect  tense  denotes  the  continnance 
of  the  sin.  Heretofore  probably  refers  to  the  time  before  hi6 
second  visit. 

Have  not  repented  (/i^  /leraiwio-iiin-Mf).  The  only  occur- 
pence  of  the  verb  in  Paul's  writings.  Merdvota  repentance, 
occurs  only  three  times:  Rom.  ii.  4;  2  Cor.  vii.  9,  10. 

Of  the  uncleanness  (eVl  t^  ajca^pcia).  Connect  with  he- 
wail,  Tiot  with  rfjirrnt.  There  are  no  examples  in  the  New 
Testament  of  the  phrase  fierauoetv  hrl  to  repent  over,  thoogh 
such  occur  in  the  Septuagint. 

Lasciviousness  {aael^rfelif).     See  on  Mark  v 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

1.  The  third  time.  The  great  mass  of  modem  expositors 
hold  that  Paul  made  three  visits  to  Corinth,  of  the  second  of 
which  there  is  no  record.* 

I  am  coming.     The  third  visit  which  I  am  about  to  pay. 

Alford  observes  that  had  not  chronological  theories  intervened, 
no  one  would  ever  have  thought  of  any  other  rendering.  Those 
who  deny  the  second  visit  explain :  this  -is  the  third  time  that  I 
have  bean  itUending  to  come. 


'FuTU  Mid  Letrin,  wlUi  SUale;  Mid  nnmptre,  are  ezoeptloiu.  8m 
Lavin'i  elsbonts  note  on  ch.  xii.  14  ;  Meyer,  "  Introduction  to  Second  Corin- 
thiui;"  Qodet,  "Introduction  tn  FlmCorinthUnti  " 


A 


Ch.  XIIL]   the  BBGOND  BPISTLE  to  THB  OOBINTHIAN&  359 

2.  I  told  you  before  and  foretell  you  {irpoeipi^iea  koX  irpo- 
'Kjer^oi}).  He  v.,  Ilw/oe  said  h^arehand,  and  I  do  say  beforehand. 
The  renderings  of  the  A.  Y.  and  Bev.  should  be  carefully  com- 
pared. The  difference  turns  mainly  on  the  denial  or  assumption 
of  the  second  visit ;  the  A.  Y.  representing  the  former,  and 
the  Bev.  the  latter.  /  have  said  beforehand  thus  refers  to  the 
second  visit ;  /  do  say  beforehand^  to  his  present  condition  of 
absence. 

As  if  I  were  present,  the  second  time  (ck  irafmv  to  Seu- 
repov).  Rev.,  as  when  I  was  present  the  second  time  /  thus 
making  a  distinct  historical  reference  to  the  second  visit  Note 
the  comma  siter present  in  A.  Y.  According  to  this,  the  second 
time  is  connected  with  irpoXiym,  I  say  beforehand  the  second 
tim£.  Another  explanation,  however,  on  the  assumption  of 
only  two  visits  is,  as  if  I  were  jpresent  this  next  trnie. 

And  being  absent  now  I  write  to  them  which  heretofore, 
etc  (ileal  airii^v  vvv  ypd(fHia!).  I  write  must  be  omitted ;  now  con- 
nected with  being  absent;  and  to  them  which  connected  with  / 
say  beforehand.  Bender,  so  now  being  absent  (I  say  before- 
hand) to  them,  whichj  etc. 

3.  A  proof  of  Christ  speaking  in  me  {SofUfjLifv  rov  iv  ifiol 
XaXoi}in-o9  Xpurrov).  Lit.,  of  the  Christ  that  speaks  in  me.  An 
experimental  proof  of  what  kind  of  a  being  the  Christ  who 
speaks  in  me  is. 

In  you  {iv  vfuv).  Better,  amxmg  you.  He  is  speaking,  not 
of  Christ  as  He  dwells  in  them,  but  as  He  works  with  reference 
to  them  {eh)  and  among  their  number,  inflicting  punishment  for 
their  sin. 

Through  (^f).  Lit.,  out  of  marking  ilie  source  of  both  death 
and  life. 

Are  weak  in  Him.  The  parallel  with  ver.  3  must  be  care- 
fully noted.  Christ  will  prove  Himself  not  weak,  but  mighty 
among  you.  He  was  crucified  out  of  weakness,  but  He  is  mighty 
out  of  the  power  of  God.  A  similar  weakness  and  power  will 
appear  in  our  case.     We  are  weak  in  Him,^  in  virtue  of  our 


360  WORD  STCJDIKS  IN  THG  SEW  TESTAMENT.      [Cb.  XIIL 

fellowsliip  with  Him.  Like  Him  we  endure  the  contradiction 
of  siniierg,  and  Eiiffer  fruni  the  viuleuce  of  men :  in  fenowship 
with  Ills  risen  life  we  shall  be  partakers  of  the  power  of  God 
wiiicli  raised  Him  from  the  dead,  and  shall  exhibit  this  life  of 
power  toward  you  in  judging  and  pnnisliing  yoii. 

Toward  you.     Construe  with  we  shall  live. 

5,  Examine  yourselves  {iavToiK  ireipa^ere).  Thuraelves  is 
emphatic.  Instead  of  putting  Christ  to  the  test,  lest  yourselves. 
Itev.,  try,  is  better  than  examine,  lamination  does  not  ne- 
cessarily imply  a  practical  te«i.  It  may  be  merely  from  cnri- 
osity.  Trial  implies  a  definite  intent  to  ascertain  their  spirit- 
nftl  condition. 

The  faith.  See  on  Acts  vi.  7.  In  a  believing  attitude  to- 
ward Clirist. 

Prove  (BoKifid^tre).     As  tlie  result  of  trying. 

Or  know  ye  not,  etc  Assuming  that  you  thus  prove  your- 
selves, does  not  this  test  show  you  that  Christ  ia  in  yon  as  the 
result  of  yonr  faith  in  him  t 

Reprobates  {a&OK^iioi).  An  unfortunate  translation.  A 
reprobate  is  one  abandoned  to  perdition.  The  word  is  kindred 
to  the  verh^T-ow:  (SojcywifeTe),  and  means  disapproved  on  trial. 
See  on  Rom.  i.  28. 

7.  Not  that  we  should  appear  approved,  etc  The  sense 
of  the  verse  is  this  :  AVe  pray  God  that  yvii  do  no  evil,  not  in 
order  that  your  good  conduct  may  attest  the  excellence  of  our 
teaching  and  example,  so  that  we  shall  be  approved ;  but  in 
order  that  you  may  do  what  is  good,  thus  rendering  it  impos- 
sible for  us  to  prove  our  apostolic  authority  by  administeriug 
discipline.  In  that  case  we  shall  ho  as  men  unapproved.  Stan- 
ley remarks  that,  in  tlie  light  of  this  verac,  Paul  might  have 
added  to  ch,  vi,  9,  as  withoxit  proof  o-nd  yet  as  approved. 

S,  For  we  can  do  nothing  against  the  truth.  Yonr  well- 
doing 18  what  wo  truly  aim  at.  For,  if  wo  had  any  other  aim, 
with  a  view  to  approving  ourselves,  we  should  fail,  because  we 
should  be  going  in  the  face  of  the  truth — the  Gospel  ;  and 


A 


Ch.  Xm.]    THB  SECOND  KPISTLB  TO  THE  CORINTHIAN&  361 

agaiust  tliat  we  are  powerless.     In  that  case  we  shonid  be  un* 
approved  before  God. 

9.  We  are  weak.  Practically  the  same  as  unapp7*oved. 
When  your  good  conduct  deprives  us  of  the  power  of  adminis- 
tering discipline,  we  are  weak. 

Perfection  (KardpTurai).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 
See  on  beperfecty  ver.  11.     ^Rqy,^  perfecting, 

10.  Use  sharpness  (diroTOfJM^  ^^f^o-co/ioi).  Kev.,  more  lit- 
erally and  correctly,  deal  sharplt/y  thus  giving  the  force  of  the 
adverb.  For  sh(irph/  see  on  the  kindred  am-orofila  severiiyy 
Rom.  xi.  22. 

11.  Finally  {Xoiwov).  Lit.,  as  for  t/ie  rest  Sometimes  rend* 
ered  nowy  as  Matt.  xxvi.  45.  "  Sleep  on  nowy^  for  tlie  time 
that  remains.  Besides,  as  1  Cor.  i.  16.  It  remainethj  1  Cor. 
vii.  29.  Senceforthj  2  Tim.  iv.  8 ;  fleb.  x.  13.  Often  as  here, 
jinaUy.  In  every  case  the  idea  of  something  left  over  is  at 
the  bottom  of  the  translation. 

Farewell  {xa^pere).  In  the  classics  used  both  at  meeting 
and  at  parting.  Lit.,  hail/  See  on  Jas.  i.  1.  Kev.,  in  mar- 
gin, has  rejoice.  It  is  somewhat  doubtful  whether  it  ever  has 
the  meaning  farewell  in  the  New  Testament*  Edersheim 
says  that,  on  Sabbaths,  when  the  outgoing  course  of  priests 
left  the  temple,  they  parted  from  each  other  with  a  farewell, 
reminding  us  of  this  to  the  Corinthians :  ^^  He  that  has  caused 
His  name  to  dwell  in  this  liouse  cause  love,  brotherhood, 
peace,  and  friendship  to  dwell  among  you  "  ("  The  Temple," 
p.  117). 

Be  perfect  {xaTapTi^eaSe).  Eev.,  he  perfected.  See  on 
Luke  vi.  40 ;  1  Pet  v.  10.  Paul  speaks  both  of  individual 
perfection  and  of  the  perfection  of  the  Church  through  the 


*  Lightfoot  on  PhiUp.  iii.  1,  renders  fareweU^  bat  sajs  that  the  word  con- 
tains an  exhortation  to  rejoice.  On  Philip,  iv.  4  he  again  combines  the  two 
meanings,  and  sajs,  *Mt  is  neither /ofMOflB  alone  nor  rejoice  alone/'  Thajer, 
in  his  lexicon,  ignorw  far etoett. 


11 

r 


363  WORD  BTDDIKS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      (Cb.  XIIL 

right  adjaBtmeot  of  all  its  membere  in  Christ.    Compare  1  Cor. 
i.  10,     The  verb  is  kindred  v/ith  j>e}^ecti7ig,  ver.  9. 

12.  Kiss.  In  1  Pet.  i.  14,  called  t/i^  kiss  of  chanty.  The 
practice  was  maintained  chiefly  at  the  celebration  of  the  Eucha- 
rist. In  the  "Apostolic  ConBtitutiona " *  it  is  enjoined  that,  be- 
fore the  comnmnion,  the  cJergj  kiss  the  bishop,  the  layniea 
amongst  each  other,  and  bo  the  women.  This  latter  injunction 
grew  oat  of  the  reproach  of  looseness  of  mannera  circulated  by  the 
heathen  against  the  Christians.  On  Good  Friday  it  was  omitted 
in  commemoration  of  -Tudaa'  kiss.  In  the  West  the  practice 
survives  among  the  Glasaites  or  Sandemanians.  In  the  Latin 
Church,  after  the  end  of  the  thirteenth  century,  there  was  sub- 
Btituted  for  it  a  piece  of  the  altar  furniture  called  a  Pax  (jieace), 
which  was  given  to  the  deacon  with  the  words  Peace  to  tJiee  amd 
to  the  Church.  In  the  East  it  is  continued  in  the  Coptic  and 
Russian  Chnrches. 

14.  The  grace,  etc.  The  most  complete  benediction  of  the 
Pauline  epistles.  In  most  of  the  epistles  the  introductory 
benedictions  are  confined  to  grace  and  jieace.  In  the  pastoral 
epistles  merci/  is  added.     In  the  closing  benedictions  uniformly 


*  A  ooUectlon  of  eoolesiutioal  pretoiipta  in  eight  books,  in  which  three  In- 
dspendent  workB  are  oombined.  Thej  oontain  doctriiiAl,  litoi^oal,  and  moral 
iiutrnctioiia.  The  fint  six  books  belong  to  the  second  centurj.  The  seventh 
is  an  enlargement  of  the  "Teaching  of  the  Twelve  Apostles,"  adapted  to  the 
Eastern  Church  in  the  flrst  h»lf  of  the  fourth  oenturj  (see  SchafTs  "Teaching 
of  the  Twelve  Apostles,"  Duo.  rii).  The  ConstitiitionB  were  never  recogniied 
hj  the  Western  Church,  and  opinion  in  the  Euteni  Cbuich  wai  divided  as  to 
their  worth  and  diguitj. 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  EPHESIANS. 


CHAPTER  I. 


^^  Thb  first  chapter  has,  bo  to  speak,  a  liturgical,  psalmodio 
character,  being,  as  it  were,  a  glowing  song  in  praise  of  the 
transcendent  riches  of  the  grace  of  Ood  in  Christ,  and  the  glory 
of  the  Christian  calling  "  (Schaff). 

1.  By  the  will  of  God.  As  frequently  in  the  introdnctions 
of  the  epistles,  to  emphasuse  his  divine  appointment.  In  Bom. 
i«  1 ;  1  Cor.  i.  1,  called  is  added. 

To  the  saints.    See  on  Bom.  i.  7 ;  Col.  i  2 ;  Philip,  i.  1. 

At  Ephesus.  There  is  mnch  discossion  as  to  the  genuine- 
ness of  these  words.  They  are  bracketed  by  both  Westcott  and 
Hort,  and  Tischendorf.*  On  their  omission  or  retention  turns 
the  question  whether  the  epistle  was  addressed  to  the  church 
at  Ephesus,  or  was  a  circular  epistle,  addressed  to  Ephesus 
along  with  several  other  churches.  For  Ephe^uB^  see  on  Apoc. 
11.  1. 

The  faithful.  Not  faithful  in  the  sense  of  fidelity  and  per- 
severance, but  heUevinffy  as  John  xx.  27 ;  Acts  x.  45.  It  is  to 
be  included  with  the  saints  under  the  one  article. 

2.  Grace.  One  of  the  leading  words  of  the  epistlcf  It  is 
used  thirteen  times. 

3.  Blessed  {eiXoytirosi).  Placed  first  in  the  clause  for  em- 
phasis, as  always  in  the  corresponding  Hebrew  in  the  Old  Test- 

*  See  the  disonssioxi  in  Westoott  and  Hort*8  Greek  TeeUment,  pftrt  2. 
f  See  Farrar*8  «  Panl,''  ii.,  491. 


364  WOBD  STUDIES   IN   THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  t 

anient.  The  verb  is  coiniuoiily  omitted — bleaaed  tli£  God.  In 
the  New  Testament  used  of  God  only.  Tlie  perfect  participie 
of  the  verb,  euXorfqfievo^  hl^aed,  ie  uaed  of  men.  See  on  1  Pel. 
1.  3.  The  word  differs  from  that  used  in  the  Ueatitndes,  fuucdp- 
to^,  which  denotes  character,  while  this  word  denotes  repute. 
Lit.,  well-apoken  of. 

God  and  Father  of  our  Lord,  etc.  Some  object  to  this 
renJering  on  the  ground  that  the  phrase  God  of  Christ  is  \ax- 
uBiifll,  occurring  nowhere  in  Paul,  except  ver.  17  of  tliis  chapter. 
Siieh  render,  Go<l  who  is  also  the  Fatlier,  etc.  But  Christ  of 
God  is  found  Matt,  xxvii.  46 ;  and  my  God,  John  xx.  17 ;  Apoc. 
iii.  12.  Compare,  also,  1  Cor.  iii.  23;  and  the  phrase  is  un- 
doubted in  ver.  17. 

Hath  blessed  (c^Xo7ij(ra?).     Kindred  with  ev\trp]To<;  blessed. 

Spiritual  {irveviMntic^).  Anotlier  leading  word.  Spirit  and 
epiriiual  occur  thirteen  times.  Paul  emphasizes  in  this  epistle 
the  work  of  the  divine  Spirit  upon  the  human  spirit.  Not 
apiritiial  as  distinguished  from  bodily,  but  proceeding  from  the 
Holy  Spirit.  Note  the  collocation  of  the  words,  blessed,  blessed, 
Messing. 

In  the  heavenly  places  {ev  toii  iiravpavloK).  Anotiier  key- 
word; one  of  the  dominant  thoughts  of  the  epistle  being  the 
woik  of  the  ascended  Christ.  Places  is  supplied,  the  Gi-eek 
meaning  in  the  /leavenllea.  Some  prefer  to  supply  things,  &b 
more  definitely  characterizing  spiritual  blessiiig.  But  in  the  four 
other  passages  where  the  phrase  occurs,  i.  20 ;  ii.  6 ;  iii.  10 ;  vi. 
12,  the  sense  is  local,  and  ivovpdvio<t  heavenly,  is  local  through- 
out Paul's  epistles.  The  meaning  is  that  the  spiritual  blessings 
of  God  are  found  in  heaven  and  are  brought  thence  to  us. 
Compare  Philip,  iii.  20. 

4.  Even  as  {Ko^axi).  Explaining  blessed  us,  in  ver.  3.  Bis 
blessing  is  in  conformity  with  the  fact  that  lie  chose. 

Chose  (^feXefaTo).     Middle  voice,/tw  Himsdf 

In  Him.  As  the  head  and  representative  of  onr  spiritual 
humanity.    Compare  1  Cor.  xv.  32.   Divine  election  is  in  Christ 


ch.  l;  thb  bpistlb  to  the  bphbsians.  365 

the  Bedeemer.     The  crown  of  divine  sovereignty  is  redemp- 
tion.    God  rules  the  world  to  save  it 

Holy  and  without  blame  (07/01/9  /cal  ifimfiovsi).  The  posi- 
tive and  negative  aspects  of  christian  life.  See  on  Col.  i.  22. 
Rev.,  without  blemish.  The  reference  is  to  moral  rather  than 
than  to  forensic  righteousness.     Compare  1  Thess.  iv.  7. 

In  love.  Join  -mth  foreordained^  ver.  5.  Hwoi/ag  in  love 
foreordained. 

5.  Having  predestinated  {irpoopUra^).  'Rev. y foreordained. 
From  irpS  before^  opl^to  to  defimSy  the  latter  word  being  from 
opo^  a  boundary.     Hence  to  define  or  determine  beforeha/nd. 

Adoption  {vloSealaii).  See  on  Rom.  viiL  15.  Never  used 
of  Christ. 

Good  pleasure  {evBoKlav).  Not  strictly  in  the  sense  of 
kindly  or  friendly  feeling  ^  as  Luke  ii.  14 ;  Philip,  i.  15,  but  be- 
coMse  ii,  pleased  Him^  see  Luke  x.  21 ;  Matt.  xi.  26.  The  other 
sense,  however,  is  included  and  implied,  and  is  expressed  by  in 
love. 

6.  To  the  praise  of  the  glory  of  His  grace.  The  ultimate 
aim  oi foreordained.  Glory  is  an  attribute  of  grace:  that  in 
which  grace  grandly  and  resplendently  displays  itself.  Praise 
is  called  forth  from  the  children  of  God  by  this  divine  glory 
which  thus  appears  in  grace.  The  gra^ce  is  not  merely ybwor, 
gifty  but  it  reveals  also  the  divine  character.  In  praising  God 
for  what  He  does,  we  learn  to  praise  Him  for  what  He  is. 
Glory  is  another  of  the  ruling  words  of  the  epistle,  falling  into 
the  same  category  with  riches  and  fvlness.  The  apostle  is 
thrilled  with  a  sense  of  the  plenitude  and  splendor  of  the  mys- 
tery of  redemption. 

Wherein  He  hath  made  us  accepted  {h  y  ixaplrfaaev 
rjfias:).  The  correct  reading  is  ^9  which,  referring  to  grace. 
The  meaning  is  not  endued  us  with  grace^  nor  made  us  worthy 
oflovcy  but,  as  Rev.,  gra>ce — which  he  freely  bestowed.  Grace 
is  an  a^  of  God,  not  a  state  into  which  He  brings  us. 


WOHD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TKSTAMENT. 


[Ch. 


The  beloved.  Chriet.  Beloved  par  excellence.  Compnre 
t/ie  Son  of  IIU  love.  Col.  i.  13 ;  also  Matt.  iii.  17 ;  xvii.  5. 

7.  We  have.  Or  are  homing,  theyreeli/  bestowed  (ver.  0) 
ie  thus  illuBtrated  hy  experience.  The  divine  purpose  is  being 
accomplished  in  the  lives  of  believers. 

Redemption  (r^v  airoXurpaxriv).  See  on  Horn.  iii.  24.  Note 
the  article:  «!;/•  redemption. 

Through  His  blood.  Further  defining  and  explaining  in 
whom. 

Forgiveness  (o^o-w).  See  on  Luke  iii.  3 ;  Jas.  v.  15 ;  Kom, 
iii,  25.     Forgiveness  specifies  the  peculiar  quality  of  redemp- 


Sins    {irapoftrraifidTaiV).       Itev, 
Matt.  vi.  14. 


better,  irespasaee.     See  on 


Riches.     See  on  glory,  ver.  6,  and  Kom.  ii.  4. 

S.  Wherein  He  hath  abounded  (^!  eireplavewrev).  Bev., 
correctly,  which  He  made  to  abound.  The  verb  is  used  both 
transitively  and  intransitively  in  the  New  Testament.  The 
transitive  use  belongs  mainly  to  later  Greek.  Compare,  for 
the  transitive  eense,  Matt.  xiii.  12;  2  Cor.  iv.  15. 

In  all  wisdom  and  prudence  {ev  tratrQ  <ro<j>lq,  xal  ^povqaei). 
For  wisdom,  see  on  Horn.  xi.  33.  Y  or  prudence,  on  Luke  i.  17. 
The  latter  is  an  attribute  or  result  of  wisdom,  concerned  with 
its  practical  applications.  Both  words  refer  here  to  men,  not 
to  God :  the  wisdom  and  prudence  with  which  He  ahiindantly 
endows  His  followers.  Compare  Col.  i.  9.  AU  wisdom  ia, 
properly,  every  kUid  of  wisdom. 

9.  Having  made  known.  The  participle  is  explanatory  of 
which  lie  made  to  abound,  etc. :  in  that  He  made  known. 

The  mystery  of  His  will.  For  mystery,  see  on  Rom.  xi. 
25 ;  Col.  i.  26.  Another  key-word  of  this  epistle.  God's  grace 
as  manifested  in  redemption  is  a  mystery  in  virtue  of  its  riches 
and  depth — as  the  expression  of  God's  very  nature.     The  mys- 


Ll 


Ch.  L]  the  epistlb  to  thb  bphbsians.  367 

tery  of  the  redemption  in  Christ,  belonging  to  the  eternal  plan 
of  God,  conid  be  known  to  men  only  through  revelation — 
making  Jhnaum.  Of  His  wHl ;  pertaining  to  His  will.  Com* 
pare  ch.  iii.  9. 

Purposed  {irpoi^ero).     Only  here,  Bom.  i.  13;  iii.  25  (note). 

In  Himself  (^ovr^).  The  best  texts  read  avr^in  Sim; 
but  the  reference  is  clearly  to  God,  not  to  Christ,  who  is  ex- 
pressly mentioned  in  the  next  verse. 

10.  That  in  the  dispensation,  etc.  (ew  oueovofjblcuf).  The 
A.  y.  is  faulty  and  clumsy.  Ei^  does  not  mean  tn,  but  untOj 
with  a  view  to.  Dispensation  has  no  article.  The  clause  is 
directly  connected  with  the  preceding :  the  mystery  which  He 
purposed  in  Hvmsdf  unto  a  dispensation.  For  oucovofjbia  dis- 
pensationj  see  on  Col.  i.  25.  Here  and  ch.  iii.  2,  of  the  divine 
regulation^  disposition^  economy  of  things. 

Of  the  fulness  of  times  (rot)  irXrfpd^ro^  r&v  Mup&v).  For 
/ulnesSy  see  on  Rom.  xi.  12 ;  John  i.  16 ;  Col.  i.  19.  For  timeSj 
compare  Gal.  iv.  4,  "  fulness  of  the  time  (roO  XP^1^^)>  where  the 
time  before  Christ  is  conceived  as  a  unit.  Here  the  conception 
is  of  a  series  of  epochs.  The  fulness  of  the  tim>es  is  the  moment 
when  the  successive  ages  of  the  gospel  dispensation  are  com- 
pleted. The  meaning  of  the  whole  phrase,  then,  is :  a  dispen- 
sation  characterized  hy  the  fulness  of  the  tim£s:  set  forth  when 
the  times  are  full. 

To  sum  up  all  things  in  Christ  {avaK&fHiKauiaaaSai).  Ex- 
planatory of  the  preceding  phrase ;  showing  in  what  the  dis- 
pensation consists.  For  the  word,  see  on  Kom.  xiii.  9.  It  means 
to  bring  back  to  and  gather  round  the  main  point  {ice^oLKiUov)j 
not  the  head  (ice^Xri) ;  so  that,  in  itself,  it  does  not  indicate 
Christ  (the  Head)  as  the  central  point  of  regathering,  though 
He  is  so  in  fact.  That  is  expressed  by  the  following  in  ChrisL 
The  compounded  preposition  avd  signifies  again,  pointing  back 
to  a  previous  condition  where  no  separation  existed.  All  things. 
All  created  beings  and  things ;  not  limited  to  intelligent  beings. 
Compare  Rom.  viii.  21 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  28. 

The  connection  of  the  whole  is  as  follows :  Qod  made  known 


3fJS 


WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


the  myBtery  of  His  will,  the  plan  o£  redemption,  accordiug  to 
His  own  good  pleasure,  iii  order  to  bring  to  pass  au  eixtnoiiiy 
pecnltar  to  that  point  of  time  when  the  ages  of  the  cbrititiaii 
dispensation  should  be  fulfilled — an  economy  which  should  be 
characterized  by  the  regathering  of  all  things  round  one  point, 
Clirist. 

God  contemplates  a  '/vgathering,  a  restoration  to  that  former 
condition  when  all  things  were  iu  perfect  unity,  and  normally 
combined  to  serve  God's  ends.  Tliis  unity  was  broken  by  the 
introduction  of  sin.  Man's  fall  involved  the  unintelligent  crea- 
tion (Rom.  viii.  20).  The  mystery  of  God's  will  includes  the 
restoration  of  this  unity  in  and  through  Christ;  one  kingdom 
on  earth  and  in  heaven — a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth  in 
which  shall  dwell  righteouBness,  and  "the  crciition  sliall  be  de- 
livered from  the  bondage  of  corruption  into  the  liberty  of  the 
glory  of  the  children  of  Grid." 

11.  In  Him.     Resuming  emphatically :  in  Christ. 

We  have  obtained  an  inheritance  {(K\7}pa)^fi^).  Only 
here  in  the  Is'ew  Testament.  From  Kktipos  a  lot.  Hence  tJie 
verb  means  literally  to  iletennine,  cfiooee,  or  assign  by  Uit. 
From  the  custom  of  assigning  portions  of  land  by  lot,  xXrjpo^ 
acquires  the  me;ining  of  that  wkich  is  thus  asstgtieil;  the  posses- 
ion or  portion  o/lavd.  So  often  in  the  Old  Testament.  See 
Sept.,  ?Jum.  xxxiv,  li ;  Dent.  iii.  18  j  xv.  4,  etc.  An,  heir 
{ickT]pop6^UK)  18  originally  one  who  obtains  by  lot.  The  A.  V. 
here  makes  the  verb  active  where  it  slionld  be  passive.  The 
literal  sense  is  we  were  desigTUtted  as  a  heritJige.  So  Rev,,  cor- 
rectly, were  mad.e  a  heniage.  CoTnpare  Deut.  iv.  20,  ap«ople 
of  inheritance  (Xoov  eyic\r]pov).     Also  Deut.  xxxii.  8,  9. 

12.  That  we  should  be.  Connect  with  we  were  made  a 
heritage. 

Who  first  trusted  (tow  trpfniKtriKOTat).  In  apposition  with 
we  (should  be).  So  Rev.,  we  who  had,  etc.,  trusted,  more  prop- 
erly hoped,-  and^Vs^  irws^tffif  is  aiuhigiious.  We  refers  to  Jew- 
ish Christians,  and  the  verb  describes  their  messianic  hope 
before  (vpo)  the  advent  nf  rhrist.     Hence  Rev,,  correctly,  wa 


ch.  L]  the  epistlb  to  the  bphesians.  369 

wlu)  had  (have)  "before  hoped.  In  Christ  should  be  ^^  in  ^ 
Christ,"  as  the  subject  of  messianic  expectation,  and  not  as 
JesuSj  for  whom  Christ  had  passed  into  a  projier  name.  It  is 
equivalent  to  in  the  Messiah     See  on  Matt.  i.  1. 

13.  Ye  also  trusted.  Gentile  Christians.  Trusted^  which 
is  not  in  the  Greek,  is  unnecessary.  The  pronoun  ye  is  nomi- 
native to  were  sealed. 

In  whom.  Resuming  the  in  whom,  at  the  beginning  of  the 
verse,  and  repeated  on  account  of  the  length  of  the  clause. 

Ye  were  sealed  {ia^pa^laSfire).  See  on  John  iii.  33; 
Apoc.  xxii.  10.  Sealed  with  the  assurance  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Eom.  viii.  16 ;  2  Cor.  i.  22 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  19. 

Spirit  of  promise.  Strictly,  the  promise.  Denoting  the 
promise  as  characteristic  of  the  Holy  Spirit :  the  Spirit  which 
was  announced  by  promise.  See  Acts  ii.  16  sqq. ;  Joel  ii.  28  ; 
Zech.  xii.  10 ;  Isa.  zxxiL  15 ;  zliv.  3 ;  John  viL  39 ;  Acts  i.  4- 
8 ;  Gal.  iii.  14. 

14.  Earnest.    See  on  2  Cor.  i  22. 

Unto  the  redemption,  etc.     Construe  with  ye  were  sealed. 

Of  the  purchased  possession  (^nfurepimoir^ewi).  See  on 
peculiar^  1  Pet.  ii.  9.  The  word  originally  means  a  making  to 
remain  over  and  above  /  hence  preservation  /  preservation  for 
one^s  self;  acquisition ;  the  thing  acquiredj  or  a  possession. 
Used  here  collectively  for  the  people  possessed^  as  the  oircumois' 
ion  for  those  circumdsedj  Philip.  iiL  3 ;  the  election  for  those 
chosen^  Bom.  xi.  7.  Hev.,  Oods  own  possession,  Gods  own 
being  inserted  for  the  sake  of  clearness.  Compare  Isa.  xliiL 
21 ;  Acts  XX.  28  ;  Tit.  ii.  14. 

Unto  the  praise  of  His  glory.  Construe  with  ye  were 
sealed:  Ye  were  sealed  unto  the  redemption^  etc ;  setting  forth 
God^s  purpose  as  it  contemplates  man.  Ye  were  sealed  unto 
the  praise  of  His  glory  /  God's  purpose  as  it  respects  Himself. 

15.  Your  faith  (t^v  #ca5*  v/ifi?  irianv).  The  Greek  phrase 
is  nowhere  else  used  by  Paul.     Lit.,  as  Rev.,  the  faith  which  is 

Vol.  in.— 24 


370 


WORD  BTUDIBS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT,  [Ch.  L 


among  you.  Expositors  endeavor  to  make  a  distinction  between 
this  and  Paul's  common  phrase  f)  Trltrrt^  iifi&v  yourfaith^  but 
they  differ  widely,  and  the  distinction  is  at  best  doubtful. 

Love.    Omit. 

Unto  all  the  saints  (t^v  «V  irovra?  tow  07/01;^).  Lit.,  tlwA 
which  is  toward  all,  etc.  Love  being  omitted,  this  refers  to 
faith :  faith  wliich  displays  its  worli  and  fruits  toward  fellow- 
Christians.  See  on  PhUem.  5,  6.  Compare  work  offait!i.  1 
These,  i.  3.  Though  love  is  not  mentioned,  yet  faith  works  by 
love.     Gal.  v.  6. 

16.  Making  mention,  etc.  As  I  make  mention.  The 
same  expression  occurs  Rom.  i.  9 ;  Philip,  i.  4 ;  Philem,  4. 

17.  God  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Compare  John  xx. 
17;  Matt,  xxvii.  46,  and  see  on  ver,  3. 

Father  of  glory  (0  TraTrtp  Ttjv  So^t).  The  Father  to  whom 
the  glory  belongs.  Note  the  article,  the  glory,  preeminently. 
Compare  Acts  vii.  2 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  8.  See  Ps.  xviii,  3,  "  who  is 
worthy  to  be  praised ; "  where  the  Hebrew  is  is  praised.  The 
exact  phrase  has  no  parallel  10  Scripture. 

The  Spirit  of  wisdom  and  revelation.  Sjnrit  has  not  tlie 
article,  but  the  reference  is  to  the  Holy  Spirit.  Compare  Matt, 
xii.  28;  Luke  i.  15,  35,  41;  Rom.  i.  4;  1  Pet.  i.  2.  Wisdom 
and  revelation  are  special  forms  of  the  Spirit's  operation.  He 
imparts  general  illuminaiion  (wisdom)  and  special  revelations 
of  divine  mysteries.  The  combination  of  two  words  with  an 
advance  in  thought  from  the  general  to  the  special  is  character- 
istic of  Paul.  Compare  grace  and  apoatleship,  Rom.  i.  5 ;  gifts 
and  calling,  Rom.  xi.  29 ;  w^isdom  and  prudence,  Eph.  i.  8 ; 
wisdom  and  knowledge,  Col.  ii.  3. 

In  the  knowledge  of  Him  (en  eirvyvatrei  airrov).  The 
sphere  in  which  they  will  receive  God's  gift  of  wisdom  and 
revelation.  To  know  God  is  to  be  wise.  The  condition  is  not 
merely  acknowledgment,  but  knowledge.  'Eirlyvtinrit  knowl- 
edge is  never  ascribed  to  God  in  the  New  Testament.  Of  Him 
refers  to  God. 


A 


Ch.  L]  the  BPISTLB  to  the  BPHESIANa  371 

18.  The  eyes  of  your  understanding  being  enlightened 
{ireifKaTia'fiivov^  rov9  o^3aXfM>u9  r^  KopSUi^  vfi&v).  Bev.,  eyes  of 
your  hea/rt.  Lit.,  being  eTdighiened  as  to  the  eyes  of  your  heart; 
enlightened  being  joined  with  you  (ver.  17)  by  a  somewhat  ir- 
regular construction:  may  give  unto  you  being  enlightened. 
For  a  similar  construction  see  Acts  xv.  22.  The  phrase  eyes  of 
the  hea/rt  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament.  Plato 
has  eye  of  the  said  ('^w^c^,  "  Sophist,"  264).  Ovid,  speaking 
of  Pythagoras,  says :  ^^  With  his  mind  he  approached  the  gods, 
though  far  removed  in  heaven,  and  what  nature  denied  to 
human  sight,  he  drew  forth  with  the  eyes  of  his  heart" 
("  Metamorphoses,"  xv.,  62-64).  Heart  is  not  merely  the  seat 
of  emotion^  as  in  popular  usage,  but  of  thought  and  wiU,  See 
on  Kom.  i.  21.  The  particular  aspect  in  which  its  activity  is 
viewed,  perception  or  cognition,  is  determined  by  what  follows, 
"  that  ye  may  know,"  etc. 

Hope  of  His  calling.  Hope^  not,  as  sometimes,  the  thing 
hoped  for^  but  the  sentvment  or  j)rvncij)le  of  hope  which  God's 
calling  inspires. 

The  riches  of  the  glory  of  His  inheritance.  Ellicott  re- 
marks that  this  is  a  noble  accumulation  of  genitives,  '' setting 
forth  the  inheritance  on  the  side  of  its  glory,  and  the  glory  on 
the  side  of  its  riches."  Glory  is  the  essential  characteristic  of 
salvation,  and  this  glory  is  richly  abounding.  Hie  inheritance : 
which  is  His,  and  His  gift. 

19.  Exceeding  {inrepfiaXXop).  Compounds  with  (nrip  over^ 
beyond^  are  characteristic  of  Paul's  intensity  of  style,  and  mark 
tlie  struggle  of  language  with  the  immensity  of  the  divine  mys- 
teries, and  the  opulence  of  the  divine  grace.  See  ver.  21 ;  iii. 
20 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  17,  etc. 

According  to  the  working  of  His  mighty  power  {icark 
Tr)v  ivifyyeiav  rov  Kpdrov^  t^9  Uryyo^  avrov).  The  A.  V.  fre- 
quently impairs  the  force  of  a  passage  by  combining  into  a 
single  conception  two  words  which  represent  distinct  ideas; 
translating  two  nouns  by  an  adjective  and  a  noun.  Thus  Philip. 
iii.  21,  vile  body,  glorious  body^  for  body  of  humiUationj  body 


372  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Cu.  L 

of  glory :  Rom.  viii,  21.  glorious  liberty,  for  liberty  of  ihe 
t/lt>ry  :  2  Cor.  iv.  4,  glorious  gospel,  for  gospel  of  the  glory: 
0<A.  \.  lY,  glorious  j>ower,ior power  of  tlie  yU>ry  ;  1  Pet.  i.  14, 
obeilieni  children,  for  children  of  obedience :  2  Pet,  ii.  14, 
cursed  children,  for  children  of  cursing.  So  iiere,  mighty 
power,  for  siretigth  of  might.  The  idea  la  thus  diluted,  and 
the  peculiar  force  and  distinction  of  the  eeparate  words  ib  meaa- 
nrabiy  lost.  Rev.,  correctly,  working  of  the  strength  of  His 
might.  For  working,  see  on  Col.  i.  29.  For  strength  and 
might,  see  on  2  Pet.  ii.  11;  John  i.  12.  Strength  {Kparovi)  is 
used  onlj-  of  God,  and  denotes  relative  and  manifested  power. 
Might  {l<r)(vo^)  is  indwelling  strength.  Working  (ivepyeuiv)  is 
the  active,  efficient  manifestation  of  these.  Hence  we  have 
here  God's  indutelling  power,  which  inheres  in  the  divine  nat- 
ure {strength) ;  the  relaivoe  quality  or  measure  of  this  power 
{might) ;  and  the  effic-ient  exertion,  of  the  divine  quality  {work- 
ing). The  phrase,  according  to  the  working  of  the  ^a-enytli.,  etc., 
is  to  be  connected  with  the  exceeding  greatness  of  His  power. 
The  magnitude  of  God's  power  toward  believers  is  known  in 
the  operation  of  the  strength  of  His  might. 

20.  Which  {^v).      Refer  to  working  (ver.  19). 

He  wrought  {evfipyrftrev).  The  best  tests  read  hr^pyrjKev, 
perfect  tense,  /Te  hath  wrought.  The  verb  is  kindred  wilh 
working  (ver.  19). 

In  Christ.  In  the  case  of  Christ.  Christ's  dead  body  was 
the  point  on  which  this  working  of  divine  power  was  exhibited. 
See  Rom.  viii.  11 ;  2  Cor,  iv.  14. 

When  He  raised  {eyfCpa<t).     Or,  in  that  He  raised. 

And  set  {ical  iiea^uiev).  Rev.,  made  Ilim  to  sit.  The  best 
texts  read  KaJ!i{iTa<;  having  seated,  or  in  that  He  caused  Him  to 


Right  hand.    See  Acts  vii,  56. 

In  the  heavenly  places.  See  on  rer.  2.  Local.  Xot 
merely  of  a  spiritual  state,  which  does  not  suit  the  local  expre» 
sions  rtiade  to  sii  and  right  hand. 


Cn.  L]  THE  BPISTLB  TO  THE  EPHESIAN8.  373 

21.  Far  above  {{nrepdvao).  Lit.,  over  above.  See  on  ver.  19. 
Connect  with  made  Him  to  ait. 

Principality,  power,  etc  These  words  usually  refer  to 
angelic  powers ;  either  good^  as  eh.  iii.  10 ;  Col.  i.  16 ;  ii.  10 ; 
or  badj  as  ch.  vi.  12 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  24 ;  Col.  ii.  15 ;  or  both^  as 
Horn.  viii.  38.  See  on  Col.  i.  16 ;  ii.  15.  Here  probably  good^ 
since  the  passage  relates  to  Christ's  exaltation  to  glory  rather 
than  to  His  victory  over  evil  powers. 

And  every  name  that  is  named.  And  has  a  collective 
and  summary  force — and  in  a  word.  Every  name,  etc  What- 
ever a  name  can  be  given  to.  ''Let  any  name  be  uttered, 
whatever  it  is,  Christ  is  above  it ;  is  more  exalted  than  that 
which  the  name  so  uttered  affirms  "  (Meyer).  Compare  Philip, 
ii.  9.  "  We  know  that  the  emperor  precedes  all,  though  we 
cannot  enumerate  all  the  ministers  of  his  court :  so  we  know 
that  Christ  is  placed  above  all,  although  we  cannot  name  all  '* 
(Bengel). 

Not  only  in  this  world,  etc.  Connect  with  which  is  ncmied. 
For  world  {al&vi)j  see  on  John  i.  9. 

22.  Put  all  things  in  subjection.  Compare  Coh  i.  15-18; 
Ps.  viii.  5-8. 

Gave  Him.  Ilim  is  emphatic:  and  Ilim  He  gave.  Not 
merely  set  Him  over  the  Church,  but  gave  Him  as  a  gift.  See 
2  Cor.  ix.  15. 

The  Church  (t§  iKKXtfo-ia).     See  on  Matt.  xvi.  18. 

23.  Which  is  His  body  (fK*^)-  The  double  relative  is  ex- 
planatory, seeing  it  is  :  by  which  Imecm.  Body^  a  living  or- 
ganism of  which  He  is  the  head.     See  on  Col.  i.  18. 

The  fulness.  See  on  John  i.  16;  Eom.  xi.  12;  Col.  i.  19. 
That  which  is  filled.  The  Church,  viewed  as  a  receptacle.  Com- 
pare ch.  iii.  10. 

That  filleth  all  in  all  (r^  'irdvra  iv  ircuriv  irXffpovfiepov). 
Better,  that  fiUeth  all  things  with  all  things.  The  expression 
is  somewhat  obscure.     All  things  are  composed  of  elements. 


374  WORD  STUDIES   IN    THK   NEW    TESTAMENT.  ICa.  IL 

Whatever  things  exist,  God  from  His  fulueea  fills  with  all  those 
elements  which  belong  to  their  being  or  welfare.  The  whole 
nniverse  is  thus  filled  by  Him. 


CHAPTER  IL 

1.  And  you.  Taking  up  the  closing  thought  of  the  preced- 
ing chapter,  the  magnitude  of  God'a  power  toward  believers  as 
exhibited  in  Christ's  resurrection.  He  now  shows  that  the 
same  power  is  applied  to  his  readers.  Hence  the  connection 
is :  "  When  He  raised  Him  from  the  dead,  etc.,  and  you  did 
He  quicken,  eveu  as  He  quickened  Christ."  The  structure  of 
the  passage  is  broken.  Paul  having  prominently  in  miud  the 
thought  Ood  quickened  you  as  He  did  Christ,  begins  with  you 
also.  Then  the  connection  ia  interrupted  by  w,  2,  3,  which 
deacribe  their  previous  condition.  Then  ver.  1  is  taken  up  in 
ver.  4,  by  hut  God,  God  introducing  a  new  sentence. 

Who  were  dead  {oma^  veKpovt).  Better,  Rev.,  when  ye  were 
dead,  thns  giving  the  sense  of  the  continued  state  in  the  past 
expressed  by  the  participle  being. 

Trespasses  —  sins  {vapatrn>iia<riv — aixaprloK).  See  on 
Matt.  i.  21 ;  vi.  14.  Trespasses,  special  acts.  SItis,  all  forma 
and  phases  of  sin ;  more  general 


Lit.,  age.     See  on  John  i.  9. 
Collective,  the  whole   empire   of  evil 


%  Course  {atSsva). 

Power  (^foiwiiis). 
apirits. 

The  air.  According  to  Paul's  usage,  in  the  simple  physical 
eense.  See  Acts  xxii.  23 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  26 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  17 ;  Apoc, 
xvi.  17.     The  air  ia  regarded  as  the  region   of  the  demons' 


The  spirit.  See  on  1  Cor.  ii. 
power  over  which  Satan  rules,  o 
men's  hearts. 


2,     The  term  designates  the 
the  side  of  its  operation  iii 


J 


Ch.  n.]  THB  BPISTLB  TO  THB  BPHBBIAN8.  375 

Now.  With  an  implied  reference  to  its  former  working  in 
his  readers.     Compare  onoe^  ver.  3. 

Children  of  disobedience  (yUAi  r^  a^eiSe^).  Compare 
ch.  V.  6.  A  Hebraistic  expression.  Compare  wn  ofj>erdUionj 
John  xvii.  12 ;  children  of  obedience^  1  Pet.  i.  14 ;  children  of 
eursmffj  2  Pet  ii.  14.  Rev.,  correctly,  sons  of  disobedience : 
belonging  to  disobedience  as  sons  to  a  parent. 

3.  Had  our  conversation  {avearpcufnffAev).  See  on  the  kind- 
red noon  conmeraation^  1  Pet.  i.  15.     Rev.,  more  simply,  lived. 

Fulfilling  {irounhnesi).  Rev.,  doing.  The  verb  implies  car- 
rying otU  or  aocompUahi/ngj  so  that  the  A.  Y.  is  more  nearly 
correct.     See  on  Rom.  vii.  15 ;  John  iiL  21. 

Desires  {^Xrniara).    Lit.,  witlings.     See  on  Col.  iii.  12. 

Mind  (Suu^May).  More  strictly,  thoughU.  See  on  Mark  xii. 
30 ;  Luke  i.  51. 

By  nature  children  of  wrath.  See  on  ver.  2.  Children 
(jkicvck)  emphasizes  the  connection  by  hiril^ ;  see  on  John  i.  12. 
Wrath  {opyfy:)  is  God's  holy  hatred  of  sin ;  His  essential,  neces- 
sary antagonism  to  everything  evil,  Rom.  i.  18.  JBy  nature 
{^va€i)  accords  with  children^  implying  what  is  innate.  That 
man  is  bom  with  a  sinful  nature,  and  that  God  and  sin  are 
essentially  antagonistic,  are  conceded  on  all  hands :  bat  that 
unconscious  human  beings  come  into  the  world  under  the  blaze 
of  God's  indignation,  hardly  consists  with  Christ's  assertion 
that  to  little  children  belongs  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  It  is 
true  that  there  is  a  birth-principle  of  evil,  which,  if  suffered  to 
develop,  will  bring  upon  itself  the  wrath  of  G^.  Whether 
Paul  means  more  than  this  I  do  not  know.* 

Others  (ot  Xo^irot).     Rev.,  correctly,  the  rest. 

4.  But  God.    Resuming  ver.  i. 

For  His  great  love  {SuS).  For  the  sake  of,  in  order  to  satisfy 
His  love. 


*  See  Me jer  on  thia  pMBAge. 


376  WORD   STUDIES   IN   THE   NEW   TKSTAMENT.  [Cb.  IL 

Quickened  us  together.  Spiritnally.  Compare  Col.  ii. 
13;  Rom.  vi.  11-14;  viii.  10,  11.  "What  God  wrought  in 
Christ  lie  wrought,  ipso /acto,  in  all  who  are  imited  with  Him" 

(EUicott). 

6.  Raised  us  up.     Compare  Rom.  vi.  5. 

Made  us  sit  together  (o-uveiwiSto-ec).  Compare  aet  Him, 
ch.  i.  20.  Together  ia  amhigiiouB.  Render  with  Him,  as  Rev. 
"Even  now  we  sit  there  in  Him,  and  shall  sit  with  Ilim  in  the 
end"  (Andrewea,  cited  by  Ellieott).  Compare  Rom.  viii.  30; 
Apoc.  iii.  21.     Meyer  renders  haih  given  disjoint  seat. 

In  Christ  Jesus.  Connect  with  raised  up,  made  us  ait, 
and  in  hemienlt/  places.  Hesv/rrection,  enthronement,  hM/ven, 
all  ai-e  in  Christ. 

7.  The  ages  to  come  {Tol<t  cUohtiv  toZs  etrcpypfiikvoei).     Lit., 

the  ages,  those  which  are  coming  on.     Which  are  snccessively 
arriving  until  Christ's  second  coming. 

He  might  show  {ei>&e(^aC).  The  middle  voice  denotes 
for  His  ovm  glory.     See  on  Col.  i.  6. 

In  kindness  (ev  ypi)<TTOTt]TC).  See  on  easy.  Matt.  xi.  30. 
The  grace  of  God  is  to  be  displayed  in  His  actual  benefits. 

8.  For  by  grace,  etc.  Tliia  may  truly  be  called  exceeding 
riches  of  grace,ybr  ye  are  saved  by  grace.  Grace  has  the  art- 
icle, the  grace  of  God,  in  vv.  5,  7. 

And  that.     Not  faith,  but  the  salvation. 

Of  God.     Emphatic.     Of  Ood  is  it  the  gift. 

10.  For  we  are  His  workmanship.  A  reason  why  no  man 
should  glory.  If  we  are  God's  workmanship,  our  salvation 
cannot  be  of  ourselves.  His  is  emphatic.  Ili^t  workmanship 
are  we. 

Created  (wrto-^ein-e^).  See  on  John  i.  3.  The  verb  origin- 
ally means  to  tnake  habitable,  topeojite.  Hence  to  found,  tiod 
in  called  Krltrvift  creator,  1  Pet.  iv.  19,  and  d  ktUtw  he  that  ere- 


Cb.  IL]  the  EPISTLB  to  the  EPHE8IAN&  377 

aiedj  Rom.  i.  25.     Compare  Apoc.  iv.  11.     KrUrt^  is  used  of 
the  whole  sum  of  created  things,  Mark  x.  6 ;  Rom.  viii.  22. 

Afore  prepared  {irpofirolfuurep).  Eev.,  more  correctly, 
prepared.  Made  ready  beforehand.  Qod  prearranged  a 
sphere  of  moral  action  for  us  to  walk  in.  Not  only  are  works 
the  necessary  oatcome  of  faith,  bat  the  character  and  direction 
of  the  works  are  made  ready  by  Gk>d. 

That  we  should  walk.     In  order  t/uU;  to  the  end  that. 

11.  Uncircumcision  —  circumcision.  Abstract  for  con- 
crete terms,  the  uncircumcised  and  circumcised. 

Which  is  called.  Notice  the  irony,  giving  back  the  called 
of  the  circumcised. 

12.  Being  aliens  {ainiXKorrpuofjLhfOL).  Kev.,  better,  giving 
the  force  of  the  verb,  alienated.  As  they  had  once  been  oth- 
erwise. Paul  speaks  ideally  of  a  spiritual  commonwealth  in 
which  Jew  and  Gentile  were  together  at  peace  with  Ood,  and 
of  which  the  commonwealth  of  Israel  is  a  type. 

Israel.  Selecting  the  most  honorable  title  to  describe  the 
Jew.  See  on  Acts  iii.  12.  The  reference  is  to  the  spiritual 
rather  than  to  the  national  distinction.  In  being  separated 
from  Christ,  they  were  separated  from  that  commonweiedth  in 
which,  according  to  the  promise,  Christ  would  have  been  to 
them,  as  to  the  faithful  Israelites,  the  object  of  their  faith  and 
the  ground  of  their  salvation. 

Covenants.  The  several  renewals  of  God's  covenant  with 
the  patriarchs. 

Of  promise  {rry;  hrarffekUv;).  Better,  the  promise.  The 
messianic  promise,  which  was  the  basis  of  all  the  covenants. 

Without  God  (o^eoi).  Ood-forsaken.  It  might  also  mean 
godless  or  impious.     The  gentile  gods  were  no  gods. 

13.  Now  in  Christ  Jesus.  Noto^  in  contrast  with  at  thai 
time.  In  Christ  Jes^is^  in  contrast  with  alienaied  from^  etc. 
Jesiis  is  added  because  the  Christ  who  was  the  subject  of  prom- 


378  WORD   STUDIIia   m  the   new   TESTAMKNT.  [Ch.  il 

iee,  the  Messiah,  has  come  into  tlie  world  under  tbat  pereoiial 
name.  The  phrase  includee  the  promised  Messiah  and  the  ac- 
tual Saviour. 

14.  Our  peace  (^  elp^inf  ^/iav),  Christ  is  similarly  described 
in  ftbstmct  terms  in  1  Cor.  i.  30 ;  loisdom,  HffAieousness^  so/nc- 
iificaiion,  reilemption.  So  Col.  i.  27,  hojie  of  glory.  Christ  is 
thus  not  merely  oar  peaoe^maker,  but  our  very  peace  itself. 

Both  (tA  d/i.ff>6Tepa).  Lit.,  th^  both.  The  neuter  gender 
shows  that  Jews  and  Gentiles  are  conceived  by  the  writer 
merely  as  two  facts.     The  masculine  isused  in  vv.  15,  16. 

Hath  broken  down  {\6fftK).  Lit.,  loosened  or  dissolved. 
Rev,,  giving  the  force  of  the  aorist  tense,  hrah^e  dovm.  The 
participle  liiis  an  explanatory  force,  in  that  He  brake  down. 

The  middle'wall  of  partition  {rh  fieiroTOf^oi/  tov  tpparf/iov). 

Lit.,  the  middle  wall  of  the  fence  or  hedge.  The  wall  which 
pertained  to  the  fence ;  tlieyiK;^  of  separation  being  emphasized 
in  wall,  and  the  instrument  of  separation  mfenr^.  The  hedge 
was  the  whole  Mosaic  economy  which  separated  Jew  from 
Gentile.  Some  suppose  a  reference  to  the  stone  screen  which 
bounded  the  court  of  tlie  Gentiles  in  the  temple. 

15.  Having  abolished  in  His  flesh  the  enmity  (r^f  ^- 
^pav  iv  T^  ffapici  aurou  Karapy^vai).  The  enmiiij  immediately 
follows  the  Tniiliile  wall  ofpartUion,  and  should  be  rendered  in 
apposition  with  and  as  defining  it,  and  as  dependent  on  brake 
doipn,  not  on  abolished:  the  middle  wall  which  was  the  en- 
mity. It  is  used  abstractly,  &s  peace  in  ver.  14.  The  enmity 
was  the  result  and  working  of  the  law  regarded  as  a  separative 
system  ;  as  it  separated  Jew  from  Gentile,  and  both  from  God. 
See  Rom.  iii.  20  ;  iv.  15  ;  v.  20 ;  vii.  7-11.  For  abolUhed,  see 
on  CJtmbereth,  Luke  xiii.  7,  and  make  without  effect,  Rom.  iij.  3. 

The  law  of  commandments  contained  in  ordinances 

{tqv  vofiov  T&v  iiToKHiv  iv  S^yfiocrtv).  T/is  hiw,  etc.,  depends 
in  construction  on  having  abolished,  and  is  not  in  apposition 
with  the  enmity,  as  A.  V.  The  middle  wall  of  partition,  the 
enmity,  was  dissolved  by  tlie  abolition  of  the  law  of  command- 


J 


ch.  il]  the  epistlb  to  thb  bphesians.  379 

ments.  CoDBtme  in  Sisjlesh  with  hamng  abcUshed.  Laio  is 
general,  and  its  contents  are  defined  by  oonyrnandmeniSy  special 
injunctions^  which  injunctions  in  turn  were  formulated  in  de- 
finite decrees,  Kender  the  entire  passage:  Irake  down  the 
middle-wan  o^jxirtition,  even  the  enmity,  by  abolishing  in  Sis 
fiesh  the  lano  of  comma/ndmeTUs  contained  in  ordinances. 

For  to  make  {ha  ktUtq).  Rev.,  that  He  might  create.  See 
on  created,  ver.  10.  The  work  was  to  be  a  new  creation  on  a 
new  foundation. 

In  Himself.    As  the  medium  of  reconciliation. 

Of  the  twain  one  new  man  {roif^  Svo  eh  tva  tcoip^p  Sv^fM- 
TTov).  The  Greek  is  livelier :  make  the  tvoo  into  one  new  man. 
Katvop  new,  emphasizes  the  new  quality  /  not  newness  in  point 
of  time.     See  on  Matt  zxvi.  29. 

16.  Might  reconcile  {anroKarckKKA^).  Onlj  here  and  Col. 
i.  20,  21.  See  on  Col.  i.  20.  The  new  man  precedes  the  re- 
conciling in  PauPs  statement,  though,  as  a  fact,  the  order  is  the 
reverse.  The  verb  contains  a  hint  of  restoration  to  a  {Himal 
unity.     See  on  ver,  12. 

Thereby  {h  avr^).    Or  ujpon  it — the  cross. 

17.  You  which  were  afar  off.    Glentiles. 

Them  that  were  nigh.  Jews.  See  on  Rom.  iiL  30.  As 
children  of  the  messianic  covenant.  See  on  ver.  12.  Compare 
Isa.  Ivii.  9,  where  the  Septuagint  Te9A%,pea>ce  upon  j[>eace  to 
those  who  are  far  and  to  tiiose  who  OAre  near. 

18.  Access  {irpocatftia^v).  See  on  Rom.  v.  2,  Notice  the 
three  persons  of  the  Gx>dhead:  through  Him  (Christ);  one 
Spirit,  the  Father. 

19.  Foreigners  {irdpoucoi).  See  on  Luke  xxiv.  18.  Rev., 
better,  sojourners.    Without  rights  of  citizenship. 

20.  Of  the  apostles  and  prophets.  The  foundation  laid 
by  them.  Prophets  are  New-Testament  prophets.  See  ch.  iiL 
6  ;  iv.  11.     See  on  1  Cor.  xii.  10. 


380  WOttD  STUDIES   IN   THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Cu.  IIL 

Chisf  corner-stone  (aicpoyatvtaiov).  Only  here  and  1  Pet, 
ii.  6. 

21.  All  the  building  {vaa-a  oucoSoftii).  Lit.,  evert/  building. 
Rev.,  eacA  several  building.  But  the  reference  is  evidently  to 
one  building,  and  the  rendering  of  A.  V.  ehould  be  retained 
though  the  article  is  wanting. 

Fitly  framed  together  {tTwapiioKo-yovfi^VT)).  The  present 
participle  indicates  the  framing  ae  in  prt^ress. 

Temple  {vaav).  Sanctuary.  See  on  Matt.  iv.  5.  Tlie  more 
sacred  portion  of  the  strncture  is  chosen  for  the  figure, 

22.  Are  builded  together  (o-wotKoSo/ieto-.Sc),  Aecomponent 
parts  of  the  one  building.  The  reference  is  to  iudividnal  Christ- 
ians, not  to  communities. 

Habitation  {KaroucrjT^ptov).  Answering  to  temple.  Only 
here  and  Apoc.  sviii.  3.  Indicating  a  permanent  dwelling. 
See  on  dwell,  Luke  xi.  26  ;  Acts  ii.  5  ;  Mark  v.  3.  In  marked 
contrast  with  sojourners,  ver.  19. 

Through  the  Spirit  (iv).  Better,  as  Kev.,  tV*,  In  the  fel- 
lowship of  the  indwelling  Spirit, 


CHAPTER  IIL 

1.  For  this  cause.     Seeing  ye  are  so  bnilded  together. 

Of  Christ  Jesus  (roO  Xpurrou 'Itjirov).  Notice  the  article, 
t/ie  Clirist,  and  see  on  ch,  ii.  13. 

Gentiles.  To  whom  Paul  was  expressly  sent,  and  in  preach- 
ing to  whom  he  had  fallen  into  tlie  hands  of  the  civil  law. 

2.  If  ye  have  heard  (etye  yKova-are).  Here  begins  a  long 
digression  extending  to  ver.  14.  If,  Rev.,  if  so  he,  means  tipon 
the  supposition  that;  not  implying  the  certainty  of  the  assump- 
tion, though  this  shade  of  meaning  is  given  by  the  context 
The  words  are  a  reminder  of  his  preaching  among  them. 


i. 


CB.IIL]  THE  BPISTLB  TO  THE  EPHB8IAN&  381 

Dispensation  (oucovofUav).  See  on  ch.  i.  10 ;  Col.  i.  25. 
The  divine  arrangement  or  disposition. 

4.  Whereby  {irpo^  h).  Lit,  agreeahly  to  whiohj  namely, 
what  he  had  written. 

Mystery  of  Christ.  The  mystery  which  is  Christ.  See 
on  Col.  i.  26 ;  Bom.  xi.  25. 

5.  Other  generations  {irlpavi).  Other  and  differtfrd.  See 
on  Matt.  vi.  24. 

6.  Fellow-heirs — of  the  same  body— partakers  {(jv^KKaip- 
ovofiOf  avaamfia,  avfAfUroxa).  The  second  of  these  words  oc- 
curs only  here ;  the  third  only  here  and  ch.  y.  7.  They  are 
strange  to  classical  Greek. 

7.  Gift  of  the  grace.  The  gift  in  which  the  grace  of  God 
consisted,  the  apostleship  to  the  Gentiles. 

By  the  effectual  working  of  His  power  {tcari^  rifv  Mp- 
y€uaf  T179  Bw/dfjL€m^  avrov).  Bev.,  better,  aooordn/ng  to  the 
working,  etc.  The  gift  was  bestowed  in  accordance  with  that 
efficiency  which  conld  transform  Saul  the  persecutor  into  Paul 
tlie  apostle  to  the  Gentiles. 

8.  Less  than  the  least  (t^  ^Xa^^i^rori/?^).  Only  here  in 
the  New  Testament,  and  very  characteristic.  A  comparative 
is  formed  upon  a  superlative :  more  least  than  all  the  saints. 
Compare  1  Cor.  xv.  8.* 

Unsearchable  {ave^^yylcurrov).  Only  here  and  Bom.  xL  33 
(note).    Which  cannot  he  tracked  out. 

9.  To  make  all  men  see  {(fHorla-ai  irdvra^).  Lit.,  to  en- 
lighten. 

The  mystery.  The  admission  of  the  Gentiles  into  covenant 
privileges. 

From  the  beginning  of  th.e  world  {airo  t&v  aUovmv).  Lit, 
from  the  ogee.     \ij^v,^from  all  ages.     See  on  Col.  i.  26. 


*  Mr.  Hnztable,  in  his  article  on  *'  Paal  an  Ectroma,**  '*  Expositor, "  boo- 
ond  series,  iii.,  278,  oalls  it  **  an  unparalleled  barbarism  of  grammatioal  in- 
flexion. '• 


382 


WORD   STDDIEB  IN  THE  NEW   TESTAMEINT.  [Ch.  IlL 


All  things  {to.  irdvra).     Collectively-. 

10.  To  the  intent  that.  Connect  with  the  matter  of  tlie 
two  preceding  verses.  Grace  was  given  me  to  preach  Clirist 
and  to  enlighten  men  as  to  the  long-hidden  mystery  of  the  ad- 
misBion  of  the  Gentiles,  in  order  that  now,  etc 


Now.     In  contrast  with  all  a 
Principalities  and  powers. 


Good  angels.    See  on  cb.  i.  21. 


By  the  Church  (8ta).  Better,  through^  as  Kev.  By  means 
of  the  Chnrcli,  Tliia  agrees  with  what  was  said  of  the  Church 
SB  thefuliu'83  of  God,  eh.  i.  23. 

Manifold  wisdom  {iroKvjraiKtXov  ao^(a).  A  very  striking 
phrase.  The  adjective  occurs  only  here,  and  means  variegated. 
It  is  applied  to  j>ictures,  floioers,  garments.  UoikCKov  is  used 
in  the  Septuagint  of  Joseph's  coat,  Gen.  xxxvii.  3,  Througli  the 
Church  God's  wisdom  in  its  infinite  variety  is  to  be  displayed — 
the  Tnany-tinted  wisdom  of  God — in  different  modes  of  power, 
different  characters,  methods  of  training,  providences,  forms  of 
organization,  etc. 

11.  Eternal  purpose  {wpo^iriv  rStv  ata>viav).  lAi.,  t/ie  par- 
pose  of  the  ages. 

Carried  into  effect.     See  on  fid- 


iv).     As  often,  for  faith 


He  wrought  {iiroltjrrev). 
filing,  oil.  it.  3. 

12.  Faith  of  Him  (t^?  witrreoK  a 
iti  Him. 

13.  Faint  (^wiweeu').  Lit,  lose  heart.  KoKot  in  clasaieal 
Greek,  but  not  in  the  New  Testament,  sometimes  means  coto- 
arUy. 

14.  For  this  cause.  Eesmning  the  interrupted  clause  in 
ver.  1,  and  having  still  in  mind  the  closing  thought  of  ch.  iu 
Seeing  ye  are  so  built  together  in  Q\xt\&'i^for  this  cause,  etc. 

Father.     Omit  of  our  Lord  Jeeus  Christ. 

15.  Of  whom  (e'f  oB).     After  whom. 


i 


Ou.  IIL]  THB  BPISTLB  TO  THB  BPHBSIANS.  383 

The  whole  family  {iraa-a  irarpiii).  Bev.,  more  correctly, 
every  faraU/y.  Harpui  is,  more  properly,  a  group  of  families — 
all  who  claim  a  common  iran^p  father.  Family^  according  to 
our  usage  of  the  term,  would  be  oZ«co9  house.  The  Israelites 
were  divided  into  triJbes  {^vKai\  and  then  into  irarpuU,  each 
deriving  its  descent  from  one  of  Jacob's  grandsons ;  and  these 
again  into  oUoi  houses.  So  Joseph  was  both  of  the  house  {olUov) 
tLud  family  {irarpMsi)  of  David.  We  find  the  phrase  dUoi  irar- 
pi&v  houses  ofthefamilieSy  Exod.  xii.  3 ;  Kum.  i.  2.  The  word 
occurs  only  three  times  in  the  New  Testament :  here,  Luke  ii. 
4 ;  Acts  iii.  25.  In  the  last-named  passage  it  is  used  in  a  wide, 
general  sense,  of  naUons.  Family  is  perhaps  the  best  transla- 
tion, if  taken  in  its  wider  meaning  of  a  body  belonging  to  a 
common  stock — a  dan.  Fatkerhood  (Rev.,  in  margin),  following 
the  Vulgate  patemUas^  means  rather  the  fact  and  quality  of 
paternity.  Observe  the  play  of  the  words,  which  can  scarcely 
be  reproduced  in  English,  j?a^,j>a^ru». 

In  heaven  and  earth.  To  the  angelic  hosts  and  the  tribes 
of  men  alike,  God  is  Father.  There  may  be  a  suggestion  of  the 
different  ranks  or  grades  of  angels,  as  principalities,  thrones, 
powers,  etc.  See  ver.  10.  "  Wherever  in  heaven  or  in  earth 
beings  are  grouped  from  their  relation  to  a  father,  the  name 
they  bear  in  each  case  is  derived  from  the  Father  "  (Biddle). 

16.  Might  (St/i'ii/Ae*).  'Rev. y power.  Appropriate  to  the  suc- 
ceeding phrase  the  inner  man,  since  it  sigai&dBfcundty  or  virtue 
not  necessarily  manifest 

In  the  inward  man  {ek  rhv  Sew  avSpanrov).  The  force  of 
the  preposition  is  into :  might  entering  into  the  inmost  per- 
sonality. Inward  man  :  compare  outwa/rd  ma,n^  2  Cor.  iv.  16. 
It  is  the  rational  and  moral  //  the  essence  of  the  man  which 
is  conscious  of  itself  as  a  moral  personality.  In  the  unregen- 
crate  it  is  liable  to  fall  under  the  power  of  sin  (Bom.  vii.  23) ; 
and  in  the  regenerate  it  needs  constant  renewing  and  strength- 
ening  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  as  here.  Compare  ike  hidden  man 
of  the  hearty  1  Pet.  iii.  4. 

17.  May  dwell  {Karo^icffaai).  Settle  down  and  abide.  Take 
up  His  permanent  abode,  so  that  ye  may  be  a  habitation  {xaro^ 


384  WORD  STUDIES  DJ  THB  NBW  TESTAMENT  [Ch.  IIL 

K^Tijpiov)  of  God.  See  on  ch.  ii.  22.  The  connection  k 
with  tlie  preceding  clause:  "to  he  atrengtiietied,  etc.,  8o  that 
Christ  7nay  dwell,  tlte  latter  worde  Laving  at  once  a  climactic 
and  an  explanatory  force,  and  adding  the  idea  of  permanency 
to  that  of  etrengtiiening. 

By  faith  (StA  t^?  TrdrreoK).  Throngh  your  (the  article) 
faith,  as  the  medinm  of  appropriating  ChriBt.  Faith  opens  the 
door  and  receives  Him  w!io  knocks.     Apoc.  iii.  20. 

18.  Rooted  and  grounded  {eppi^fihoi  Kal  TeSefteXiafUvoi). 
Compare  Col.  ii.  7,  and  see  note.  Grou7)J':d  or  foutuled,  from 
AefUXtovJimndation.  The  dwdling  in  ver,  17  would  naturally 
BuggeBt  t\\i  Joundation.  Hooting  and  grounding  are  conee- 
queucee  of  the  strengthening  of  the  Spirit  and  of  Christ's  in- 
dwelling. 

In  love.  Standing  first  in  the  sentence  and  emphatic,  as  the 
fundamental  principle  of  christian  life  and  knowledge. 

May  be  able  (efw^iicnrre).  Rev.,  may  he  strong.  This 
compound  verb  occurs  only  here.  The  preposition  e'f  has  the 
force  oifvUy  or  emimntly.  'Iff^w  is  etrenyi/i  emhodied  ;  in- 
hering in  organized  power.  Hence  it  is  an  advance  on  Suva/ut 
Tnighi  in  ver.  16  (see  note).  Paul  prays  that  the  inward  might 
or  virtue  may  issue  in  ability  to  grasp.  Compare  Luke  xiv.  30 ; 
xvi.  3  ;  Acts  xxvii.  16 ;  Jas,  v,  16,  and  see  notes.* 

Comprehend  (fearaXa^icrJat).  To  English  readers  this 
conveys  the  meaning  understand.  Rev.,  better,  apprehend: 
grasp.     See  on  John  i.  5,  and  compare  Philip,  iii.  12,  13. 

■  P»ul'«  use  in  this  epiatle  of  different  words  for  pouwr  uid  its  working  Is 
rtn  iaterealiug  stadj.  He  ases  all  the  l«nns  tiniployed  !□  the  New  Testameiit, 
except  fiia  rioUnce. 

lir^fii,.  i.  19,21;  iii.  7,  18.20. 

tiWxu,  iii  20;  Ti.  II,  13,16. 

Jh^io,  i.  10  ;  liL  7  ;  ir.  16. 

fr(pr^,  i.  11.20;  ti.  2;  iiL  20. 

itoMTfo.  i.  21  ;  Ii.  2i  1)1.  10;  t1  13. 

■piroi,  i.  19  ;  vi.  10. 
««Ta.'«.  ill.  IG. 


Ch.  nL]  THB  BPI8TLB  TO  THE  EPHBSIAlilS.  885 

Breadth,  etc  No  special  interpretations  are  to  be  given 
to  these  words.  The  general  idea  of  vastness  is  expressed 
in  these  ordinary  terms  for  dimension.  Notice  that  the 
article  is  attached  only  to  the  first,  hreadthj  all  the  rest  being 
included  under  the  one  article;  the  intention  being  to  ex- 
hibit the  love  of  Christ  in  its  entire  dimension,  and  not  to 
fix  the  mind  on  its  constituent  parts. 

19.  To  know  (yv&viu).  Practically,  through  experience; 
while  apprehend  marks  the  knowledge  as  conception. 

Love  of  Christ.  Christ's  love  to  us.  Human  love  to  Christ 
could  not  be  described  in  tliese  terms. 

Which  passeth  knowledge  {t^v  virepfidKkowrav  riy:  yvtia^ 
€ok).  Which  surpasses  mere  knowledge  without  the  experience 
of  love.     Note  the  play  on  the  words  know  and  knowledge. 

That  ye  might  be  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God  {Tva 
irXffpc^Srjre  ek  irav  to  TrXi^po^fia  tov  Beov).  Note  the  recurrence 
of  t/uU;  that  He  would  grant  you;  that  ye  may  be  strong; 
that  ye  may  he  filled.  With  is  better  rendered  untOj  to  the 
measure  or  standard  of.  FtUneee  of  God  is  the  fulness  which 
God  imparts  through  the  dwelling  of  Christ  in  the  heart; 
Christ,  in  whom  the  Father  was  pleased  that  all  the  fulness 
should  dwell  (CoL  i.  19),  and  in  whom  dwelleth  all  the  fulness 
of  the  Godhead  (Col.  ii.  9). 

20.  Exceeding  abundantly  {yirepeicirepuraov).  Only  here, 
1  Thess.  iii.  10 ;  v.  13.  Suptrabundantly.  One  of  the  numer- 
ous compounds  of  tnrip  ieyondj  over  and  aiove,  of  which  Paul 
is  fond.  Of  twenty-eight  words  compounded  with  this  preposi- 
tion in  the  New  Testament,  Paul  alone  uses  twenty.  For  the 
order  and  construction,  see  next  note. 

Above  all  {virep  Trdvra).  These  words  sliould  not  be  con- 
nected with  thaty  as  A.  V.  and  Rev. :  "  above  all  that  we  ask," 
etc.  They  form  with  do  an  independent  clause.  The  next 
clause  begins  with  exceedingly  ahove^  and  is  construed  with  &v 
that  which  we  ask,  etc.  Eead  the  whole,  "  Unto  Him  who  is 
able  to  do  beyond  all,  exceedingly  above  that  which,"  etc. 
Vol.  IU.— 85 


3S6  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE   NEW  TBSTAMENT.  (Ch.  H 

21.  Glory.     Properlj,  (AtJ  glory,  wliicli  ia  Ilia  dne. 

In  the  Church.  Through  which  His  manj-tinted  wisdom  is 
to  be  displayed,  and  which  is  Hie  fulness.  The  variety  of  tlie 
divine  wisdom  is  again  hinted  at  in  ail  tfuit  we  ask  or  think. 

By  Christ  Jesns  {iv).  Rev.,  better,  in.  Ab  the  Church  is 
the  outward  domain  in  which  God  is  to  be  praised,  bo  Christ 
ia  the  spiritual  ^hert  of  this  praise. 

Throughout  all  ages,  world  without  end  {^h  iriawi  rhs 
ytveai;  toO  aliivw  Tmv  ata»mv).  Lit.,  unto  all  the  generations 
of  the  age  of  the  ages.  Eternity  is  made  up  of  ages,  and  agea 
of  generatioQB. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

1.  In  the  Lord.    See  on  Philip,  i.  14. 

2.  Lowliness — meekness.     See  on  Matt.  xi.  29;  t.  5. 
Long'suffering.     See  on  Jas.  v.  7. 
Forbearing  {av€j(6ficvoi).     See  on  Lake  ix,  41. 

3.  Endeavoring  (oTrou&ii;bvT«).  Kot  strong  enough.  Orig- 
inally the  verb  means  to  make  haste.  So  the  kindred  noun 
o-irowS^  haste,  Mark  vi.  25 ;  Luke  i.  39.  Hence  diligence.  Eev., 
here,  (fi/oing  diligence. 

To  keep  (■ntpelv).     See  on  reserved,  1  Pet.  i.  4. 

Unity  of  the  Spirit.     Wrooght  by  the  Holy  Spirit. 

Bond  of  peace.  The  bond  which  is  peace.  Compare  ch. 
ii.  14,  our  peace — made  both  one.  Christ,  our  peace,  is  thus  a 
bond  of  peace.  Others,  however,  treat  in  the  bond  as  parallel 
with  in  looe  of  ver.  2,  and  cite  Co!,  lii.  1 4,  "  love  the  bond  of 


4.  The  connection  with  the  preceding  verscB  ia  as  follows ; 
I  exhort  you  to  unity,  for  you  stand  related  to  the  Church, 
which  is  one  body  in  Christ ;  to  the  one  Spirit  who  informs  it ; 
to  the  one  hope  which  your  calling  inspires ;  to  the  one  Zordy 


Ch.  IV.]  THB  BPISTLB  TO  THB  EPHB8IANS.  387 

Christy  in  whom  you  believe  with  one  common  faUhy  and  re- 
ceive one  common  &iffn  of  that  faith,  baptism.  Above  all,  to 
the  one  God  and  Father, 

Body — Spirit.  The  body  is  the  invisible  Church,  the  mystical 
body  of  Christ:  the  Spirit,  the  Holy  Spirit.  Ilvevfia  epirity  is 
never  used  in  the  New  Testament  of  temper  or  disposition. 

Even  as.  To  the  facts  of  one  body  and  one  Spirit  corre- 
sponds the  fact  of  their  calling  in  one  hope.  Compare  Col.  iii 
15. 

In  one  hope  of  your  calling  {h  fuf  ikirCbt  Trp  /cXi{<r€ai9 
vfi&v).  In^  not  hy.  Their  calling  took  place  in  the  one  hope 
as  its  moral  element  or  sphere,  since  they  were  called  to  fellow- 
ship with  Christ  who  is  the  one  object  and  the  one  inspirer  of 
hope.  Compare  called  in  peaccy  1  Cor.  vii.  15 ;  in  sanctifica- 
tion,  1  Thess.  iv.  7  (Sev.).  Hcfpe  here  is  not  the  obfect  but  the 
principle  of  hope.  The  phrase  hope  of  your  calling  signifies 
hope  which  is  characteristic  of  God's  call  to  salvation,  and  is 
engendered  by  it.     See  on  ch.  i.  18. 

5.  Faith.  The  principle  of  faith;  not  that  which  is  believed 
— the  body  of  Christian  doctrine,  which  does  not  promote  unity. 
See  on  Acts  vi.  7. 

Baptism.  The  external  sign  of  faith,  but  of  no  significance 
without  the  Lord  and  the  faith.  Baptism  is  emphasized  in- 
stead of  the  Eucharist,  because  the  latter  assumes  and  recog- 
nizes unity  as  an  established  fact;  while  faith  and  baptism 
precede  that  fact,  and  are  essential  to  it.  Baptism,  moreover, 
is  not  administered  to  the  Church  as  a  body,  but  to  individuals, 
and  therefore  emphasizes  the  exhortation  to  each  m^emher  to  be 
in  vital  union  with  the  whole  body. 

6.  One  God  and  Father.  The  fundamental  ground  of 
unity.     Note  the  climax:  One  Churchy  one  Christy  one  God. 

Above  all  (^l  irdmwv).    Bev.,  over  :  as  ruler. 

Through— in  (8iA — hi).  Through,  pervading:  vn,  indweU- 
ing.     Compare  ch.  ii.  22 ;  iii.  17^ 


388  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TBST4UEKT.  [Ca.  IV. 

7.  Every  one  {hi  eicdirr^).  Rev.,  each.  From  the  Church 
as  a  whole,  he  poeees  to  its  individual  members,  In  the  gen- 
eral unity  the  uidividual  is  not  overlooked,  and  unity  is  con- 
sJKtent  with  variety  of  gifts  and  offices. 

Grace  (17  x'^pK).  The  article,  omitted  by  A.  V.,  is  import- 
ant: i/te  one  grace  of  God,  manifesting  itself  in  the  different 

gifts. 

8.  Wherefore.     Confirming  by  Scripture  what  has  just  been 

said. 

When  He  ascended,  etc.  Quoted  from  Ps.  Ixviii.  19  (Sept. 
Ixvii.  18).  The  Hebrew  reads:  "Ascending  to  the  height  thon 
didst  lead  captive  captivity,  and  received  gifts  in  man."  So 
Sept.  Paul  changeB  thou  didst  lead,  didst  recevoe,  into  he  lead 
and  he  gave.  The  Psalm  is  Messianic,  a  hymn  of  victory  in 
which  God  is  praised  for  victory  and  deliverance.  It  is  freely 
adapted  by  Paul,  wlio  regards  its  substance  rather  than  its  let- 
ter, and  uses  it  as  an  expression  of  the  divine  triumph  as  ful- 
filled in  Christ's  victory  over  death  and  sin. 

Ascended.  The  ascent  of  Jehovah  is  realized  in  Christ's 
ascent  into  heaven. 

Captivity.  Abstract  for  the  body  ofcaptwea.  See  on  Luke 
iv.  18.  The  captives  are  not  tJte  redeemed,  but  the  enemies  of 
Christ's  kingdom,  Satan,  Sin,  and  Death.  Compare  on  Col.  ii. 
15,  and  2  Cor.  ii.  14. 

Gave.  In  the  Hebrew  and  Septnagint,  received  or  took  /  but 
with  the  sense  received  mi  order  to  disirtbule  anutng  men.  Com- 
pare Gen.  XV.  9,  take  forme:  xvm.5,IvnUJetchJ'oryou:  Exod. 
xxvii.  20,  bring  thee,  i.e.,  ia&e  andpreae^U  to  thee:  Acts  ii.  33, 
"  Having  received  of  the  Father,  etc.,  He  hath  shed  forth." 
Thus  Paul  interprets  the  received  oi  the  Old  Testament.  His 
point  is  the  distribution  of  grace  by  Christ  in  varied  measure 
to  individuals.  He  confirms  this  by  Scripture,  seeing  in  the 
Jehovah  of  this  Old -Testament  passage  the  Clirist  of  the  New 
Testament — one  Redeemer  under  both  covenants — and  apply- 
ing the  Psalmist's  address  to  Christ  who  distributes  the  results 


J 


Ch.  iy.]  thb  bpistlb  to  the  kphbsians.  389 

of  His  victorj  among  His  loyal  subjects.     These  results  are 
enumerated  in  ver.  11  sqq. 

9.  Now  that  He  ascended.  Yv.  9  and  10  are  parenthet- 
ical, showing  what  the  ascension  of  Christ  presupposes.  By 
descending  into  the  depths  and  ascending  above  all,  He  entered 
upon  His  function  of  filling  the  whole  universe,  in  virtue  of 
which  function  He  distributes  gifts  to  men.  See  ch.  i.  23. 
Rev.,  properly,  inserts  ihis^  thus  giving  the  force  of  the  article 
which  calls  attention  to  the  fact  of  ascension  alluded  to  in  the 
quotation.     "  Now  the  or  this  '  He  ascended.'  ^ 

What  is  it  but.    What  does  it  imply  ? 

Descended  first  (koX  /carifirf).  His  ascent  implies  a  previous 
descent.  A.  Y.  reads  Jirstj  following  the  Tex.  Bee.  irpSnov. 
Rev.,  correctly,  lie  also  descended.     Compare  John  iii.  13. 

The  lower  parts  of  the  earth  (r^  Karm-epa  fiipi^  T179  7^). 
The  under  world.  The  reference  is  to  Christ's  descent  into 
Hades.  Some  give  the  words  a  comparative  force,  deeper  than 
the  earth, 

10.  Fill  all  things.    Compare  ch.  i.  23. 

11.  The  gifts  specified. 

He  gave.  He  is  emphatic.  It  is  J9^  that  gave.  Compare 
given  in  ver.  7. 

Apostles.  Properly,  as  apostles,  or  to  he  apostles.  Christ's 
ministers  are  gifts  to  His  people.  Compare  1  Cor.  iii.  6,  ^^min- 
isters as  the  Lord  gave ; "  also  1  Cor.  iii.  21,  22.  The  distin- 
guishing features  of  an  apostle  were,  a  commission  directly 
from  Christ:  being  a  witness  of  tlie  resurrection:  special  in- 
spiration :  supremo  authority :  accrediting  by  miracles :  milim- 
ited  commission  to  preach  and  to  found  churches. 

Prophets.  Preachers  and  expounders  under  the  immediate 
influence  of  the  Spirit,  and  thus  distinguished  from  teachers, 
1  Cor.  xii.  10. 

Evangelists.    Travelling  missionaries. 


390  WORD  3Tt7DIES  IN  THE   NEW    TESTAMENT.  (Cn.  IT. 

Pastors  and  teachers.  Pastors  or  altepherds.  The  verb 
woifiaina  to  teiid  as  a  shepherd,  is  often  need  in  this  sense.  8ee 
on  1  Pet.  V.  2;  Matt.  ii.  6.     The  omission  o£  tlie  article  from 

teachers  f&K.Ta6  to  indicate  tliat  pastors  and  teachers  are  inchided 
under  one  class.  The  two  belong  together.  No  man  is  fit  to 
be  a  pastor  who  cannot  also  teach,  and  the  teacher  needs  the 
knowledge  which  pastoral  experience  gives. 

12.  For  the  perfecting  (tt/m?  top  KaTaprurfiov).  On]y  here 
in  the  New  Testament.  In  classical  Greek  of  refitting  a  ship 
or  setting  a  bone.  The  preposition  /'or  denotes  tlie  vUiTnate 
purpose.  Ministering  and  building  are  means  to  this  end. 
Hence  its  emphatic  position  in  tlie  sentence.  For  jjerfectmg, 
see  on  viendiivg,  Matt,  iv.  ^\ ;  perfected,  Matt,  xxi,  16;  Luke 
■ri,  40 ;  1  Pet,  V.  10.  Compare  1  Cor,  i.  10 ;  Heb.  xiii.  21. 
The  radical  idea  of  adjustinetU  is  brought  out  in  ver.  13, 

For  the  work  of  the  ministry  {dt  epyov  Siatcoviait).  Kcv., 
much  better,  unto  the  work  of  ministering.  Ew  unto,  marks 
the  immediate  parpose  of  the  gift.  He  gave  apostles,  etc.,  unto 
ihs  work  of  minist^riTiff  and  huUding,  Jbr  the  perfecting,  etc. 
The  prevailing  sense  of  Suueovia  ministry,  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, is  spiritual  service  of  an  official  character.  See  Acts  L 
25  ;  vi.  4;  xx.  24 ;  Rom.  xi.  13  ;  1  Tim,  i.  12  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  5. 

Edifying  (owcoSo/i^f).  Rev.,  building  up.  See  on  Actsxx. 
32.  Notice  the  combination  oi perfecting  and  huilding.  Suild- 
in'j  defines  the  nature  of  the  work  of  ministry,  and  perfecting 
coineB  through  a  process. 

13.  Till  {fU-)(pi).  Specifying  the  time  up  to  which  this  min- 
istry and  impartation  of  gifts  are  to  last. 

Come  {«aTat^o-(D/i«v).  Arrive  at,  as  a  goal.  See  Acts  xvi, 
1 ;  xviii.  19 ;  xxv.  13.     Kev.,  attain. 

In  the  unity  (etv).  Rev.,  correctly,  unto.  Compare  one  faith, 
ver.  5. 

Knowledge  (t^  itri/yvoxTeto^).  The  _/u^  knowledge.  Not 
identical  with  faith,  since  the  article  puts  it  as  a  distinct  con- 
ception; but  related  to  faith.  Compare  Philip,  iii.  9,  10;  1 
John  iv.  16.     "  Christians  are  not  to  be  informed  merely  on 


J 


Ch.  IV.]  THE  BPISTLK  TO  THE  EPHBSIAN8.  391 

difiEerent  sections  of  trath  and  erring  through  defective  inform- 
ation on  other  points,  but  thej  are  to  be  characterized  by  the 
completeness  and  harmony  of  their  ideas  of  the  power,  work, 
history,  and  glory  of  the  Son  of  God"  (Eadie). 

Of  the  Son  of  God.  Belongs  to  both  faith  and  knowledge. 
Faith  in  Him,  knowledge  of  Him. 

Perfect  (riKeiovy     Rev.,  /tdl  grown.     See  on  1  Cor.  ii.  6. 

Measure  of  the  stature  {jikrpov  ijKucUv:).  Defining  jper- 
feet  man.  For  stainirey  see  on  Lnke  zii.  25.  The  word  is 
rendered  agcj  John  ix.  21,  23 ;  Heb.  xi.  11.  So  here,  by  some, 
the  age  when  tkefuLnees  of  Christ  is  received.  TixxifiJ/neea  and 
grow  tip  (ver.  15)  suggest  rather  the  idea  of  tnagnitude. 

Fulness  of  Christ.  Which  belongs  to  Christ  and  is  im- 
parted by  Him.     See  John  i.  16,  and  compare  ch.  iiL  19. 

14.  Children  (i^um).  See  on  1  Cor.  ii.  6;  iiL  1.  As  to 
the  connection,  ver.  13  states  the  ultimate  goal  of  christian 
training ;  ver.  14  that  which  is  pursued  with  a  view  to  the  at- 
tainment of  that  goal.  Yer.  14  is  subordinate  to  ver.  13,  as  is 
shown  by  the  retention  of  the  same  figure,  and  is  remotely  de- 
pendent on  vv.  11, 12.  The  remote  end,  ver.  13,  is  placed  be- 
fore the  more  immediate  one,  as  in  ver.  12.     See  note. 

Tossed  to  and  fro  («c\uSa>i/*2|o/ievoi).  Only  here  in  the  New 
Testament.  See  on  wa/oe^  Jas.  i.  6.  For  Paul's  use  of  nautical 
metaphors,  see  on  Philip,  i.  23.  Compare  Plato :  '^  Socrates. 
In  a  ship,  if  a  man  having  the  power  to  do  what  he  likes,  has 
no  intelligence  or  skill  in  navigation,  do  you  see  what  will  hap- 
pen to  him  and  to  his  fellow-sailors?  Alcibiadee.  Yes,  I  see 
that  they  will  all  perish ''  ("  Alcibiades,"  i.,  135). 

W  i  n  d  of  d  octr i  n  e.  Or  oft/ie  teaching.  The  different  teach- 
ings of  philosophers  or  of  religious  quacks  are  represented  as 
winds,  blowing  the  unstable  soul  in  every  direction. 

Sleight  {/cvfieia).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  From 
Kvfio<;  a  cube  or  die.     Lit.,  dice-jplaying. 

Cunning  craftiness  {Travovfyyia).  See  on  Luke  zx.  23.  The 
craft  which  gamblers  use. 


392 


WORD  STUDIES   IN   THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Cu.  IV. 


Whereby  they  lie  in  wait  to  deceive  (ir/>o;  t^v  fxeSoSeiav 

r^f  TrXaifijtj.  Lit.,  Uiuling  to  the  si/stein.  of  error.  It«v.,  uftcr 
tke  wiles  of  error.  MeSoBeia  means  a  deliberate  planning  or 
gffstem.  Of  error  includeB  the  idea  of  deceit  or  delusion.  See 
Matt,  xxvii.  64  ;  Rem.  i.  27 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  18  ;  iu.  17 ;  Jas.  t.  20. 
Error  orgauizes.  It  hsB  its  syateiiis  and  its  logic.  Eilicott  re- 
marks that  liere  it  is  almost  personified. 

15.  Speaking  the  truth  {oXijSeuoi^et).  Only  liere  and  Gal. 
iv,  16.  In  elasBical  Greek  it  means  to  be  true,  to  ai-rlve  at  truUi, 
and  to  speak  truth.  Here  the  idea  is  rather  that  of  being  or 
walking  in  trnth.     Re".,  in  margin,  dealing  truly. 

In  love.  Some  connect  with  grow  up.  The  parallel  con- 
struction, tossed  ami  carried  about  in,  the  sleight,  in  craftiness, 
speaking  truth  in  love,  favors  the  A.  V.  and  Rev.,  as  does  the 
awkwardness  of  speaking  truth  standing  alone,  Moreover, 
Paul's  habit  is  to  subjoin,  and  not  to  prefix,  his  qualifying 
clauses. 

16.  Fitly  Joined  —  compacted  {rrwapfuiXoyov/ievov — trv/tr- 
^i^a^o/ievov).  The  present  participles  denote  pi-eseut,  contiuii- 
OU9  progress.  The  two  participles  represent  respectively  the 
ideas  of  haruwnij  or  adaptation  and  compactness  or  solidity. 
See  on  Acts  ix.  22,  and  Col.  ii.  2. 

By  that  which  every  joint  supplieth  {&ih  ■n-aai]^  o^^  t^? 
iTTij^^opriyliK).  Lit,,  through  every  joint  of  the  supply.  For 
joint,  seo  on  Col.  ii.  19  ;  for  supply,  see  on  2  Pet.  i.  5.  The 
supply  specifies  it  as  peculiarly  Christ's.  The  phrase  joint  of 
the  supply  signifies  ^OTrii  whose  office  or  ptirpose  it  is  to  supply. 
Construe  with  the  two  participles,  as  Col.  ii.  19. 

According  to  the  working.      Construe  with  maluth  tw- 


in the  measure  of  every  part.  According  as  each  part 
works  in  its  own  proper  measure. 

Maketh.  Notice  the  peculiar  phrase;  the  whole  body  maJb- 
eth  increase  of  the  body.  It  is  a  living  organism,  and  its  growth 
is  produced  by  vital  power  within  itself. 


i 


Ch.  IV.]  THB  BPI8TLB  TO  THB  EPUESIAN&  393 

In  love.  As  the  element  in  which  the  upbuilding  takes 
place.     Compare  ch.  iii.  17-19. 

17.  This — ^therefore.  Referring  to  what  follows.  There- 
forCy  resuming  the  exhortation  of  vv.  1-3. 

Testify.  Solemnly  declare.  Compare  Acts  xx.  26;  Gal. 
V.  3. 

Other  Gentiles.    Omit  otiier. 

Vanity  of  their  mind  (juvraUnfrn  rov  voo^  avr&v).  For 
vanity  see  on  Bom.  i.  21 ;  viii.  20.  For  mindy  on  Bom.  vii. 
23. 

18.  Understanding  (Suufoief).  See  on  Luke  i.  51.  The 
moral  understanding. 

Life  of  Ood  ($c»^).  See  on  John  i.  4.  The  life  which  God 
bestows ;  life  in  Christ     See  1  John  v.  11. 

Through  the  ignorance.  The  cause  of  the  alienation. 
Kot  to  be  construed  with  darkened^  since  ignorance  is  the  ef- 
fecty  and  not  the  cavse^  of  the  darkness  of  the  understanding. 

Which  is  in  them  (r^y  oiaav  h  airroky  The  participle  of 
the  substantive  verb  expresses  the  deep-seated,  indwelling  char- 
acter of  the  ignorance. 

Hardening  {mopwriv).  See  on  Mark  iiL  5.  Dependent, 
like  ignorance,  on  alienated.    Arrange  the  whole  clause  thus: 

The  Gentiles  walk  in  the  vanity  of  their  mind, 

being  darkened  in  their  understanding, 

being  alienated  from  the  life  of  God, 

because  of  the  ignorance  that  is  in  them, 
because  of  the  hardening  of  their  heart. 

19.  Who  (omi/e^).  Explanatory  and  classifying:  men  of 
the  class  which. 

Being  past  feeling  {aTnjXrfriicoTes),  Only  here  in  the  Kew 
Testament.  Lit.,  the  verb  means  to  cease  from  feeling  pain. 
Hence  to  be  apaithetic. 


394 


WORD  STUDIES  IS  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Cn.  IV. 


Have  given  themselves  over  {irapeStuKav).  See  on  Matt. 
iv.  Vi;  xi.  27;  xsvi.  3;  Mark  iv.  29;  Luko  i.  3;  1  Pet.  ii.  23. 
The  verb  is  frequently  used  of  Christ  giving  Himself  for  the 
world.  Rom.  iv.  25  ;  Gal.  ii.  20;  Epb.  v.  5,  25,  It  indicates 
A  complete  surrender.  Meyer  says,  "  with  frightful  einphaBis," 
Where  men  persistently  give  themBelvea  up  to  evil,  God  gives 
them  up  to  its  power.     See  Rom,  i.  24. 

Lasciviousness  (dtrelvfela).     See  on  Mark  vii.  22. 

To  work  (ew  epyaa^iav).  Lit.,  to  a  working.  In  Acta  xix. 
25,  used  of  a  trade.  Not  precisely  in  this  sense  here,  yet  with 
a  shade  of  it.  They  gave  tiiemselves  up  as  to  the  prosecution 
of  a  business.     The  elu  unto  ia  very  forcible. 

With  greediness  (eV  wXeoi^fia).  The  noun  commonly  rend- 
ered covetousjiess :  in  an  eager  grasping  after  more  and  more 
uncleanness.  Not  with,  but  in,  as  the  state  of  mind  in  which 
they  wrouglit  evil. 

20.  Have  not  learned  {oix  ifidStTe).  Kev.,  giving  the 
force  of  the  aorist  tense,  did  not  learn ;  at  the  time  of  yoiir 
conversion,  when  you  were  instructed  in  Christ's  precepts.  The 
phrase  lea}'n  Cfirtst  occurs  nowhere  else.  Christ  does  not 
stand  for  the  doctrine  of  Christ ;  but  Christ  is  the  subject  of 
His  own  message.     See  ver.  21. 

21.  If  so  be  that  ye  heard  Him  {eX  ye  avrov  ^Kowrare). 
The  indicative  mood  implies  the  truth  of  the  supposition:  if 
ye  heard  as  ye  di<l.  Ilivi  is  emphatic.  If  it  was  Him  that  ye 
heard.     Compare  John  x.  27. 

By  Him  {iv  aiir^).     liev.,  correctly,  in  Him.     In  fellowship 


As  the  truth  is  in  •Se^u^ {KO^t  e<mv oK^^ta iv T^'Itiaoii). 

As  corresponds  with  not  so.  Ye  did  not  in  such  a  manner  learn 
Christ  if  ye  were  taught  in  such  a  manner  as  is  truth,  etc. 
Keudei',  as  Rev.,  as  truth  in  in  Jesus.  Schaff  paraphrases :  "  If 
you  were  taught  so  that  what  you  received  is  true  as  embodied 
in  the  personal  Saviour."  "Taught  in  the  lines  of  eternal 
fact  and  Bpiritual  reality  which  meet  in  Him"  (Moule).     Jesitt 


Ch.  IV.]  THB  epistle  to  the  EPHESIANa  395 

is  used  rather  than  Christ:  the  historical  rather  than  the  official 
name.  The  life  of  Christianity  consists  in  believing  fellowship 
with  the  historic  Jesus,  who  is  the  Christ  of  prophecy. 

22.  That  ye  put  away.  Dependent  upon  ye  were  taught^ 
and  specifying  the  purport  of  the  teaching. 

The  old  man.    See  on  Bom.  vi.  6.    Compare  Col.  iii.  9. 

Which  is  corrupt  {jov  ^dei/>o/A€yoy).  The  A.  Y.  misses  the 
force  of  the  participle.  The  verb  is  passive,  which  is  being 
corrupted^*  and  marks  the  jyrogressvoe  condition  of  corruption 
which  characterizes  'Hhe  old  man.''  Bev.,  correctly,  waxeth 
corrupt. 

According  to  the  deceitful  lusts  {Kark  rh,^  hriBvfulm  rr^ 
airdrrfsi).  Rev.,  correctly,  lusts  of  deceit.  On  the  vicious  rend- 
ering of  similar  phrases  in  A.  Y.,  see  on  ch.  i  19.  Deceit  is 
personified. 

23.  In  the  spirit  of  your  mind  (T^mmffLan  roD  yo^  vfA&v). 
77ie  spirit  is  the  human  spirit,  having  its  seat  in  and  directing 
the  mind.  In  the  New  Testament  the  Holy  Spirit  is  never  de- 
signated so  as  that  man  appears  as  the  subject  of  the  Spirit 
We  have  Sjpirit  of  adoption^  of  hclvnesSy  of  Ood^  but  never 
Holy  Spirit  of  man.  Furthermore,  the  apostle's  object  is  to 
set  forth  the  moral  self-activity  of  the  christian  life.  Hence 
irvev/JM  spiriiy  is  here  the  higher  life-principle  in  man  by  which 
the  human  reason,  viewed  on  its  moral  side^the  organ  of  moral 
thinking  and  knowing  is  informed.  The  renewal  takes  place, 
not  in  the  mvndj  but  in  the  spirit  of  it.  '^Tlie  change  is  not  in 
mind  psychologically,  either  in  its  essence  or  in  its  operation ; 
and  neitiier  is  it  in  the  mind  as  if  it  were  a  superficial  change 
of  opinion  either  on  points  of  doctrine  or  practice :  but  it  is  in 
the  spirit  of  the  mind ;  in  that  which  gives  mind  both  its  bent 
and  its  materials  of  thought.  It  is  not  simply  in  the  spirit  as 
if  it  lay  there  in  dim  and  mystic  quietude ;  but  it  is  in  the  spirit 
of  the  mind ;  in  the  power  which,  when  changed  itself,  radically 

■ ~ m  ^^^^  M  ^  ^ ^ ■— ■r'^'^"^^ 

*  Though  some  take  it  ai  middle,  eormpieth  kA 


396 


WORD   STUDIES   IN   THE   NEW   TESTAMENT.  [CiL  JV 


ftltere  the  entire  sphere  and  biieiness  of  the  inner  mechaniBin  " 
(Eadie). 

'24.  New  man  (natvhv).     See  on  Malt.  xxvi.  29. 

Created  {icriffSiuTa).     See  on  ch.  ii.  10. 

In  righteousness  and  true  holiness  {iv  hiKotoa-vin}  koI 
ocrtonjT*  T^s  aXii^'uK).  Rev.,  correctly,  i?*  Tighieouaiu^s  and 
holhiess  of  truth.  See  on  Luke  i.  75.  Truth.  Opposed  to  dr^- 
ceii,  ver.  22,  and  likewise  personified.  HighteouBneas  and  holi- 
ness are  attributes  of  trtitti. 

25.  Falsehood  (to  -^(wSw).  Lit.,  the  N^ ;  used  abstractly. 
See  on  John  viii.  44. 

Members  one  of  another.  Compare  Rom.  xiL  5 ;  1  Cor, 
xii.  12-27.  Chrysostom  says:  "  Let  not  the  eye  lie  to  the  foot, 
nor  the  foot  to  the  eye.  If  there  be  a  deep  pit,  and  its  mouth 
covered  with  reeds  shall  present  to  the  eye  the  appearance  of 
solid  ground,  will  not  the  eye  use  the  foot  to  ascertain  whether 
it  ia  hollow  underneath,  or  whether  it  is  firm  and  resists )  Will 
the  foot  tell  a  lie,  and  not  tlie  truth  as  it  is  ?  And  what,  again, 
if  the  eye  were  to  spy  a  serpent  or  a  wild  beast,  will  it  lie  to 
the  foot!" 

26.  Be  ye  angry  and  sin  noX  {opriLfytrBe  koI  fit}  ifxapTdvere). 
Cited  from  I's.  iv,  5.  after  the  Septuagint.  Hebrew,  stand  in 
awe  and  sin  7wt.  Righteous  anger  is  comimmded,  not  merely 
j>ermit(ed. 

Wrath  {wapopyuT/i^).  Irritation,  exasperation;  something 
not  so  enduring  as  opy^  anger,  which  denotes  a  deep-seated 
sentiment.     Sec  on  John  iii.  36, 

27.  Place.    Room. 

29.  Corrupt  iaaTTpot).     See  on  Luke  vi.  43,  and  Col.  iv.  6. 

That  which  is  good  (e?  rt?  ar]a^o<;).  Lit.,  if  an  ij  is  good. 
Discourse  that  is  good,  whatever  it  he. 

To  the  use  of  edifying  {wpos  olim&o/i^v  t^<i  ■ypeliK).  Lit., 
for  the  building  up  of  the  need.  Rev.,  edifying  as  ths  need 
may  he.     Compare  1  Thess.  v.  11,  14. 


Ch.  v.]  the  epistlb  to  the  ephbsians.  397 


31.  Bitterness  {irucpla).    Bitter  frame  of  mind. 

Wrath.  What  is  commanded  in  ver.  26  is  here  forbidden, 
because  viewed  simply  on  the  side  of  liuman  passion. 

Anger  {Bviwsi),  Violent  outbreak.  See  on  John  iii.  36 ; 
Jas.  V.  7. 

Clamor  {xpavy^).  Outward  manifestation  of  anger  in  vo- 
ciferation or  brawling. 

Evil-speaking  (fiKcur^fuCa).    See  on  Mark  vii.  22. 

Malice  {icatcCtf).    The  root  of  all  the  rest.    See  on  Jas.  i.  21. 

32.  Be  ye  {ylvea-Se).  lit.,  heoomey  as  following  the  putting 
away  of  anger,  etc. 

Kind  (xpv^^^O-  ^^^  ^^  ^(^j  Matt  xi.  30;  ffraoiotUy  1  Pet. 
ii.  3. 

Each  other(jiiuroi?).  lit.,  yotMrselves.  See  on  Col.  iii.  13. 
^^  Doing  as  a  body  for  yourselves  that  which  Ood  did  once  for 
you  all "  (Alford). 


CHAPTER  r. 

1.  Be  ye  {ylvea-Se).    Became^  as  ch.  iv.  32. 

Followers  (jjufifiral).    Bev.,  correctly,  imitators. 

Dear  {arfarnird).  Bev.,  beloved.  As  those  to  whom  Christ 
has  shown  love. 

2.  Walk  in  love.    As  imitators  of  GK>d,  who  is  love. 

Loved  us  (i7/Aa9).     The  correct  reading  is  v/jm^  you. 

Gave  (7rapiB<oiC€p).  To  death.  Compare  Ilom.  iv.  25,  where 
the  same  verb  was  delivered  is  followed  by  wets  raised.  See 
also  Rom.  viii.  32 ;  Gal.  ii.  20. 

Offering— sacrifice  {irpoa^phv — Svclav).  Offering^  gen- 
eral, including  the  life  as  well  as  the  death  of  Christ:  sacrifice^ 
special :  on  the  cross.     Properly,  a  slavn  offering. 


398  WORD   STUDIES  IN   THE  NKW   TESTAMENT.  (Cu.  V 

A  sweet*8mel)ing  savor  (dtr/i^i'  fimBiwi).  liev.,  correcll_v, 
odor  of  a  sweet  smell.  See  on  2  Cor.  ii.  li,  15,  16.  The  Sep- 
tuagint,  in  Lev.  i.  9,  usee  this  plirase  to  render  the  Hebrew,  a 
savor  ofqui^tn^a.  For  {eh)  expresses  design,  that  it  might  be- 
come, or  result:  so  that  it  became. 

3.  Or  covetousness.  Or  sets  this  sin  empfaaticall;  by  it- 
Belf. 

Let  it.     It  refers  to  each  of  the  eins. 

4.  Filthinesa  {ala-)(p6T7i^).     Obacenitj. 

Foolish  talking  (juupoXoyia).  Only  here  in  the  New  Test 
anient.  Talk  which  is  both  foolish  and  sinful.  Compare  o&r- 
Tupt  cofnmutiication,  eh.  iv.  29.  It  ia  more  than  random  or 
idle  talk.  "  Words  obtain  a  new  earnestness  when  assumed 
into  the  ethical  terminology  of  Christ's  school.  Nor,  in  seeking 
to  enter  fully  into  the  meaning  of  this  one,  ought  we  to  leave 
out  of  sight  the  greater  emphasis  which  the  words  Joolfjoottsh, 
folly  obtain  in  Scripture  than  elsewhere  they  have  or  can 
have"  (Trench). 

Jesting  (eirrpoTre^Ja).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 
From  ev  well  or  easily,  Tpknta  to  turn.  That  which  easily  turns 
and  adapts  itself  to  the  moods  and  conditions  of  those  with 
whom  it  may  be  dealing  at  the  moment.  From  this  original 
sense  of  versatility  it  came  to  be  applied  to  morals,  as  time- 
serving, and  to  speech  with  the  accompanying  notion  of  dissim.- 
uUiiion.  Aristotle  cails  it  chasten^  insolence.  The  sense  of 
the  woi-d  here  is  jwlished  and  witty  speech  as  the  instrument  of 
sin  ;  refinement  and  versatility  without  the  flavor  of  Christian 
"Sometimes  it  ia  lodged  in  a  sly  question,  in  a  smart 
in  a  quirkish  reason,  in  shrewd  intimation,  in  cunningly 
diverting  or  cleverly  retorting  an  objection :  sometimes  it  is 
couched  in  a  bold  scheme  of  speecli,  in  a  tart  irony,  in  a  lusty 
hyperbole,  in  a  startling  metaphor,  in  a  plausible  reconciling  of 
contradictions,  or  in  acute  nonsense.  .  .  .  Sometimes  an 
atFected  simplicity,  sometimes  a  presumptuous  bhintness  giveth 
it  being.     ...     Its  waya  are  unacconntable  and  inexplicable, 


grace. 


Ch.  v.]  THB  epistle  to  the  BPHESIANa  399 

being  answerable  to  the  numberless  rovings  of  fancj  and  wind- 
ings of  language "  (Barrow,  Sermon  XIV.,  ^'  Against  Foolish 
Talking  and  Jesting."  The  whole  passage  is  well  worth  read- 
ing)- 

5.  Ye  know  {lore  yivwrxovre^).  The  A.  V.  fails  to  give  the 
whole  force  of  the  expression,  which  is,  f/e  know  recoffnizing. 
Bev.,  ye  know  of  a  surety. 

Idolater.    Compare  Col.  iii.  6,  and  see  on  1  Cor.  v.  10. 

6.  Vain.  Plausible,  but  devoid  of  truth,  and  employed  to 
palliate  heathen  vices. 

7.  Be  not  (yivecSe).  Lit.,  become  not  It  is  a  warning 
against  lapsing  into  old  vices. 

8.  Ye  were.  Emphatic,  and  according  with  become  of  ver. 
7.  Ye  were  darkness,  but  now  are  je  light  Do  not  becoms 
darkness  again. 

Darkness  {{rtdra^).    See  on  John  i.  5. 

Light  (^o>9).    Light  itself ;  not  a  lamp. 

Children  of  light.     See  Matt  v.  16. 

9.  Is  in.     Consists  in.    The  verse  is  parenthetical. 

10.  Proving.  Connect  with  i/^oZXr.  Walk,  proving  by  your 
walk.     Proving  J  see  on  1  Pet  i.  7. 

Acceptable  (evdpetrrov).  Bev.,  better  and  more  literally, 
weU-plecLsing.  The  one  point  of  all  moral  investigation  is,  does 
itjplease  Qodf 

11.  Have — ^fellowship  {^nj^KowmHlM).  See  on  Apoc.  xviii. 
4 ;  i.  9. 

Unfruitful  works  (^P70i9  to!?  oKofmovi).  Compare /rut^ 
ver.  9,  and  Gal.  v.  19,  22,  works  of  the  flesh,yrui^  of  the  Spirit 
Works  which  bring  no  blessing  with  them.  Compare  Bom.  vL 
21 ;  viii.  13 ;  Gal.  v.  21 ;  vi.  8. 

Reprove  (^X^y^erc).     See  on  John  iii.  20. 

13.  All  things  (r^  irdvra).  More  literaUy,  they  aU^  or  aO 
of  them  ;  the  secret  sins  just  mentioned. 


400 


WORD  STUDIES   IH  THE  f 


;■  TKSTAJIENT. 


[fu.  V. 


That  are  reproved  (e\ey)(6fi(va).  Lit.,  beiTiff  r^roved. 
Rev.,  vtAefi  they  are  i-Kpruved.  Jieproved  is  to  be  taken  in  the 
same  literal  sense  ae  in  ver.  11,  and  not  metaphorically  in  the 
Bense  of  being  diinmisli-aied  hy  liglit,  or  brought  to  light,  wliiuli 
is  almost  Bj'iionymoiis  with  are  Vioda  niauifeKi. 

By  the  light.  Connect  with  are  nrnde  manijeat,  not  with 
arc  i-ejirov&l. 

Whatsoever  doth  make  manifest  is  light  {irav  to  ^mvep- 
ovfi€vov  ^>Sn  ea-riv).  Wrong.  The  A.  V.  i-endera  doth  make 
■manifest,  as  in  the  middle  voice,  but  the  verb  is  in  the  passive 
voice.  It  occurs  nearly  fifty  times  in  the  New  Testament,  and 
never  as  middle.  Hence  Rev.,  correctly,  everything  thai  is 
Tnade  rrtanifest. 

Is  light.  A  general  proposition,  going  to  show  that  mani- 
festation can  come  only  through  light.  Whatever  is  revealed 
in  its  true  essence  by  liglit  is  of  the  nature  of  light.  It  no 
longer  belongs  to  the  category  of  darkness.  Manifestation  is 
a  law  of  good  and  evil  alike.  That  which  is  of  the  truth  seeks 
tiie  light  and  cometh  to  the  light.  That  which  is  evil  avoids 
the  light,  and  loves  darkness  better  than  light,  but  none  the 
less  is  brought  to  the  light  and  appears  in  its  own  light.  See 
John  iii.  20,  21.  This  truth  is  embodied  in  another  form  in 
the  parable  of  the  Tares,  Growth  is  manifestation.  By  suf- 
fering the  tares  to  grow,  their  difference  from  the  wheat,  which 
at  first  is  not  apparent,  is  fully  revealed. 

14.  He  saith.  God.  This  use  of  the  personal  prononn  is 
frequent  in  Paul's  writings.  See  Gal.  iii.  16 ;  Epli.  iv,  8 ;  1 
Cor.  vi.  16. 

Awake,  etc.  The  quotation  is  probably  a  combination  and 
free  rendering  of  Isa.  Ix.  1 ;  xxvi.  19.  For  similar  combina- 
tions see  on  Rom.  iii.  10;  ix.  33.  By  some  the  words  are  re- 
garded as  the  fragment  of  a  hymn. 

Shall  give  thee  light.  Rev.,  correctly,  shall  shhie  uj>on 
thee, 

15.  See  that  ye  walk  circumspectly  {^keirere -rrSKi  aKpt^wt 
irepcTTOTCiTe).     Lit.,  look  how  exactly  ye  walk:     Tlie  best  texts 


J 


Ch.  v.]  thb  epistlb  to  the  EPHESIANS.  401 

place  WW  how  after  cucpifim  exacti/y.  So  Rev.,  look  carefuUy 
how  ye  walk.  OvrcumspecUy  is  better  rendered  carefully.  It 
means  eixactiy^  accurately^  from  atcpo^  the  farthest  jmnt.  See 
on  inquired  diligently ^  Matt.  ii.  6 ;  and  compare  Luke  i  3 ; 
Acts  xviii.  25,  notes. 

Not  as  unwise,  but  as  wise.    Explanatory  of  carefully. 

16.  Redeeming  the  time  {i^afYopai6fievoi  rov  tcaipov).  See 
on  Col.  iv.  5. 

17.  Understanding  (awUvre^).  See  on  jprudent^  Matt  xi. 
25 ;  foolish^  Eom.  iii.  21. 

18.  Be  not  drunk  Qi^  fAeSwrxeaSe).    See  on  John  ii.  10. 

Wherein.    In  drunkenneesy  not  in  urnie. 

Excess  {aamrla).  Bev.,  riot.  Lit.,  unsavinffneee.  See  on 
riotous  living^  Luke  xv.  13. 

19.  Speaking  to  yourselves  (XoXoOin-c?  iavrok).  Bev., 
one  to  OAfiotheT.  The  A.  Y.  is  literally  correct,  but  is  open  to 
the  misinterpretation  each  one  communing  with  himself.  The 
meaning  is  as  in  Col.  iii.  13,  and  Bev.  is  better. 

Psalms.    See  on  1  Cor.  xiv.  15. 

Hymns — spiritual  songs.    See  on  CoL  iii.  16. 

22.  Your  own  i^JUw).  The  peculiar  personal  relationship 
is  emphasized  as  the  ground  of  the  duty. 

23.  He  is  the  saviour  of  the  body.  In  this  particular  the 
comparison  between  the  husband  as  the  head  of  the  wife,  and 
Christ  as  the  head  of  the  Church,  does  not  hold.  Hence  Bev., 
properly,  renders  for  and  He  isy  being  Himself;  Simself  B&pBr 
rating  the  clause  from  what  was  previously  said.  The  com- 
parison lies  in  the  fact  of  headship  alone.  The  husband's  love 
and  protection  cannot  be  called  salvaiionj  in  which  respect 
Christ's  headship  is  peculiar  to  Himself. 

24.  Therefore  (aXXA^.  Bev.,  correctly,  hut.  Offsetting  the 
relation  of  saviour.  The  comparison  does  not  hold  in  respect  of 
salvation,  huf  it  does  hold  in  respect  of  subjection. 

Vol.  in ^26 


402  WORD  8TDDIBS  IN   THE  NEW    TESTAMENT.  [Ca.  V. 

26  Banciiiy  and  c\9a.nse (a/ytdaT)  Ko^pla-cK).  Jiev.,mig/U 
sa7ici-y^l/,  having  cleansed.  The  liev.  brings  out  the  proper 
eiicceesion  of  sanctificatioii  as  a  consequence  of  cleanslDg: 
might  sanctify  after  Lsviiig  cleansed. 

With  the  washing  of  water  (tm  XovrpA  tov  tSSaro?).  Aot;- 
rpop  -washing  is  properly  laoer.  .Note  the  article,  the  laver,  as 
something  well  known.  There  is  no  Batisfactory  evidence  for 
the  meaning  washing.  The  allusion  is  to  baptism.  Some  find 
a  reference  to  the  bride's  bath  before  marriage. 

By  the  word  {iv  p-^naTi).  liev.,  correctly,  with  the  word. 
To  be  connected  with  liavvng  cUaneed  it  by  the  laver  of  waier  ; 
not  with  might  sancitfy,  nor  with  the  Icwer  of  water  alone,  aa 
a  descriptive  epithet.  With  the  word  describes  that  which  ac- 
companies the  rite  and  which  is  the  peculiar  element  of  bap- 
tismal purification.  Compare  John  xv.  3.  Auguatine  saya: 
"  Take  away  the  word,  and  what  is  the  water  but  water ) " 

27.  He  might  present  it  to  Himself  {irapaar^aji  avrai 
iavT^).  As  a  bride.  Compare  2  Cor.  xi.  2.  Notice  the  two 
pronouns  in  conjunction,  j5e,  to  ffirnself.  Christ  Himself  pre- 
■enta  the  bride. 

Spot  {(TTriKoii).  Only  here  and  2  Pet.  ii.  13.  The  kindred 
Verb  oTTiXJiu  to  dejile,  occurs  Jae,  iU.  6  ;  Jnde  23. 

Wrinkle  {pvr&a).    Only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 

2S.  So.     As  Christ  loved  the  Church. 

As  their  own  bodies  (w).     As  being :  since  they  are. 

20.   Flesh.     Instead  of  body,  with  reference  to  Gen.  ii.  S3. 

Cherisheth  (.SaXTret).  Only  here  and  1  These,  ii.  7.  Orig- 
inally, to  warm. 

30,  OraKt  of  His  JUth  and  of  His  hones. 

31,  Shall  be  joined  {irpoaKoXK-ri^a-eTat).  Only  here  and 
Mark  x.  7.  See  on  Luke  xv.  15.  The  compound  verb  denotes 
moat  intimate  union. 


Ch.  VI.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  EPHBSIANa  403 

Shall  be  one  flesh  {iaovrcu  ek  cdptca  lulav).  The  A.  Y. 
overlooks  the  force  of  et?  urUo.  Lit.,  shaU  he  unto  onejleah. 
Kev.,  BhaU  become. 

32.  A  great  mystery.  Chreixt  is  predicative,  not  attribu- 
tive. Rev.,  correctly,  {hxB  mystery  is  great.  The  reference  in 
this  mystery  is  to  the  preceding  statement  of  the  conjugal  rela- 
tion of  the  Church  with  Christ,  typified  by  the  human  marriage 
relation. 

Concerning  Christ  and  the  Church.  Kev.,  in  regard  of 
(ew).  Not  calling  your  attention  to  the  mere  human  relation- 
ship, but  to  the  mysterious  relation  between  Christ  and  His 
Church,  of  which  that  is  a  mere  semblance. 

33.  Nevertheless.  Not  to  dwell  longer  on  the  mystical  as- 
pect of  the  subject. 

Even  as  himself.  Not  as  much  as  he  loves  himself ^  but 
as  being  his  very  self. 


CHAPTER    YL 

1.  In  the  Lord.  The  children  being  with  their  parents  in 
the  Lord,  are  to  be  influenced  by  religious  duty  as  well  as  by 
natural  affection. 

Right  {^iKowy).  Belonging  essentially  to  the  very  nature  of 
the  relation. 

2.  Honor  thy  father,  eta  To  what  is  essentially  right  the 
divine  ordinance  is  added.  Compare  Aeschylus :  ^^  For  the 
reverence  of  parents,  this  is  written  third  in  the  laws  of  mnch- 
venerated  justice "  ("  Suppliants,"  687-689).  So  Euripides : 
"There  are  three  virtues  which  thou  shouldst  cultivate,  my 
child,  to  honor  the  gods,  and  thy  parents  who  gave  thee  being, 
and  the  common  laws  of  Hellas"  (Fragment).  Honor  ex- 
presses the  frame  of  mind  from  which  obedience  proceeds. 

First — with  promise  {wptorrj  h  iirarfyeKuf).  First  in  point 
of  promise,  as  it  also  is  in  order  the  first  with  promise. 


404 


WORD  STUDIES   IN   THE  NEW    TESTAUKNT. 


3.  Thou  mayest  live  long  (earj  fiojcpoypovuK).   Lit.,  mayeet 

he  l-ong-lived.     Tlie  adjective  ocuurs  oiii^  liere. 

4.  Nurture  and  admonition  (^TratSei'a  koX  vov^eala).  Ilat 
Beif  from  •jraCi;  a  child.  In  claesical  usage,  that  wiiich  is  ap- 
plied to  train  and  educate  a  child.  So  Plato:  "Education 
iTrtuZeui)  is  the  constraixiing  and  directing  of  youth  toward  that 
right  reason  which  the  law  affirms,  and  which  the  experience 
of  the  best  of  our  eldera  haa  agreed  to  be  truly  right"  ("Laws," 
659).  In  scriptural  usage  another  meaning  liaa  come  into  it 
and  its  kindred  verb  iraiSeveiv,  which  recognizes  the  necessity 
of  corj'eciion  or  ohastisemerd  to  thorough  diacipline.  So  Lev, 
xxvi.  18;  Ps.  vi.  1;  Isa.  liii.  5;  Ileb.  xii.  5-S.  In  Acta  viL 
22  Tra^Evdi  occurs  in  the  original  classical  sense :  "  Moees  waa 
inabriKted  {hraiZev^)  in  all  the  wifidom,"  etc.  The  term  here 
covers  all  the  agencies  which  contribute  to  moral  and  spiritual 
training.  Diectplitie  is  better  than  Rev.,  chastening.  NovSeaia 
admonition  occurs  only  here,  1  Cor.  x.  11,  and  Tit.  iii.  10,  The 
kindred  verb  vovAeria  to  warn  or  adraonish,  la  found  only  in 
Paul's  letters,  with  the  single  exception  of  Acts  xx.  31  (see 
note).  Its  distinctive  feature  is  training  hy  word  of  Truyidk,  as 
is  shown  by  its  classical  nsage  iu  counection  with  words  mean- 
ing to  exhort  or  tetuih.  Xenophon  uses  the  phrase  vavSeriKoi 
\oyoi  admonitory  -words.  Yet  it  may  include  monition  by 
deed.  Thus  Plato,  speaking  of  public  instruction  in  nmsic,  says 
that  the  spectators  were  kept  quiet  by  the  admonition  of  th-e 
wund  (pd^Sov  vovSinjaK,  "  Laws,"  700).  lie  also  uses  the  phrase 
TrXiryaw  vow^erew  t^'  admonish  vrilh  llotos.  It  includes  rebuke, 
hut  not  necessarily.  Trench  Iiappily  illustrates  the  etymologi- 
cal sense  {vow  the  mintf,  riSij/ii  to  put) :  "  Whatever  is  needed 
to  cause  the  monition  to  be  laid  to  heart."  Admonition  isa 
mode  of  discipline,  so  that  the  two  words  nurtu/re  and  admoni- 
tion stand  related  as  general  and  special. 

Of  the  Lord.  Such  discipline  as  is  prescribed  by  the  Lord 
and  is  administered  in  His  name. 

5.  Servants  {hoiiXoC).  Bond-servants  or  slaves.  In  this  ap- 
peal Paul  was  addressing  a  numerous  class.  In  many  of  the 
eitiea  of  Asia  Minor  slaves  outnumbered  freemen. 


i 


Ch.  VL]  THK  BPISTLE  to  the  BPUBSIAN&  405 

Masters  {icvplov;).    See  on  Gol.  iii.  22. 

According  to  the  flesh.    Regarded  in  their  merely  human 

relation. 

With  fear.    See  on  Philip,  ii.  12. 

Singleness.    See  on  simplicity ,  Bom.  xii.  8. 

Unto  Christ.  ^'Common  and  secular  inducements  can 
have  but  small  influence  on  the  mind  of  a  slave." 

6.  Eye-service — men-pleasers.    See  on  Col.  iii.  22. 

7.  With  good-will.  Bengel  quotes  Xenophon:  ''The  slave 
that  is  a  steward  must  have  good-will  if  he  is  to  fill  thy  place 
adequately."    Compare  Col.  iii.  23. 

8.  Shall  he  receive  {KOfulaercu).  See  on  1  Pet.  i.  8;  com- 
pare Col.  iii.  25. 

9.  Forbearing  {avihT^^).  See  on  the  kindred  noun  Svtavi, 
A.  v.,  liberty  J  Acts  xxiv.  23. 

Threatening  (r^y  anreOJiv).  Note  the  article,  the  threaten- 
ing customary  from  the  master  to  the  slave. 

Knowing.    Since  ye  know. 

Your  master  also  {yii&v  ain&v  6  icupib^i).  The  correct  read- 
ing is  Kcu  airr&v  xai  vfiMv  6  icupUt^  hoik  their  master  and  yours. 
So  Rev. 

Respect  of  persons.    See  on  Jas.  iL  1 ;  Col.  iiL  26. 

10.  Finally  {rh  \ovir6v).  See  on  2  Cor.  ziiL  11.  Omit  my 
brethren. 

Be  strong  {ipSwafuwa-Be).  Lit,  he  strengthened.  Compare 
Rom.  iv.  20,  and  Philip,  iv.  13. 

Power  of  His  might.    See  on  ch.  i.  19. 

11.  Whole  armor  {iravoTrTUav),  Pcmoply  is  a  transcript  of 
the  Greek  word.  Only  here,  ver.  13,  and  Luke  zi.  22,  see  note. 
In  classical  Greek  of  tlie/uU  armor  of  a  hea^-armed  soldier. 
The  student  may  compare  the  description  of  the  forging  of 


406 


WOHD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW   TESTAMENT. 


Aeneae^  annor  hy  Vulcan  (Virgil,  "Aeiieid,"  viii.,  il5— 459), 
and  of  the  armor  itself  aa  displayed  to  Aeneas  by  Venua 
("Aeneid,"  viii,,  616-730).  Also  of  the  armor  of  Achillea 
(Homer,  "Iliad,"  xviii.,  468-617). 

Wiles  {fif^oSelas;).  Bee  on  ch.  iv.  14.  The  armor  ie  a  de- 
fence against  strategy  as  well  as  assault. 

The  devil  (toO  SiaffoXov).  See  on  Matt.  iv.  1 ;  John  vi.  70. 
In  Job  and  Zechariah  used  ae  the  equivalent  of  ^atan  {hater  or 
accuser,  see  on  Luke  x,  18),  of  a  single  person,  the  enemy  of 
mankind.  In  the  othei-  Old-Testament  passages  in  which  it 
occurs,  it  is  used  to  translate  either  Satan  or  its  equivalent  in 
meaning,  tsar  {adversary,  diaireaser),  but  without  the  aame  ref- 
erence to  that  single  person.  See  Sept.,  1  Chron.  xxi.  1  ; 
Esther  vii.  4;  viii.  1;  Pa.  cviii.  6;  Numb.  xxiL  32.  The 
Septuagint  usage  implies  euinity  in  general,  witliout  accusatioQ 
either  true  or  false.  In  the  New  Testament  invariably  as  a 
proper  name,  except  in  the  Pastoral  Epistles,  where  it  has  its 
ordinary  meaning  slanderous.  See  1  Tim.  iii.  11;  2  Tim.  iii.  3; 
Tit.  ii.  3.  As  a  proper  name  it  is  used  in  the  Septnagint  sense 
as  the  equivalent  of  Satan,  and  meaning  enemy. 

12.  We  wrestle  (eortt-  TjfiXv  3}  iraXii).  Eev.,  more  literally 
and  correctly,  our  vfresUing  is.     IlaKr}  wrestling,  only  here, 

Flesh  and  blood.     The  Greek  reverses  the  order. 

Principalities  and  powers.     See  on  Col,  i.  16. 

Rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this  world  {KtHTiiOKp6.Topa^  rou 
ffKOTov?  rouTov).  Rev.,  more  correctly,  world-rulers  of  tltia 
darhtiess.  Worlds-rulers  only  here.  Compare  John  xiv.  30  ; 
xvi.  11 ;  1  John  v.  19;  2  Cor.  iv.  4. 

Spiritual  wickedness  (ri  TmevfiaTuck  rrp  trovr]plasi).  Lit., 
the  spiritual  things  of  wickedness.  Rev.,  spiritttal  hosts  of 
wickedness.  The  phrase  is  collective,  of  tlie  evil  powers  viewed 
as  a  body.  Wickedness  is  active  evil,  mischief.  Ilence  Satan 
ie  called  o  irovrjpov  the  wicked  one.  See  on  Luke  iii.  19 ;  vii 
21  ;  1  John  ii.  13. 


J 


Cu.  VL]  THE  EPISTLB  TO  THE  BPHESIAN8.  407 

In  high  places  {h  rok  hrovpavCoisi).  Kev.,  more  literally, 
m  the  heavenly  places.  Used  in  the  general  sense  of  the  sky  or 
air.     See  on  ch.  ii.  2. 

13.  Wherefore.    Because  the  fight  is  with  such  powers. 

Take  unto  you  {avaKdfiere).  Lit.,  taJce  up^  as  one  takes  up 
armor  to  put  it  on.     So  Bev. 

The  whole  armor.  An  interesting  parallel  passage,  evi- 
dently founded  upon  this,  occurs  in  Ignatius'  Epistle  to  Foly- 
earp,  vi.  "  Please  the  captain  under  whom  ye  serve,  from 
whom  also  ye  shall  receive  your  wages.  Let  no  one  of  you  be 
found  a  deserter.  Let  your  baptism  abide  as  your  shield ;  your 
faith  as  your  helmets ;  your  love  as  your  spear ;  your  patience 
as  your  whole  armor.  Let  your  good  works  be  your  savings 
(tA  hertr6<TVTa  depasiia)^*  that  you  may  receive  what  is  justly  to 
your  credit."  Gibbon  relates  how  the  relaxation  of  discipline 
and  the  disuse  of  exercise  rendered  the  soldiers  less  willing  and 
less  able  to  support  the  fatigues  of  the  service.  They  complained 
of  the  weight  of  their  armor,  and  successively  obtained  permis- 
sion to  lay  aside  their  cuirasses  and  helmets  (ch.  xxvii.). 

Withstand.  With  has  the  sense  of  against j  as  appears  in  the 
older  English  wUhsayy  to  contradict;  Anglo-Saxon,  widgtandan^ 
to  resist.    Compare  German,  wider  and  Widersto/nd^  resistance. 

Having  done  all.     Everything  which  the  crisis  demands. 

14.  Having  your  loins  girt  about  {irepi^DMrdfAepoi  rifv 
6(T<f>ini).  The  verb  is  middle,  not  passive.  Rev.,  correctly, 
having  girded.  Compare  Isa.  xi.  5.  The  principal  terms  in 
this  description  of  the  christian  armor  are  taken  from  the 
Septuagint  of  Isaiah. 


*  When  a  boantj  was  given  to  Boldien,  onlj  one-half  wai  paid  at  a  time, 
the  rest  being  placed  in  a  sarings-bank  and  managed  bj  a  special  oflcer. 
This,  with  prize-monej,  etc.,  Tolontarily  deposited,  waa  paid  over  to  the 
soldier  at  his  discharge.  Deserters  or  discharged  soldiers  forfeited  their  ao« 
camalations. 


408  WOBD  STUDIES   IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Cu.  VI 

Truth  {aXtjSeia).  The  Btate  of  tlie  heart  answering  to  God'a 
tnith ;  inward,  practical  scltnowledgiiieiit  of  tlie  truth  as  it  is  in 
Him  :  the  agreeiuent  of  our  convictions  witii  God'a  revelation. 

The  loins  encircled  by  the  girdle  form  tiie  central  point  of 
the  physical  system.  Hence,  in  Scripture,  the  loiim  are  de- 
scribed as  Uie  seat  of  power.  "To  smite  through  the  loins"  is 
to  strike  a  fatal  blow.  "  To  lay  afBiction  upon  tlie  loins  "  is  to 
afflict  heavily.  Here  was  the  point  of  junction  for  the  main 
pieces  of  the  body-armor,  bo  that  the  girdle  formed  the  common 
bond  of  the  whole.  Truth  gives  unity  to  the  different  virtnef, 
and  determinateness  and  consistency  to  cliaracter.  All  the  vir- 
tnes  are  exercised  within  the  sphere  of  truth. 

Breastplate  of  righteousness  (SmpaKa  t^«  SucaiotrtJi^!). 
Compare  Isa.  li.\.  17.  IH'jhteoumiess  is  used  here  in  the  eeuse  of 
moral  rectitude.  In  1  Theas.  v,  8,  the  breastplate  is  described  aa 
oi  faith  and  love.  Homer  speaks  of  liglit-armed  warriors  anued 
with  linen  corselets;  and  these  were  worn  to  much  later  times  by 
Asiatic  soldiers,  and  were  occasionally  adopted  by  the  Romans. 
Thus  Suetonius  says  of  Galba,  that  on  the  day  on  which  he 
was  slain  by  Otho's  soldiers,  he  put  on  a  linen  corselet,  though 
aware  that  it  would  avail  little  against  the  enemy's  daggera 
{"  Galba,"  xix.).  Horn  was  used  for  this  purpose  by  some  of 
the  barbarona  nations.  It  was  cut  into  small  pieces,  which  were 
fastened  like  scales  upon  linen  shirts.  Later,  the  corselet  of 
metal  scales  fastened  upon  leather  or  linen,  or  of  flexible  bands 
of  steel  folding  over  each  other,  was  introduced.  They  appeai- 
on  Roman  monuments  of  the  times  of  the  emperors.  The 
Roman  spearmen  wore  cuirasses  of  chain-mail.  Virgil  mentions 
those  in  which  tlie  linked  rings  were  of  gold  ("Aeneid,"  iii., 
467).  The  stiff  cuirass  called  <rra8(09  stariding  upright,  be- 
cause, when  placed  upon  its  lower  edge  it  stood  erect,  consisted 
of  two  parts:  the  breastplate,  made  of  hard  leather,  bronze,  or 
iron,  and  a  corresponding  plate  covering  the  back.  They  were 
connected  by  leatliern  straps  or  metal  bands  passing  over  the 
shoulders  and  fastened  in  front,  and  by  hinges  on  the  right 
side. 

The  breastplate  covers  the  vital  parts,  as  the  heart. 


i 


Cb.  VI.]  THE   EPISTLE  TO   THE  EPHESIAN8,  409 

lii.  Preparation  {hoifuiaia).  Only  here  in  the  New  Teata- 
ineiit.  The  Roman  soldier  aubatituted  for  tlie  greaves  of  tlie 
Greek  (metal  plates  covering  the  lower  part  of  the  leg)  the 
cali^ae  or  sandals,  boand  by  tlioiigB  over  the  inetep  and  roniid 
the  ankle,  and  having  the  eolee  thickly  studded  with  nails. 
They  were  not  worn  by  the  superior  officers,  bo  that  the  eoui- 
mou  soldiers  were  distinguished  as  caligati.  'Erotfutala  means 
readiness;  but  in  Hellenistic  Greek  it  was  sometimes  used  in 
the  sense  of  eaUMishment  or  jirjn.  foundation,  which  would  suit 
this  passage :  firm-footing.     Compare  Isa.  Hi,  7. 

16.  Above  all  (en-i  ttoo-ii').  Ambiguous.  It  may  mean  ovdf 
all,  or  in  addition  to  all.     The  latter  is  correct.     Rev.,  withal. 

The  shield  of  faith  (rbv  ^peov  tt}^  Tria-Teax;).  Svpeov  shield, 
is  from  Bvpa  door,  because  shaped  like  a  door.  Uomer  uses  the 
word  for  that  -which  is  placed  in  fro^it  of  the  doorway.  Thus 
of  the  stone  placed  by  Polyphemus  in  front  of  bis  cave 
("  Odyssey,"  ix.,  240).  The  shield  here  described  ia  that  of  the 
heavy  infantry  ;  a  large,  oblong  shield,  four  by  two  and  a  half 
feet,  and  sometimes  cnrved  on  the  inner  side.  Sculptured 
representations  may  be  seen  on  Trajan's  column.  Compare 
"  Comjiass  him  as  with  a  shield,"  Ps,  v.  12.  It  was  made  of 
wood  or  of  wicker-work,  and  held  on  the  left  arm  by  means  of 
a  handle.  Xenophou  describes  troops,  supposed  to  be  Egyp- 
tians, with  wooden  shields  reaching  to  their  feet  ("Anabasis," 
i.,  8,  9).     Saving  faith  is  meant. 

Fiery  darts  (ri  /Sc'Xij  rk  weTrvprnpUva).  Lit.,  the  darts,  those 
which  have  been  set  on  fire.  Ilerodotns  says  that  the  Persians 
attacked  the  citadel  of  Athens  '^  with  arrows  whereto  pieces  of 
lighted  tow  were  attached,  which  they  shot  at  the  barricade" 
(viii.,  52).  Thncydides :  "  The  Plataeans  uonstmcted  a  wooden 
frame,  which  they  set  up  on  the  top  of  their  own  wall  opposite 
the  mound.  .  .  .  They  also  hung  curtains  of  skins  and 
hides  in  front:  these  were  designed  to  protect  the  woodwork 
and  liie  workers,  and  shield  them  against  blazing  arrows  "  (ii., 
75).  Livy  tells  of  a  huge  dart  used  at  the  siege  of  Saguntnm, 
which  was  impelled  by  twisted  ropes.  "There  was  nsed  by 
the  Sagnntines  a  missile  weapon  ^\&A  falariea,  with  the  shaft 


410 


WORD   STOBtGS   IN  THE  SEW   TESTAMENT. 


ICb.  \"L 


of  fir,  and  rouDd  in  otlier  parts,  except  toward  the  point, 
whence  tlie  iron  projected.  Tliia  part,  which  was  square,  tiie_>' 
bound  around  with  tow  and  besmeared  with  pitch.  It  liad  an 
iron  head  three  feet  in  length,  so  tliat  it  cuuld  pierce  through 
the  body  with  the  armor.  But  what  caused  the  greatest  fear 
was  that  tliis  weapon,  even  though  it  stuck  in  the  aiiield  and 
did  not  penetrate  into  the  body,  when  it  was  discharged  with 
tlie  middle  part  on  fire,  and  bore  along  a  much  greater  flame 
produced  by  the  mere  motion,  obliged  the  armor  to  be  thrown 
down,  and  exposed  the  soldier  to  succeeding  blows"  (xxi.,  8), 
Again,  of  the  eiege  of  Ambracia  by  the  Romans :  "  Some  ad- 
vanced with  burning  torches,  others  carrying  tow  and  pitch 
and  fire-darte,  their  entire  line  being  illuminated  by  the  blaze" 
(xxxviii.,  6).  Compare  Ps.  vii.  13,  where  the  correct  rendering 
ia,  "  His  arrows  He  maketh  fiery  arrows."  Temptation  is  thus 
represented  as  impelled  from  a  distance.  Satan  attacks  by  in- 
direction— through  good  things  from  which  no  evil  is  suspected, 
Thei-e  is  a  hint  of  its  propagating  power :  one  sin  draws  an- 
other in  its  track:  the  flamo  of  the  fire-tipped  dart  spreads. 
Temptation  acts  on  susceptible  material.  Self-confidence  is 
combustible.  Faith,  in  doing  away  with  dependence  on  self, 
taltes  away  fuel  for  the  dart.  It  creates  sensitiveTiess  to  holy 
influences  by  which  the  power  of  temptation  is  neutralized.  It 
enlists  the  direct  aid  of  God.  See  1  Cor.  x.  13 ;  Luke  xxii.  32 ; 
Jas.  i.  2;  1  Pet.  iv.  12;  2  Pet.  ii.  9. 

17.  Take  the  helmet  of  salvation  (rijp  vepticetpaXaiav  toO 
ffo)rt}plov  Se'f<w5e).  Compare  Isa.  lix.  17 ;  1  Thesa.  v.  8.  Tak« 
is  a  different  word  from  that  used  in  w,  13,  16.  It  is  reaeiva 
as  from  Cud.  The  meaning  is  the  helmet  which  is  salvation. 
The  protection  for  the  head.  The  helmet  was  originally  of 
skin,  strengthened  with  bronze  or  other  metal,  and  surmounted 
with  a  figni-e  adorned  with  a  horsehair  crest.  It  was  furniahed 
with  a  visor  to  protect  the  face. 

Sword  of  the  Spirit  (fuij^eupap  tov  ■jrvevfuntK).  See  on 
Apoc.  vi.  4.  The  word  of  God  serves  both  for  attack  and  to 
parry  the  thrusts  of  the  enemy.  Tlius  Christ  nsed  it  in  Hia 
temptation.     It  is  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  because  the  Spirit  of 


J 


Ch.  VL]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  EPHESIAN&  411 

God  gives  it  and  inspires  it.  The  Spirit's  aid  is  needed  for  its 
interpretation.  Compare  John  xiv.  10  ;  Heb.  iv.  12,  in  which 
latter  passage  the  image  is  sacrificial. 

Word  of  God  (Jnifia  SeoO).  See  on  Luke  i.  37.  See  Luke 
iii.  2 ;  iv.  4 ;  Bom.  x.  17 ;  Heb.  vi.  5  ;  xi.  3. 

18.  Always  {iv  iravrl  xcup^).  Incorrect.  It  means  on  ev- 
ery occasion.    Bev.,  at  all  seasons.     Compare  Luke  xxi.  36. 

With  all  prayer  and  supplication  {SiA  irdtny;  irpoaeu^ 
teal  S€i;<r6(ki9).  Prayer  is  general,  supplication  special.  Jui 
toith  is  literally  through  ;  that  is,  through  the  medvum  of.  AUj 
lit.,  every.  Prayer  is  of  various  kinds,  formal,  silent,  vocal, 
secret,  public,  petitionary,  ejaculatory — shot  upward  like  a  dart 
(Jacidum)  on  a  sudden  emergency.    Compare  Ps.  v.  1,  2. 

Watching  thereunto  (ek  ainir  aypvirvoihrre:).  Compare 
CoL  iv.  2.  For  toatchingj  see  on  Mark  xiii.  33,  35.  T^here- 
untOj  unto  prayer,  for  occasions  of  prayer,  and  to  maintain 
the  spirit  of  prayer.  One  must  watch  hefore  prayer,  in  prayer, 
after  prayer. 

Perseverance  {irpoaKCkprepf/iaei).  Only  here.  The  kindred 
verb  irpoa-Kaprepico  to  cofitinttey  occurs  often.    See  on  Acts  i.  14. 

19.  Boldly.  Connect  with  to  make  hnoton^  as  Bev. ;  not 
with  cfpen  my  mouthy  as  A.  Y. 

Mystery.    See  on  Bom.  xi.  25  ;  Col.  i.  26. 

20.  I  am  an  ambassador  in  bonds  {vpeafievw  iv  iXuaei). 
The  verb  to  he  an  ambassador  occurs  only  here  and  2  Cor.  v. 
20.  See  on  Philem.  9.  In  bonds,  lit.,  in  a  chain  :  the  partic- 
ular word  for  the  cotipUng-chain  by  which  he  was  bound  to 
the  hand  of  his  guard. 

21.  That  ye  also  may  know,  etc.  Compare  Cicero  to  At- 
ticus :  ^^  Send  us  some  letter-carrier,  that  both  you  may  know 
how  it  goes  with  us,  and  that  we  may  know  how  you  fare  and 
what  you  are  going  to  do  '^  (v.  18). 

Tychicus.    See  on  Col.  iv.  7. 


412  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  KBW  TBSTAMBNT.  [Cb.  VL 

A  beloved  brother.  Rev.,  correctly,  the  beloved  brother. 
Tychicus  is  referred  to  as  well  known. 

24.  In  sincerity  {h  a^>Sapa'la).  Rev.,  correctly,  in  inoor- 
^*uptness  :  who  love  Christ  with  an  inaperishable  and  inoormp- 
tible  love. 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS. 


CHAPTER  L 


1.  Paul.  The  official  designation  is  omitted,  as  in  1  and  2 
Thessalonians  and  Philemon.  It  is  not  easy  to  explain  the  use 
or  omission  of  the  title  apostle  in  all  cases.  Here,  and  in  Phile- 
mon and  1  Thessalonians,  its  omission  may  be  accounted  for  by 
the  general,  unofficial,  personal,  affectionate  character  of  the  let- 
ter. In  2  Corinthians  and  Galatians  the  reason  for  its  use  is 
apparent  from  the  fact  that  Paul's  official  authority  had  been  as- 
sailed. But  it  is  also  omitted  in  2  Thessalonians,  which  has  an 
admonitory  and  rebuking  character.  Its  use  in  the  epistles  to 
Timothy  and  Titus,  private  letters,  is  explained  by  the  fact  that 
Paul  is  addressing  them  not  only  as  friends,  but  as  pastors. 
In  Romans,  while  there  is  no  evidence  of  any  challenge  of  his 
apostolic  claims,  there  is  an  authoritative  exposition  of  christian 
doctrine  which  appears  to  warrant  the  title. 

Timothy.  Associated  with  Paul  as  in  the  introductions  to 
2  Corinthians  and  the  two  Thessalonian  epistles.  Timothy  as- 
sisted Paul  in  founding  the  Philippian  church.  Acts  xvi.  1, 
13 ;  xvii.  14.  Two  visits  of  Timothy  to  Philippi  are  recorded. 
Acts  xix.  22 ;  xx.  3,  4.  He  is  evidently  preparing  for  a  third 
visit,  see  ch.  ii.  19.  His  only  part  in  this  letter  is  his  name  in 
the  salutation,  and  in  ch.  ii.  19. 

To  all  the  saints  {irwriv  roU  ofyloisi).  In  Paul's  personal  ad- 
dresses in  this  epistle  the  word  all  occurs  nine  times.  It  is 
sufficiently  accounted  for  by  the  expansiveness  of  grateful  christ- 
ian feeling  which  marks  the  entire  letter,  and  it  is  doubtful 


il4  WOED  STUDIES  IN  THE  NKW  TESTAIIENT.  ICa.  L 

whether  it  has  any  definite  or  conBcions  connection  with  the 
social  rivalries  hinted  at  in  the  epistle!,  and  which  call  foi-tli  ex- 
hortations to  unity,  as  if  Panl  were  disclaiming  all  partisan 
feeling  by  the  use  of  the  term.  For  saints,  see  on  Col.  i,  2 ; 
Kora.  i.  7.  The  word  is  transferred  from  the  Old  Testament. 
The  Israelites  were  called  Syiot  holy,  separated  and  coiKsecrated, 
Exod.  xix.  6;  Dent.  vii.  6 ;  xiv,  2,  21  ;  Dan.  vii.  IS,  22,  etc 
The  christian  Church  has  inherited  the  title  and  the  privileges 
of  the  Jewish  nation,  llence  it  is  ^iw  a^iav  a  holy  nation^  I 
Pet.  ii.  9.  The  term  implies,  but  does  not  assert,  actual,  per- 
Bonal  sanctity.  It  is  a  Bocial,  not  a  personal  epithet.  See  on 
Acts  xxvi.  10. 

Philippi.  In  Macedonia.  Travellers  by  sea  landed  at  Neap- 
olie,  and  then  travelled  ten  miles  to  Philippi  along  the  Via 
Egiiatia,  which  traversed  Macedonia  from  east  to  west.  The 
site  was  originally  occupied  by  a  town  called  Du(us  or  Datum, 
and  was  known  as  Krtnides  from  its  numerous  springs.  It 
was  called  PkUippi  in  honor  of  Philip  of  Mucedun,  who  en- 
larged and  fortified  it.  Its  situation  was  impoi-tant,  command- 
ing the  great  high  road  between  Europe  and  Asia.  This  fact 
led  to  its  fortification  by  Philip,  and  made  it,  later,  the  scene 
of  the  decisive  battle  which  resulted  in  the  defeat  of  Crutiis 
and  CaasiuB.  Its  soil  was  productive  and  rich  in  mineral  treas- 
ures, which  had  yielded  a  lai^  revenue,  but  which,  in  Paui'a 
time,  had  apparently  become  exliausted. 

Augnstua  planted  at  Philippi  a  col<mia.  See  on  Acts  xvi. 
12.*  A  variety  of  national  types  assembled  there — Greek,  Ro- 
man, and  Asiatic — representing  different  phases  of  philosophy, 
religion,  and  superstition.  It  was  therefore  an  appropriate 
starting-point  for  the  Gospel  in  Europe,  a  field  in  which  it 
could  demonstrate  its  power  to  deal  with  all  differences  of  na- 
tion, faith,  sex,  and  social  standing. f 

Bishops  [hrtaKOTTOK).  Lit.,  overseers.  See  on  visitation,  1 
Pet.  ii,  12,     The  word  was  originally  a  secular  title,  designating 

■  Bee  Oibbon'B  ■'  Deoline  and  Fall,"  vol.  1..  oh.  ii.  ;  tnd  W.  T.  Arnold's 
"Ronuai  FroTiiicial  AdminUtrBtfop." 

f  Ses  Ughtfool'e  "  Introdaclioii  [o  tbe  Epistle,"  aod  Actt  zri. 


J 


Ch.  LJ  THB  SPISTLB  to  THB  PHUilPPlANS.  415 

commissioners  appointed  to  regulate  a  newly-acquired  territory 
or  a  colony.  It  was  also  applied  to  magistrates  who  regulated 
the  sale  of  provisions  under  the  Bomans.  In  the  Septnagint  it 
signifies  inapectorSj  supe7*intenderU8j  tashmastersj  see  2  Kings 
xi.  19 ;  2  Chron.  xxxiv.  12,  17 ;  or  captains^  jrresiderUSj  Keh. 
xi.  9,  14,  22.  In  the  apostolic  writings  it  is  synonymous  with 
presbyter  or  elder  ;  and  no  official  distinction  of  the  episcopate 
as  a  distinct  order  of  the  ministry  is  recognized.  Bev.  has  aoer^ 
eeere  in  margin. 

Deacons  {Jiuucovot^).  The  word  means  eerva/nt^  and  is  a  gen- 
eral term  covering  both  slaves  and  hired  servants.  It  is  thus 
distinct  from  iovKo^  hand-eervcmt.  It  represents  a  servant,  not 
in  his  relation,  but  in  his  activity.  In  the  epistles  it  is  often 
used  specifically  for  a  minister  of  the  Gospely  1  Cor.  iii.  5 ;  2  Cor. 
iii.  6 ;  Eph.  iii.  7.  Here  it  refers  to  a  distinct  class  of  officers 
in  the  apostolic  church.  The  origin  of  this  office  is  recorded 
Acts  vi.  1-6.  It  grew  out  of  a  complaint  of  the  Hellenistic  or 
Graeco-Jewish  members  of  the  Church,  that  their  widows  were 
neglected  in  the  daily  distribution  of  food  and  alms.  The  Pales- 
tinian Jews  prided  themselves  on  their  pure  nationality  and 
looked  upon  the  Oreek  Jews  as  their  inferiors.  Seven  men  were 
chosen  to  superintend  this  matter,  and  generally  to  care  for  the 
bodily  wants  of  the  poor.  Their  function  was  described  by  the 
phrase  to  serve  tables^  Acts  vi.  2,  and  their  appointment  left  the 
apostles  free  to  devote  themselves  to  prayer  and  the  ministry  of 
the  word.  The  men  selected  for  the  office  are  supposed  to  have 
been  Hellenists,  from  the  fact  that  all  their  names  are  Greek, 
and  one  is  especially  described  as  a  proselyte.  Acts  vi.  5 ;  but 
this  cannot  be  positively  asserted,  since  it  was  not  uncommon 
for  Jews  to  assume  Greek  names.  See  on  Bom.  xvi.  5.  The 
work  of  the  deacons  was,  primarily,  the  relief  of  the  sick  and 
poor;  but  spiritual  ministrations  naturally  developed  in  con- 
nection with  their  office.  The  latter  are  referred  to  by  the 
term  helpSy  1  Cor.  xii.  28.  Stephen  and  Philip  especially  ap- 
pear in  this  capacity,  Acts  viii.  5-40 ;  vi.  8-11.  Such  may  also 
be  the  meaning  of  ministering y  Bom.  xii.  7.  Hence  men  of 
faith,  piety,  and  sound  judgment  were  recommended  for  the 


416 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  HEW   TESTAMENT. 


[Ch.  L 


office  by  the  apostles,  Acts  vi.  3;  1  Tim.  iii.  8-13.  Women 
veto  also  chosen  aa  deaconeBees,  and  Phoebe,  the  bearer  of  the 
epistle  to  the  Romans,  is  commonly  supposed  to  have  been  ODe 
of  these.     See  on  Rom.  xvi,  1. 

Igiiatins  says  of  deacons  :  "They  are  not  ministers  of  food 
and  drink,  but  servants  {uTn/perat,  see  on  Matt,  v,  25)  of  the 
Church  of  God  "  ("  Epistle  to  Tralies,"  ii,).  "  Let  all  pay  re- 
spect to  the  deacons  as  to  Jesus  Christ"  ("Tralies,"  iii.). 
"  Respect  the  deacons  as  the  voice  of  God  enjoins  you  "  ("  Epis- 
tle to  Smyrna,"  viii.).  In  "  The  Teaching  of  the  Twelve  Apos- 
tles" the  local  churches  or  individual  congregations  are  ruled  by 
bishops  and  deacons.  "Elect  therefore  for  yourselves  bishops 
and  deacons  worthy  of  the  Lord  ;  raen  meek  and  not  lovers  of 
money,  and  truthful  and  approved ;  for  they  too  miuister  to 
you  the  ministry  of  the  prophets  and  teachers.  Therefore  de- 
spise them  not,  for  they  are  those  that  are  the  honored  among 
yon  with  the  prophets  and  teachers "  (xv.,  I,  2),  Deaconesses 
are  not  mentioned. 

2.  Grace — peace.  The  combination  of  the  Greek  and  Ori- 
ental salutations  spiritualized:  ffrcure  expressing  God's  love  to 
man,  aadj>eace  the  condition  resulting  therefrom. 

3.  Every  remembrance  (-rrd^  t$  fivela).  Better,  as  R«v., 
all  my  remembrcmce. 

Prayer  (Se^«).  Kev.,  bettor,  sv^tpHcation.  See  on  Luke 
V.  33. 

For  you  all.     Connect  with  every  prayer  of  mine. 

Request  (t^v  Sei^o-ti').  Rev.,  better,  my  svj>plicatwn.  The 
article  refers  to  eveiy  sujipllcation. 

With  joy.  Joy  is  the  keynote  of  this  epistle.  Bengel  says  : 
"The  sum  of  the  epistle  is,  'I  rejoice,  rejoice  ye.'"  See  vv. 
18,  25  ;  ch.  ii.  2,  17,  18,  28,  29 ;  iii.  1 ;  iv.  1,  4,  10. 

5.  For  your  fellowship  {ewi  t§  miwavla  vfi&p).  Connect 
with  I  thank  Ood.  Yor  JeUowship,  see  on  1  John  i.  3.  The 
word  sometimes  has  the  meaning  of  almsgiving,  oontrihutiona, 
as  Rom.  xv.  26 ;  Ileb.  xiii.  16.     Though  here  it  is  used  in  the 


J 


Cu.  I.]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN&  417 

larger  sense  of  sympaihetio  coopenUian^  yet  it  is  no  doubt 
colored  by  the  other  idea,  in  view  of  the  Philippians'  pecuniary 
contributions  to  Paul.     See  ch.  iv.  10,  15,  16. 

In  the  Gospel  (€^  to  evofyyiKiov),  Lit.,  tmto  the  Gospel  : 
Rev.,  in  furtherance  qf. 

6.  Being  confident  {ven-oiSik).  With  a  slightly  causative 
force :  since  lam  c(n\fident. 

Hath  begun— will  perform  {ivap^6juvofi — hrvreKkirei).  The 
two  words  occur  together,  2  Cor.  viii.  6;  Gal.  iii.  3.  Both 
were  used  of  religions  ceremonials.  So  Euripides :  '^  But  come  I 
Bring  up  the  sacrificial  meal-basket "  {i(dfy)(ov  icava) ;  that  is, 
begin  the  offering  by  taking  the  barley-meal  from  the  basket 
('^  Iphigenia  in  Aulis,"  435).  Some  find  the  sacrificial  meta- 
phor here,  and  compare  ch.  ii.  17,  see  note.  Perfamhj  better 
as  ^ij&^.^  perfect.  Perform^  in  its  older  and  literal  sense  of 
carrying  through  (per)  or  consumnuUing  would  express  the 
idea  ;  but  popular  usage  has  identified  it  with  do. 

7.  Even  as  {koBw).  The  reason  for  being  confident  (ver. 
6). 

Defence  {iLvoKtrfla).    See  on  1  Pet.  iii.  15. 

Confirmation  (fiefiauMrei).  Only  here  and  Heb.  vi  16. 
The  kindred  verb  fiefiaiow  to  confimiy  occurs  frequently,  as 
Rom.  XV.  8 ;  1  Cor.  i.  8,  etc. 

Partakers  of  my  grace  {avyteoiV€SPov^  iaov  t^  ')(apiTosi)* 
Better,  as  Rev.,  paHakere  with  me  of  gra^.  Lit,  the  grace, 
either  the  divine  endowment  which  enabled  them  both  to  suffer 
bonds,  and  to  defend  and  establish  the  Gospel,  or  the  loving 
favor  of  God,  which  confers  suffering  and  activity  alike  as  a 
boon.     The  two  may  be  combined.     Compare  ver.  29. 

8.  In  the  bowels  of  Jesus  Christ  {hf  cir\6rfxyovi  Xpurrov 
IfjiTov).  Rev.,  better,  in  the  tender  mercies.  Describing  his 
longing,  not  as  his  individual  emotion,  but  as  Christ^s  longing, 
as  if  the  very  heart  of  Christ  dwelt  in  him.  "  In  Paul  not 
Paul  lives,  but  Jesus  CliriBt"  (Bengel).  With  tender  mercies 
compare  reins^  Apoc.  ii.  23,  note. 

Vol.  IlL— 27 


WORD  STUDIHS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT, 


[OB.L 


9.  Judgment  {aivl^^ei).  Only  here  ia  the  New  Teeta- 
ment.  Rev.,  better,  discemme?ii :  sensitive  moral  perception. 
Used  of  tAe  seniles,  as  XeuopLon :  "perception  of  things  sweet 
or  puugent"  ("  Memorabilia,"  i.,  4,  5),  Oi  hearing:  "It  ispos- 
aible  to  go  so  far  away  as  not  to  afford  a  liearing"  ("  Anabasie,'* 
iv.,  6,  13).  The  senses  are  called  ala^atK.  See  Plato, 
"  Theaetetus,"  156,  Plato  uses  it  of  visions  of  the  gods 
("  Phaedo,"  111),  Compare  ataSfiri^pui  aenaea,  Ileb.  v,  14. 
IHscemmeni  selects,  claesifies,  and  applies  what  is  furnished  by 
knowledge. 

10.  Approve  (SoKifid^tiv).  Sanction  on  teat.  See  on  1  Pet. 
i.  7. 

Things  which  are  excellent  (ra  Sta^povrd).  Unnecessary 
difficulty  baa  been  made  in  the  explanation  of  this  phrase. 
Love  displays  itself  in  knowledge  and  discernment.  In  propor- 
tion as  it  abounds  it  sharpens  the  moral  perceptions  for  the 
discernment  of  what  is  best.  The  passage  is  on  the  line  of  1 
Cor.  xii.  31,  "Covet  earnestly  the  best  gifts,"  and  the  "more 
excellent  way  "  to  attain  these  gifts  is  love  (ch.  xiii.).  See  on 
Rom.  ii.  18,  where  the  same  phrase  occurs,  but  with  a  different 
meaning.     Some  explain  things  which  are  morally  d^ereni. 

Sincere  {elXixptveK).     See  onpure,  2  Pet  iii.  1. 

Without  offence  {airpotTKovot).  See  on  Acts  xxiv.  16.  It 
may  be  explained,  ?wt  atrimhlin^,  or  not  causing  others  to 
stumble,  as  1  Cor.  x,  32,  Both  senses  may  be  included.  If 
either  is  to  be  preferred  it  ie  the  former,  since  the  whole  pas- 
sage contemplates  their  inward  state  rather  than  their  relations 
to  men. 

Till  the  day,  etc.  (e«).     Rev.,  ttnio.     Better,  againat ;  with 


11.  Fruit  of  righteousness  {Kafmov  hucoMowTft).  The 
phrase  occurs  Jas.  iii.  18.     Compare  Prov.  li.  30. 

Glory  and  praise  of  God.  For  glurt/  of  God,  see  on  Rom. 
iii.  23.  That  God's  glory  may  be  both  manifested  and  recog- 
nized.    Compare  Eph.  i.  6. 


J 


Oa.  L]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHIUPPIANa  419 

12.  Rather  QidXKov).  For  the  furtherance  of  the  Goepel 
rat/ier  than,  as  might  have  been  expected,  for  its  hindrance. 

Furtherance  {-n-poKo^v).  Only  here,  ver.  25,  and  1  Tim. 
iv.  15.  The  metaphor  ie  uncertain,  but  is  supposed  to  be  that 
of  pioneers  cutting  {kottto})  a  way  before  {trpo)  an  array,  and  so 
furthering  its  march.  The  opposite  ia  expressed  by  eyxoTrrv 
to  cut  into  ;  hence  to  throw  obstacle  in  the  way,  hi/tuUr.  GaL 
V.  7.     See  on  1  Pet.  iii.  7. 

13.  My  bonds  in  Christ  are  manifest  {tow  beafutw  fi.ov 
if>a»epoiK;  ev  Xptirrai  yevetrSai).  Biynda  and  Christ,  in  the  Greek, 
are  too  far  apart  to  he  conetrued  together.  Better,  as  Rev.,  my 
bonds  became  manifest  in  Christ.  Ills  imprisonment  became 
known  as  connected  with  Christ.  It  was  understood  to  be  for 
Christ's  Bake.  His  bonds  were  not  hidden  as  though  he  were 
an  ordinary  prisoner,     Hia  very  captivity  proclaimed  Christ, 

In  all  the  palace  {ev  okp  t^  irpaiTiapUp).  Rev.,  throughout 
tJte  whole  praetorian  guard.  So  Lightfoot,  Dwight,  Farrar. 
Tiiifl  appears  to  be  the  correct  rendering.  The  other  explana- 
tions are,  the  imperial  residence  on  the  Palatine,  so  A.  V. ;  the 
praetorian  barracks  attached  to  the  palace,  so  Eadie,  Ellicott, 
Lumby,  and  Alford ;  ths  praetorian  camp  mi.  the  east  of  the 
city,  BO  Meyer.* 

The  first  explaitation  leaves  the  place  of  Paul's  confiuemeut 
uncertain.  It  may  have  been  in  the  camp  of  the  Praetorians, 
which  was  large  enough  to  contain  within  its  precincts  lodgings 
for  prisoners  nnder  military  cnstody,  so  that  Paul  couid  dwell 
"  in  hia  own  hired  house,"  Acts  xxviii,  30.  This  would  be  dif- 
ficult to  explain  on  the  assumption  that  Paul  was  confined  in 
the  barracks  or  within  the  palace  precincts. 

The  Praetorians,  forming  the  imperial  guard,  were  picked 
men,  ten  thousand  in  number,  and  all  of  Italian  birth.     Tlie 

•  The  whole  Bnbject  U  eUborataly  diBoussed  ia  Lightfool'a  note.  lie  shows 
thM  there  U  no  aatiafaclorj-  suthorltj  for  ipplying  tbe  lenn  to  either  the 
palace,  the  hkTraolu.  or  llie  jiraetorisn  Mmp,  and  cites  namerous  instknoes  of 
its  applicstioD  to  ■  bodj  of  men,  for  ioBtanoe.  lo  a  ponncll  of  wsr,  »nd  eepoo- 
ially  (o  the  imperial  ^srd.  The  refuronce  la  the  piilue  U  defended  b; 
Herivale,  "Htstorjr  of  tbe  KomiinB  under  tbe  Empire,"  vi..  363. 


420 


WORD  STDDIES  m  THE  NKW  TEHTAilENl' 


[Ch.  1 


body  waa  inetituted  b^-  AugiiBtiis  and  was  tailed  hy  him  j}/ae' 
Uiriae  L-oliortes,  praetorian  colioris,  in  iinitation  of  the  eeieet 
troop  wliieli  attended  tbe  person  of  tlie  praetor  or  Uouian  gen- 
eral. Augustus  originally  etatioued  only  three  thousand  of  them, 
three  cohorts,  at  Home,  and  dispersed  the  remainder  in  the 
adjacent  Italian  towns.  Under  Tiberius  they  were  all  assem- 
bled at  Home  in  a  fortified  camp.  They  were  distingnished  by 
double  pay  and  special  privileges.  Tlieir  term  of  service  waa 
originally  twelve  years,  afterward  increased  to  sixteen.  On 
completing  his  term,  each  soldier  received  a  little  over  eight 
hundred  dollars.  They  alt  seem  to  have  had  the  same  rank  as 
centurions  in  the  regular  legions.  They  became  the  most  pow- 
erful body  in  the  state;  the  emperors  were  obliged  to  court 
their  favor,  and  each  emperor  on  his  accession  was  expected  to 
bestow  on  tliem  a  liberal  donative.  After  the  death  of  Per- 
tinax  {a.d,  193}  they  put  up  the  empire  at  public  sale,  and 
knocked  it  down  to  Didius  Julianns.  They  were  disbanded 
the  same  year  on  the  accession  of  Severus,  and  were  banished ; 
but  were  restored  by  tliat  emperor  on  a  new  plan,  and  increased 
to  four  times  their  original  number.  They  were  finally  sup- 
pressed by  Constantine. 

The  apostle  was  under  the  charge  of  these  troops,  the  soldiers 
relieving  each  other  in  mounting  guard  over  the  prisoner,  who 
was  attached  to  his  guard's  hand  by  a  chain.  In  the  allusion 
to  his  bonds,  Eph.  vi.  20,  he  uses  the  specific  word  for  the 
coupllmj-c/iain.  ITis  contact  with  the  different  members  of 
the  corps  in  succession,  explains  the  statement  that  his  bonds 
had  become  manifest  throughout  the  praetorian  guard. 

!n  all  other  places  {tok  Xotwo«  -rraaiv).  Rev.,  correctly, 
to  all  ike  rest  ;  tliat  is,  to  ail  others  besides  tlie  Praetorians. 

14.  Many  (tow  irKelavas).  Rev.,  correctly,  the  moat.  Lit., 
the  more.     Implying  that  there  were  a  few  who  held  back. 

Brethren  in  the  Lord.  In  the  Lord  should  he  rather  con- 
nected with  hein^  covjulent.  The  expression  Irrethren  in  the 
Lord  does  not  occur  in  the  New  Testament ;  while  to  have  con- 
fidence in  one  in  tlie  Ijyrd  is  fontid  Gal.  v.  10;  2  Thess.  iii.  4; 
compare  ch.  ii.  24.     In  the  Lord  is  thus  emphatic     It  may  be 


J 


Ch.  LJ  the  EPIBTLB  to  tub  PHILIPPIAN&  421 

correlative  with  in  Christy  ver.  13 ;  but  this  is  not  certain.'^ 
In  the  Lord  trusting  my  hondsj  signifies  that  the  bonds  awaken 
confidence  as  being  the  practical  testimony  to  the  power  of  the 
Gospel  for  which  Paul  is  imprisoned,  and  therefore  an  encour- 
agement to  their  faith. 

Are  much  more  bold  {TrepuraaTiptD^  roKfiav).  Rev.,  mors 
abundantly  holdj  thus  holding  more  closely  to  the  literal  mean- 
ing of  the  adverb.  For  are  holdj  see  on  2  Cor.  x.  2.  The  bold- 
ness required  to  profess  Christ  within  the  precincts  of  the  pal- 
ace is  illustrated  bj  the  graffito  or  wdlUscribhle  discovered  in 
1857  among  the  ruins  on  the  Palatine.  It  is  a  caricature  of 
Christ  on  the  cross,  with  an  ass's  head,  while  on  the  left  appears 
a  christian  youth  in  an  attitude  of  adoration.  Underneath  are 
scrawled  the  words  Alexatnenos  worships  Oodj\ 

To  speak  (XoXciv).  Tlie  verb  denotes  the  fact  rather  than 
the  substance  of  speaking.  See  on  Matt.  xxviiL  18.  They 
have  broken  silence. 

15.  Even  of  envy.  Strange  as  it  may  seem  that  envy  should 
be  associated  with  the  preaching  of  Christ.  They  are  jealous 
of  Paul's  influence. 

Strife  (^pii').     Factious  partisanship. 
Good  will.    Toward  Paul. 

16.  The  one  preach  Christ  of  contention.  The  order  of 
vv.  16,  17,  is  reversed  in  the  best  texts.  Of  oonieniion  {i( 
ipiSeiasi).  See  on  strife^  Jas.  iii.  14.  Rev.,  better,  foiction. 
Compare  Chaucer : 

"  For  mine  entente  ib  not  but  for  to  winne 
And  nothing  for  correction  of  sinne.'* 

•*  P»rdonere'§  T»le,^'  12887-8. 

*  This  connection  is  advocated  bjr  Mejrer,  Eadie,  Ellicott,  Lightfoot,  Winer. 
It  is  abljr  disputed  bjr  Dwight  (notes  on  Meyer ).  who  adTOcates  the  rendering 
of  A.  V.  and  Rev.     With  him  agree  Alford  and  Lumbj. 

f  Tacitus  declares  that  the  ftgnre  of  an  ass  was  consecrated  in  the  Jewish 
temple,  because  the  Jews  in  their  wanderings  in  the  desert  were  guided  to 
springs  of  water  by  a  herd  of  wild  asses  (**  History,"  t.,  8).  The  charge  of  woi^ 
shipping  an  ass  was  applied  by  pagans  indiscriminately  to  Jews  and  Christiana. 
The  graffito  may  now  be  seen  in  the  Kirohnerian  Museum  at  Rome. 


422 


WORD  STUDIBS   IN  THE   NEW   TESTAMBNT. 


Sincerely  (otiwj).  Purely,  with  unmixed  motives.  The 
adjective  ar/v6<t  means  pure,  in  the  sense  of  c/umte,  free  from 
admixture  of  evil,  aod  is  onc«  applied  to  God,  1  John  iii.  3. 
See  OQ  Acta  xxvi.  10,  foot-note.  If^ot  eincerdy  iB  explained  by 
in  pretence,  ver.  18. 

To  add  affliction  (■9XZ'^(i>  hrv^peai).  Lit,  to  brmg  afftic- 
tion  to  bear.  But  the  correct  roadiug  is  dyeipeiv  to  raise  -up,  as 
Eev.:  to  waken  or  stir  up  affliction.  The  piirase  ie  Btriking  in 
the  light  of  the  original  meaning  of  3\i-^i<i,  namely,  proMure. 
They  would  make  his  bonds  press  more  heavily  and  gall  him. 
See  on  Matt.  xiii.  21. 

17.  I  am  set  (xet/uu).  Or  appointed.  See  on  Luke  ii.  34. 
Compare  1  Thess.  iii.  3.  Some,  instead  of  rendering  t/he  on« 
(or  some)  preach  Christ  of  contention — hut  tfie  other  of  love, 
join  oi  ^1'  some,  oi  Bi  oihei-a,  in  each  instance  with  the  succeed- 
ing word,  making  one  phrase,  thus:  "they  wlio  are  of  love  do 
BO  knowing  that  I  am  set,  etc.:  iheyioho  are  of  faction  ^roc\a.\Ta 
Christ  not  sincerely,  etc.  The  phrase  those  who  are  of  faction 
occurs  Bom.  ii.  8 ;  and  a  similar  phrase,  hini  w^io  is  of  faith. 
Bom.  iii.  26.  There  seems  no  sofficient  reason  for  altering 
A.  V.  and  Bev. 

18.  What  then?     Such  heing  the  case,  how  does  it  affect 


Notwithstanding  (TrX^c).  Bead  wX^n  on  except  that.  Rev., 
only  that.  What  is  my  feeling  in  view  of  these  things !  Only 
that  I  rejoice  that  Christ  is  preached. 

In  pretence.  With  a  spirit  of  envy  and  faction,  possibly 
with  a  counterfeited  zeal  for  truth. 

19,  This.     This  preachiug  of  Christ  in  every  way. 

Shall  turn  (aTro/S^o-frai).     Lit.,  come  off,  eventuate. 

Salvation.  Not  his  deliverance  from  captivity,  but  it  will 
prove  salutary  to  him  in  a  spiritual  sense  and  to  the  saving 
work  of  the  Gospel.  Salvation  simply  is  used,  without  any  more 
precise  definition  ;  and  the  broader  sense,  as  related  to  his  min- 


Ch.  l]  the  epistlb  to  thb  philippians.  423 

istrj,  seems  to  be  indicated  by  the  words  Christ  ahaU  he  rruigni- 
fiedj  in  ver.  20. 

Supply  {hrvxppqyla/i).  See  on  addj  2  Pet.  i.  5.  Compare 
Gal.  iii.  5.     The  word  implies  hcnMfUifvl  supply. 

Of  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ.  Either  the  supply  furnished 
by  the  Spirit,  or  the  supply  which  is  the  Spirit.  It  is  better  to 
take  it  as  including  both.  The  exact  phrase,  Spirit  ofJesits 
Christy  is  found  only  here.  Spirit  of  Christ  occurs  Bom.  viii. 
9;  1  Pet.  i.  11.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  meant;  called  the  Spirit 
of  Jesus  Christ,  because  through  the  Spirit  Christ  communi- 
cates Himself  to  His  people.  ^^  The  Spirit  is  the  living  prin- 
ciple and  the  organ  of  the  proper  presence  of  Christ  and  of 
His  life  in  them  "  (Meyer). 

20.  Earnest  expectation  {anroiccLpeAoiclav).  Only  here  and 
Kom.  viii.  19,  on  which  see  note. 

Shall  be  ashamed  {aUrxyvBriiroiuu).  Bey.,  better,  giving 
the  force  of  the  passive,  shall  he  put  to  shame. 

Boldness.     See  on  Philem.  8. 

Shall  be  magnified  in  my  body.  Through  my  bodily  suf- 
ferings Christ  shall  appear  more  glorious,  and  that  even  if  I 
die. 

21.  To  me.  Emphatic.  Whatever  life  may  be  to  others, 
to  mcy  etc. 

To  live  is  Christ  {to  ^v  Xpurro^).  Lit,  the  Umng  is 
Christ.  Compare  Gktl.  ii.  20.  He  has  no  thought  of  life  apart 
from  Christ. 

Gain.  As  consummating  the  union  with  Christ  Compare 
Col.  iii.  4 ;  2  Cor.  v.  1-8. 

'*  Declare  unto  him  if  the  light  wherewith 
Bloflsoms  jrour  sabstance  shall  remain  with  joa 
Etemallj  the  same  that  it  is  now  ; 
And  if  it  do  remain,  say  in  what  manner, 
After  ye  are  again  made  risible, 
It  can  be  that  it  injure  not  jonr  sight. 


I2i  WORD  STUDIES  IN    THE   NEW  TESTAMBNT. 

An  b;  >  graater  gladness  urged  and  drawn 
The;  who  are  daaciag  in  a  ring  gatnelimes 
UplUt  tbuir  Tnic«B  and  Iheir  motions  quioksn  ; 
80,  al  that  oriBDn  devout  and  prompt, 
The  holy  airoles  a  new  joy  displajud 
la  tlieir  revolTing  and  their  vpondroua  *ong. 
Who  BO  lamenloth  liim  that  here  we  die 
That  we  may  live  aboT«,  has  never  there 
Seea  the  rerreahment  of  the  etamal  rain." 

D*STK,  '■  Paradiao,"  xIt.,  18-37. 

23.  If  I  liva  (e*  Tti  K")'  R«v.,  bettor,  if  to  live :  the  living, 
u  rer.  21. 

This  is  the  fruit  of  my  labor.  According  to  the  A.  V. 
these  worde  fortii  the  offset  of  the  conditional  clauee,  and  con- 
cUide  tlie  sentence  ;  if  J  live — this  is  the  fruit.  It  is  bette»  to 
make  the  two  clauses  parallel,  thus :  if  living  after  the  flesh,  {jf) 
this  is  fruit  of  labor.  The  conditional  suspended  clause  will 
then  be  closed  by  what  I  aluiU  choose  I  do  not  d^edare.  Fruii 
of  labor,  advant^;e  accruing  from  apostolic  work.  Compare 
Rom.  i.  13. 

Yet  what  I  shall  choose  I  wot  not  (koI  W  alpijiTojiai  oi 
yvutpt^).  Kn,l  rendered  i/et  has  the  force  of  then.  If  living 
in  the  flesh  be,  etc.,  then  what  I  shall  choose,  etc.  Wot  is  obsolete 
for  know.  In  classical  Greek  yvwpl^a  means :  1,  to  make  knoion 
poini  oiU,'  2,  to  become  acquainted  with  or  discover;  3,  to 
have  acquaintance  with.  In  the  Septuagint  tho  predominant 
meaning  seems  to  be  to  m.ake  knoion.  See  Prov.  xxii,  19 ; 
Ezek.  xliv.  23  ;  Dan.  ii.  6,  10;  v.  7.  The  sense  here  ia  to  de- 
clare or  make  known,  as  everywhere  in  the  New  Testament. 
Compare  Luke  ii.  15 ;  John  xvii.  26 ;  Acts  ii.  28 ;  Col.  iv.  T ; 
2  Pet.  i.  16,  etc.  If  I  am  assnred  that  my  continuing  to  live  is 
most  fruitful  for  the  Church,  then  I  say  nothing  as  to  ray  per- 
sonal preference.  I  do  not  declare  my  choice.  It  is  not  for 
me  to  express  a  choice, 

23.  I  am  in  a  strait  betwixt  two  (<nn>exop.ai  eV  t&v  Buo). 
See  on  2  Cor.  v.  14.  The  picture  is  that  of  a  man  pressed  on 
both  sides.     Lit.,  /  am  held  together,  so  that  I  cannot  incline 


J 


Cii.  L]  THE  KPISTLB  TO  THB  PHILIPPIANS.  425 

either  way.  Betwixt  twOj  lit.,  J^?*om  the  ttvo.  The  pressure 
comea/ram  both  sides.  Note  the  article,  the  two,  the  two  con- 
siderations just  mentioned,  departing  or  abiding  in  the  flesh. 

Having  a  desire.  lit.,  the  desire:  my  desire,  as  expressed 
in  ver.  21,  for  death  with  its  gain. 

To  depart  (ai/aXucroi).  The  verb  means  originally  to  unloose^ 
mido  again.  So  of  Penelope's  web :  ^^  During  the  night  she 
midid  it"  (Homer,  "Odyssey,"  ii.,  105).  Of  loosing  a  ship 
from  her  moorings :  of  breaking  up  a  camp.  So  2  Mace.  ix.  1. 
Antiochus,  having  entered  Persepolis,  and  having  attempted  to 
rob  the  temple  and  to  hold  the  city,  was  put  to  flight  by  the 
inhabitants,  and  broke  up  {avcCKekuicm)  and  came  away  with 
dishonor.  We  have  the  same  figure  in  popular  usage  of  one 
who  changes  his  residence :  "  He  h*oke  up  at  Chicago  and  re- 
moved to  New  York."  Paul's  metaphor  here  is  the  military 
one,  to  break  camp.  Compare  2  Cor.  v.  1,  where  the  metaphor 
is  the  striking  of  a  tent  Some  prefer  the  nautical  image,  cast- 
ing off  from  shore;  but  Paul's  circumstances  naturally  sug- 
gested military  figures ;  and,  what  is  somewhat  strange  in  the 
case  of  one  so  familiar  with  the  sea,  nautical  metaphors  are  rare 
in  his  writings.  There  is  one  at  1  Tim.  i.  19,  of  those  "  who 
concerning  the  faith  have  m4ide  shipwreck ;  "  at  Eph.  iv.  14, 
"  tossed  as  by  waves,  and  borne  about  by  every  wind."  Kv^ep- 
VTjaet^  govemm^etUSy  1  Cor.  xii.  28  (see  note),  is  from  /cvfiepvao) 
to  steer. 

To  be  with  Christ.  Compare  2  Cor.  v.  6,  8  ;  Acts  vii.  59  ; 
1  Thess.  iv.  14,  17. 

Which  is  far  better  (^oXKp  fiaXKop  Kpetaa-ov).  Lit.,  m>uch 
more  better.  For  similar  cumulative  expressions,  see  on  2  Cor. 
iv.  17.  The  best  texts  insert  ^kpfor.  So  Rev.,ybr  it  is  very 
far  better, 

24.  To  abide  in  the  flesh  {iinfjUveiv  iv  r$  aapKi).  See  on 
Col.  i.  23.  To  abide  by  the  flesh.  Compare  Bom.  vi  1 ;  xi. 
22,  23. 

25.  Furtherance.    See  on  ver.  12. 


426  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  ICh.  I. 

Of  faith.  Rev.,  in  the  faith.  To  Le  connected  with  botli 
furtherance  &TiA  joy.  For  promoting  your  faitli  and  your  joy 
in  believing.     Vovjoy  of  faith,  compare  Rom.  xv.  13. 

26.  Rejoicing;  («au^/*o).  Tlie  matter  of  rejoicing,  wroiigiit 
tlirough  your  faith. 

In  Christ  Jesus  for  me  (eV  Xpiar^  'JijffoO  eV  iftoi).  Con- 
Btrue  in  Christ  Jesus  with  -may  abound,  not  with  rejoicing. 
Christ  IB  conceived  as  the  element  in  which  the  matter  of  re- 
joicing growB  and  abounds.  For  ine,  better,  as  Rev.,  in  me. 
The  conjunction  of  tbe  two  phraaea  in  Christ,  in  me,  is  some- 
what confusing.  P&uI'b  presence  is  the  immediate  cause  of 
their  christian  joy ;  hence  in  m£  ;  but  their  rejoicing  in  Paul  is 
tn  Christ — a  joy  evolved  within  the  spliere  of  life  in  Christ, 
and  peculiar  to  those  only  to  whom  to  live  is  Christ. 

Coming  [irapova-lait).     Rev.,  better,  jwe««ice. 

27.  Only.     This  one  thing  I  urge  as  tbe  only  thing  needful. 

Let  your  conversation  be  {iroXiTeveir^).  Only  here  in 
Paul's  writingB,  and  elsewhere  only  Acts  xxiii.  1.  Tbe  verb 
means  to  be  a  citizen.  Lit.,  Be  dtisens  worthiJ.y  of  the  Gospel. 
Rev.,  Zet  your  manner  of  life  he.  Margin,  Behave  aa  citizens. 
Compare  Eph.  iii.  19,  and  see  on  ch.  iii.  20.  The  exhortation 
contemplates  the  Pbilippians  as  members  of  the  christian  cotn- 
vionwealth.  Tbe  figure  would  bo  naturally  suggested  to  Paul 
by  his  residence  in  Rome,  and  would  appeal  to  the  Philippians 
as  a  Roman  colony,  which  was  a  reproduction  of  the  parent 
commonwealth  on  a  Einaller  scale. 

Ye  standfast  ((rr^ncere).  Compare  Eph.  vL  13;  2  Tbesa. 
ii.  15.     For  tlie  verb,  see  on  John  i.  26;  viii.  44. 

Spirit — mind  (wceiJ^Tt — >}ft^).     See  on  Rom.  viii.  4;  xi,  3. 

Striving  together  for  the  faith    {awaSXaOvTe^  t^  irla-rfi). 

Tbe  verb  occurs  only  here  and  ch.  iv.  3.  Tbo  figure  is  that  of 
an  atbletic  contest,  and  is  in  keeping  with  standfast.  Not  to 
he  rendered  Btriving  in  concert  with  the  faith,  thus  personifying 


Ch.  L]  the  EPISTLB  to  the  PHILIPPIAN&  427 

fait\  and  making  the  faith  signify  tiie  gospd  teaching*  For 
the  faith  as  christian  doctrine,  see  on  Acts  vi.  7.  FaiUi  is  to  be 
taken  in  its  usual  subjective  sense  of  t/ru«t  in  Christ  or  in  the 
Oospel.  Together  refers  to  the  m/iU/uaZ  striving  of  the  Philip- 
plans ;  not  to  their  striving  in  concert  with  PauL 

28.  Terrified  {irrvp6fAevoi).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment Properly  of  the  terror  of  a  startled  horse.  Thus  Dio- 
dorus  Siculus,  speaking  of  the  chariot-horses  of  Darius  at  the 
battle  of  Issus :  ^^  Frightened  (wrvpofAevoi)  by  reason  of  the  mult- 
itude of  the  dead  heaped  round  them,  they  shook  off  their 
reins  "  (xvii.,  34).  Plutarch  says :  ^^  The  midtitude  is  not  easy 
to  handle  so  that  it  is  safe  for  any  one  to  take  the  reins ;  but 
it  should  be  held  sufficient,  if,  not  being  scared  by  sight  or 
sound,  like  a  shy  and  fickle  animal,  it  accept  mastery." 

Which  is  (^i9  i<rriv).     Seeing  that  it  is. 

An  evident  token  {fvSei^i^).  Only  here,  Rom.  iii.  25,  26 ; 
2  Cor.  viii.  24.  lit.,  apoi/ntmg  out.  Used  in  Attic  law  of  a 
vrrit  of  i^ictment.    A  demonstration  ox  proof 

To  you  of  salvation  (v/a&).  Bead  vyAv  of  you.  Bev.,  of 
your  eaivation. 

And  that  of  God.  'Eiev.^from  Qod  {am-o).  Ughtfoot  finds 
here  an  allusion,  in  accord  with  etrwing  together^  to  the  sign  of 
life  or  death  given  by  the  populace  in  the  amphitheatre  when 
a  gladiator  was  vanquished,  by  turning  the  thumbs  up  or  down. 
^^  The  christian  gladiator  does  not  anxiously  await  the  signal  of 
life  or  death  from  the  fickle  crowd.  The  great  Director  of  the 
contest  Himself  has  given  him  a  sure  token  of  deliverance." 

29.  It  is  given— to  sufFer  for  His  sake  {ixapUrStf  ri  inrip 
— avTov  irda^eiv).  Every  word  here  is  significant.  Suffering  is 
a  gift  of  grace.  "  It  is  given  '*  should  be  "  it  toae  given,"  re- 
ferring to  the  gift  bestowed  when  they  became  Christians. 
Suffering  was  the  marriage-gift  when  they  were  espoused  to 
Christ :  the  bounty  when  they  enlisted  in  His  service.    Be- 

*  So  Lightf oot 


428  WORD  STUDIES  IS  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IL 

coming  one  with  Ilim  they  entered  into  the  fellowehip  of  His 
suffering  (ch.  iii.  10).  The  gift  was  not  Buffering  as  »itr/i. 
Its  iiieftiiing  and  value  lay  in  its  being  J'or  JIU  sake.  Tlie 
Macedonian  churches,  &nd  the  Philippian  cliureh  especially, 
were  pretjminently  suffering  churches.     See  2  Cor.  viii.  2. 

30.  Conflict  (a7<uva).     An  athletic  contest.     See  on  striv- 
ing. Col.  i.  29,  and  compare  striming  together,  ver,  27. 

Ve  saw.     In   his  sufferings  at  Philippi,  Acts   xvi. ;  see  1 
These,  ii.  2. 

Hear.     Coucerniog  my  imprisonment. 


CHAPTER  IL 

1.  Therefore.  Paul  has  spoken,  in  ch.  i.  26,  of  the  Philip- 
pians'  joy  in  his  presence.  Their  joy  is  to  find  expression  in 
duty — in  the  fulfilment  of  their  obligations  as  members  of  the 
christian  commonwealth,  by  fighting  the  good  fight  of  faith 
and  cheerfully  appropriating  the  gift  of  suffering  (t-h.  i.  27-29). 
Ver.  30,  alluding  to  his  own  conflicts,  marks  the  transition  from 
the  tlioHght  of  their  joy  to  that  of  his  joy.  Therefore,  since 
ench  is  your  duty  and  privilege,  fulfil  my  joy,  and  show  your- 
selves to  be  tnia  citizens  of  God's  kingdom  by  your  humility 
and  imity  of  spirit. 

Consolation  (wa/xieXijo-K),  Rev.,  comfort.  Better,  exhort- 
ation. See  on  Luke  vi.  2-i.  If  Christ,  by  His  example,  suffer- 
ings, and  conflicts,  exhorts  you. 

Comfort  of  love  {■irapaftv^wv).  Rev.,  consolaUon.  Only 
here  in  the  New  Testament.  From  irapd  beside,  and  f*5Soi 
tpeech  or  word.  Ilapd  has  the  same  force  as  in  irapoKXifa-i^ 
exhoi'tation  {see  on  Luke  vi.  24) ;  a  word  which  comes  to  the 
side  of  one  to  stimulate  or  comfort  him  ;  hence  an  cxhvrtaiion^ 
an  encouragement.  So  Plato :  "  Let  this,  then,  be  our  exhorta- 
tion concerning  marriage  "  ("  Laws,"  773).     A  motime  of  per- 


Ch.  IL]  the  epistle  to  the  PHILIPPIAN&  429 

suasion  or  dissuasion.  Plato,  speaking  of  the  fear  of  disgrace, 
or  of  ill-repute,  says :  "  The  obedient  nature  will  readily  yield 
to  Buch  incentives'^  ("Laws,"  880).  Also  an  aasttdgement  or 
ahatefnent.  So  Sophocles :  ^^  Offspring  of  the  noble,  ye  are  come 
as  the  aseicagement  of  my  woes "  (''  Electra,"  130).  Plato  : 
"  They  say  that  to  the  rich  are  many  coneoUUione  "  ("  Repub- 
lic," 329).  Plato  also  calls  certain  fruits  etimtUants  {irapafiv^la) 
of  a  sated  appetite  (^^  Critias,"  115).  Here  in  the  sense  of  in- 
centive. As  related  to  exhortationy  exhortation  uses  incentive 
as  a  ground  of  appeal.  Christ  exhorts,  appealing  to  love. 
Compare  ch.  i.  9  sqq.  See  Bom.  v.  8 ;  1  Cor.  xiii.  4 ;  2  Cor.  v. 
14 ;  Gal.  V.  13 ;  Eph.  v.  2 ;  1  John  iv.  16,  etc.  The  two  verbs 
kindred  to  exhortation  and  incentwe  occur  together  at  1  Thess. 
ii.  11.  See  on  1  Cor.  xiv.  3.  Bender  here,  if  amy  incentive  of 
love. 

Fellowship  of  the  Spirit.  Communion  with  the  Holy 
Spirit,  whose  first  fruit  is  love.  Gal.  v.  22.  Participation  in 
His  gifts  and  influences.  Compare  2  Pet.  i.  4,  and  2  Cor.  xiii. 
13. 

Bowels  and  mercies  ((TTrXoT^^va /col  oMcri/^/io/).  For  meroieSf 
see  on  2  Cor.  i.  3,  and  compare  Col.  iii.  12. 

2.  Fulfil  {irXfjpdHTaTe).     Or  complete.    Compare  John  iii.  29. 

Be  like-minded  {to  aino  ^povffre).  Lit.,  think  the  same 
thing.  The  expression  is  a  general  one  for  concord,  and  is  de- 
fined in  the  two  following  clauses :  unity  of  affection^  the  same 
love;  unity  of  s&niimentj  of  one  accord.  The  general  expres- 
sion is  then  repeated  in  a  stronger  form,  thinking  the  one  thing. 
A.  V.  and  Rev.,  of  one  mind. 

3.  Let  nothing  be  done  ijirfBhi).  Bev.,  doing  nothing. 
The  Greek  is  simply  nothing,  depending  either,  as  A.  V.  and 
Rev.,  on  the  verb  to  do  understood,  or  on  thinking  {<l>povouvT€^) 
of  the  preceding  verse :  thinking  nothing.  The  latter  is  prefer- 
able, since  the  previous  and  the  following  exhortations  relate  to 
thinking  or  feeling  rather  than  to  doing. 

Through  strife  {xariL  ipi^Uw).  Rev.,  correctly,  yoc^/on. 
Lit.,  according  to  faction.     See  on  Jas.  iii.  14 ;  and  ch.  L 


430  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Cu.  IL 

16,     According  to  ind'vi&te» /a<^um  as  the  regulative  atate  uf 
inind. 

Vain  glory  {KevoSo^iav).  Only  here  iu  the  New  Teatameiit. 
The  kindred  adjective  Kevoho^oi  desirous  of  vain  glory,  occxin 
only  at  Gal.  v.  26.  In  the  Septuagint  the  word  is  used  to  de- 
scribe the  worship  of  idols  aa  folly  (see  Wisdom  xiv.  14),  and 
in  4  Mace.  v.  9,  the  verb  KevoBo^a  is  used  of  fonowingiMm 
conceits  about  the  truth.  The  word  is  compounded  of  xevo^ 
empty,  vain,  and  Sofa  opinion  (but  not  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment), which,  through  the  intermediate  sense  of  good  or  favor- 
able opinion,  runs  into  the  meaning  of  glory.  See  on  Apoc. 
L6. 

Lowliness  of  mind  (raweivoippoffvp^).     See  on  Matt  xi.  29. 

4.  Look  {aKOTrovvTet).  Attentively:  fixing  the  attention 
upon,  with  desire  for  or  interest  in.  So  Rom.  xvi.  17 ;  Philip, 
ill.  17;  2  Cor.  iv.  18.  Hence  often  io  aim  at;  compare  <r«o7ros 
the  mark,  ch.  iii.  14.  Tlio  participles  esteeming  and  looking 
are  used  with  the  force  of  imperatives.     See  on  Col.  iii.  16. 

5.  Let  this  mind  be  in  you  {rovro  ippopeltrSm  iv  iifiw).  Lit., 
lei  this  be  thought  in  you.  The  correct  reading,  however,  is 
^>poveiTe,  lit.,  "  think  this  in  yourselves."  Rev.,  have  this  viitul 
in  you. 

6.  Being  in  the  form  of  God  {ev  futp^  Beov  inrdpx'^'')- 
Being.  Not  the  simple  elww  to  he,  but  stronger,  denoting  being 
which  is  from  the  beginning.  See  on  Jas.  ii.  15.  It  lias  a 
backward  look  into  an  antecedent  condition,  wliich  has  been  pro- 
tracted into  the  present.  Here  appropriate  to  the  preinearnate 
being  of  Christ,  to  which  the  sentence  refers.  In  itself  it  does 
not  imply  eternal,  but  only  prior  existence.  Form  (juyptfti^. 
We  must  here  dismiss  from  our  minds  the  idea  of  shape.  The 
word  is  nsed  in  its  philosophic  sense,  to  denote  that  expression 
of  being  which  carries  in  itself  the  distinctive  nature  and  char- 
acter of  the  being  to  whom  it  pertains,  and  ia  thus  permanently 
identified  witli  that  nature  and  character.  Thus  it  is  distin- 
goished  from  erj^ftafashion,  comprising  that  which  appeals  to 


A 


Cn.  U.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  IHB  PHILIPPIAN8.  431  I 

the  Bensea  and  which  ib  changeable.  Mopi^rifonn.*  i&  identi- 
fied with  tlie  essence  of  a  persou  or  thing  :  a-)(T)fia  fashion  is  an 
accident  which  may  change  without  affecting  tiie form.  For 
the  manner  in  which  this  differeuee  is  developed  in  the  kindred 
verba,  see  on  Matt.  xvii.  3. 

As  applied  here  to  God,  the  word  is  intended  to  descrihe  that 
mode  in  which  the  essential  being  of  God  expresses  itself.  We 
have  no  word  which  can  convey  this  meaning,  nor  is  it  possible 
for  DB  to  formulate  the  reality.  Form  inevitably  carries  witli 
it  to  ns  the  idea  of  shape.  It  ie  conceivable  that  the  essential 
personality  of  God  may  express  itself  in  a  mode  apprehensible 
by  the  perception  of  pure  spiritual  intelligences;  but  the  mode 
itself  is  neither  apprehensible  nor  conceivable  by  human 
miiida. 

This  mode  of  expression,  this  setting  of  the  divine  essence,  is 
not  identical  with  the  essence  itself,  but  is  identified  with  it^  as 
its  natural  and  appropriate  expression,  answering  to  it  in  every 
particular.  It  \b  tlie  perfect  expression  of  a  perfect  essence. 
It  is  not  something  imposed  from  without,  but  something  which 
proceeds  from  the  very  depth  of  the  perfect  being,  and  into 
which  that  being  perfectly  unfolds,  as  light  from  tire. 

To  say,  then,  that  Christ  was  in  thsfonn  of  God^  is  to  say 
that  He  existed  as  essentially  one  with  God.  The  expression 
of  deity  through  human  nature  (ver.  7)  thns  has  its  background 
in  the  expression  of  deity  (W  deitij  in  the  eternal  ages  of  God'a 
being.  Whatever  the  mode  of  this  expression,  it  marked  the 
being  of  Christ  in  the  eternity  before  creation.  As  the_/orTO 
of  God  was  identified  with  the  heiny  of  God,  so  Christ,  being 
in  the  form  of  God,  was  identified  with  the  being,  nature,  and 
personality  of  God. 

Thisyb/Tn,  not  being  idetifical  with  the  divine  essence,  but 
dependent  upon  it,  and  necessarily  implying  it,  can  be  parted 
with  or  laid  aside.  Since  Christ  is  one  with  God,  and  therefore 
pure  being,  absolute  existence.  lie  can  exist  without  the  form. 
This  form  of  God  Christ  laid  aside  in  Ilia  incarnation. 


432 


WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT. 


tCi.  IL 


Thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God  (ol^  dp 
warfiJMv  t'lyijaaro  to  elvai  lira  Sew).  Tlithbery  is  explaiiieii  in 
three  ways.  1.  A  robbing,  the  act.  2.  TVw  i/miff  tobbe^/,  a 
piece  of  plunder.  3.  Aprhe,  a  thing  to  be  grasped.  Here  in 
the  last  eense. 

Paiil  does  not  then  say,  as  A.  T.,  that  Christ  did  not  think 
it  robbery  to  be  e<iu«d  witk  God:  ior,  1,  that  fact  goes  without 
saying  in  the  previous  expression,  Seiny  m  the  form,  of  God. 
2.  On  this  explanation  tlie  statement  is  very  awkward.  Christ, 
being  in  the  form  of  God,  did  not  think  it  robbery  to  be  equal 
with  God  ;  hut,  after  which  we  should  naturally  expect,  on  the 
other  hand,  claimed  and  asserted  equality :  whereas  the  state- 
ment is :  Chriat  was  in  th«fortn  of  Ood  and  did  not  think  it 
robbery  to  be  equal  with  God,  but  (instead)  ejnj)tied  ITiniself, 
Christ  held  fast  Ilis  aseertion  of  divine  dignity,  but  relinqnished 
it.     The  antithesis  is  thus  entirely  destroyed. 

Taking  the  word  apirofyfiov  (A.  V.,  robbery)  to  mean  a  highly 
jffized  j>ossesaitni,  we  understand  Paul  to  say  that  Christ,  be- 
ing, before  His  incarnation,  in  the  form  of  God,  did  not  regard 
Ills  divine  equality  as  a  prize  which  was  to  be  grasped  at  and 
retained  at  all  liazards,  but,  on  the  contrary,  laid  aside  the  form 
of  God,  and  took  upon  Himself  tho  nature  of  man.  The  em- 
phasis in  the  passage  is  upon  Christ's  humiliation.  The  fact 
of  His  equality  with  God  is  etated  as  a  background,  in  order 
to  throw  the  circumstances  of  His  incarnation  into  stronger  re- 
lief. Hence  the  peculiar  form  of  Paul's  statement.  Christ's 
great  object  was  to  identify  Himself  with  humanity ;  not  to 
appear  to  men  as  divine  but  as  Auman.  Had  He  come  into 
the  world  emphasizing  Uia  equality  with  God,  the  world  would 
have  been  amazed,  but  not  saved.  He  did  not  grasp  at  this. 
Tiie  rather  He  counted  hunifinity  His  prize,  and  so  laid  aside 
tho  conditions  of  Hia  preSxistent  state,  and  became  man. 


.  Made   Himself  of  no   reputation    {kavrov 


*  ■'  The  direnltj  of  opinion  preT&lliDg  Biaoiig  iDterpreteia  Id  regard  to  the 
meaning  of  this  pUBBge  is  eDougli  to  fill  the  student  with  deep&ir,  and  to 
affliat  htm  witli  Intelieotual  psralyBia"  (Bruoe,  "The  Humiliatiou  of  ChriBt.' 


A 


Cb.  U.] 


THE   EPISTLE  TO  THE   I'HIUPPIANa. 


433 


Lit.,  emptied  Himsdf.  The  general  aense  is  that  He  divested 
Iliiaself  of  that  peculiar  mode  of  existence  which  was  pi'upur 
aiid  peculiar  to  Ilijii  as  one  with  God.  Ue  laid  aside  the  form 
of  God.  In  so  doing,  lie  did  not  divest  Himself  of  His  divine 
nature.  The  change  was  a  change  of  state ;  the  form  of  a 
servant  for  the  form  of  God.  Ilia  peraoiiaiity  continued  the 
same.  His  self-emjytylng  waa  not  self -extinction,  nor  was  the 
divine  Being  changed  into  a  mere  man.  In  His  humanity  He 
retained  the  couBciousness  of  deity,  and  in  Tlis  incarnate  state 
carried  out  the  mind  which  animated  Him  before  His  incarna- 
tion. He  waa  not  unable  to  assert  equality  with  God.  He  waa 
able  not  io  assert  it. 

Form  of  a  servant  OMfx^^f&ivXof).  The  same  word  for/ffrm 
as  in  the  phrase  ^fT7/i  of  God,  and  with  the  same  sense.  The 
mode  of  expression  of  a  slave's  being  is  indeed  apprehensible, 
and  is  associated  with  human  shape,  but  it  is  not  this  side  of 
the  fact  which  Paul  is  developing.  It  is  that  Christ  asaniiied 
that  mode  of  being  which  answered  to,  and  was  the  complete 
and  characteristic  expression  of,  the  slave's  being.  The  mode 
itself  is  not  defined.  This  is  appropriately  inserted  here  aa 
bringing  out  the  contrast  with  counted  fiot  equaiity  vnth  God, 
etc.  What  Christ  grasped  at  in  His  incarnation  was  not  divine 
sovereignty,  but  service. 

Was  made  in  the  likeness  of  men  (cf  6/u>ta)fMTi  dv9p<inro)v 
yevofifvos).  Lit.,  becoming  in,  etc.  Notice  the  choice  of  the 
verb,  not  wa«,  but  became:  entered  into  a  new  state.  Likeness. 
The  word  does  not  imply  the  reality  of  our  Lord's  humanity, 
as  fiop<l»j  form  implied  the  reality  of  Ilia  deity.  That  fact  is 
stated  in  the  form  of  a  servartt.  Neither  is  eucav  tTtioffe  em- 
pioyed,  which,  for  our  purposes,  iinpliea  aubstantially  the  same 
as  /utptf)^.  See  on  Col,  i.  15.  Aa  form  of  a  ser^<ant  e\\iihita 
the  inmost  reality  of  Christ's  condition  as  a  servant — that  Ue 
became  really  and  esseidlnlly  the  servant  of  men  (Luke  \xii. 
27) — so  likeness  of  men  expresses  the  fact  that  His  mode  of 
manifestation  resemiled  what  men  are.  Thie  leavea  room  for 
the  assumption  of  another  side  of  flia  nature— (A«  divine — in 
the  likeness  of  which  He  did  not  appear.     Aa  He  appealed  to 


k 


Vol.  111—28 


A 


434  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Cb.  IL 

men,  HewftB  like  the  in  Bel  ves,  y/'ith  Areal  likeoeas;  buttbis  Hke- 
itGsa  to  men  did  not  express  Ilie  whole  self.  The  toialdty  of 
His  beJDg  could  not  appear  to  men,  for  that  involved  the  form 
of  God.  Hence  the  apostle  views  JJim  solely  as  He  could  ap- 
pear to  men.  All  that  was  possible  was  a  real  and  complete 
likeness  to  humanity.  What  He  was  esaentiaZly  and  eternally 
could  not  eater  into  His  liumaD  mode  of  existence.  Humanly 
He  was  like  men,  but  regarded  with  reference  to  His  whole 
self,  He  was  not  identical  with  man,  becanee  there  was  an  ele- 
ment of  Hia  personality  which  did  not  dwell  in  them — equality 
with  God.  Hence  the  statement  of  His  human  manifestation 
ie  neceesarily  limited  by  tliis  fact,  and  ia  confined  to  likeness 
and  does  not  extend  to  identity.  "To  affirm  likeness  is  at  once 
to  assert  similariiy  and  to  deny  S(mien6ss"  (Dickson).  See  on 
Rom.  viii.  3. 

8.  Being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man  (o^ij/iart  eipeSeU  tixt 
avSptawo^).  Some  expositors  connect  these  words  witli  tlie  pre- 
ceding clause,  thua:  beinff  made  in  the  likeness  of  men  and 
being  fouiid  in  fashion  as  a  man  /  a  new  sentence  beginning 
with  ITe  humbled  JTimself.  The  general  sense  ia  not  altered 
by  this  change,  and  there  is  great  force  in  Meyer's  remark  that 
the  preceding  thought,  in  the  likeness  qfm^n,  is  thus  "  emphati- 
cally exhausted."  On  the  other  hand,  it  breaks  the  connection 
with  the  following  sentence,  which  thus  enters  vei-y  abruptly. 
Notice  beitiff found.  After  He  had  assumed  tl»e  conditions  of 
humanity,  and  men's  attention  was  drawn  to  Him,  they  found 
Him  like  a  man.  Compare  Isa.  liii,  2.  "H  we  looked  at  Him, 
there  was  no  sightlinesB  that  we  should  delight  in  Him." 

Fashion  {o^itaTi).  That  wliicii  is  purely  outward  and  ap- 
peals to  the  senses.  Thefnrm  of  a  servant  is  concerned  with 
the  fact  that  the  manifestation  aa  a  servant  corresponded 
with  the  real  fact  that  Christ  came  aa  the  servant  of  man- 
kind. In  the  phrase  in  the  likeness  of  men  the  thought  is  still 
linked  with  that  of  His  essential  nature  which  rendered  possible 
a  Itkeneaa  to  men,  but  not  an  absolute  identity  with  men.  In 
being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man  the  thought  ie  confined  to  the 
outioard  guise  as  it  appealed  to  the  sense  of  mankind.    Like- 


Cb.  IL]  THB  EPI8TLB  TO  THB  PHILIPPIAN&  435 

ness  states  the  fact  of  real  resemblance  to  men  in  mode  of  exists 
euce :  fashion  defines  the  outward  mode  KcAform.  As  a  jna/n. 
Not  being  found  a  man  :  not  whai  He  was  recognized  to  be, 
but  as  a  man,  keeping  up  the  idea  of  semblance  expressed  in 
likeness. 

He  humbled  Himself  {iram-eUwirev  eavrov).  Not  the  same 
as  emptied  Himself y  ver.  7.  It  defines  that  word,  showing  how 
the  self -emptying  manifests  itself. 

Became  obedient  unto  death  {yevo/AeiHK — ^a^^xpO*  Bscame^ 
compare  Apoc.  i.  18.  Unto,  The  Bev.  very  judiciously  inserts 
even  ;  for  the  A.  Y.  is  open  to  the  interpretation  that  Christ 
rendered  obedience  to  death.  Unto  is  up  to  the  jpoint  of. 
Christ's  obedience  to  Grod  was  rendered  to  the  extent  of  laying 
down  His  life. 

Of  the  cross.  Forming  a  climax  of  humiliation.  He  sub- 
mitted not  only  to  deaths  but  to  the  death  of  a  malefactor. 
The  Mosaic  law  had  uttered  a  curse  against  it,  Deut  xxi.  23, 
and  the  Gentiles  reserved  it  for  malefactors  and  slaves.  Hence 
the  shams  associated  with  the  cross,  Heb.  xii.  2.  This  was  the 
offence  or  stumMi/ng-hlock  of  the  cross,  which  was  so  often  urged 
by  the  Jews  against  the  Christians.  See  on  Oal.  iii.  13.  To  a 
Greek,  accustomed  to  clothe  his  divinities  with  every  outward 
attribute  of  grace  and  beauty,  the  summons  to  worship  a  cruci- 
fied malefactor  appealed  BBfoolishnesSj  1  Cor.  i.  23. 

9.  Wherefore  {hii).    In  consequence  of  this  humiliation. 

Hath  highly  exalted  {inrepvy^xocep).  Lit,  exalted  above. 
Compare  Matt,  xxiii.  12. 

Hath  given  {ixaploaro).  Freeiy  bestowed,  even  as  Jesus 
freely  offered  Himself  to  humiliation. 

A  name.  Bev.,  correctly,  the  name.  This  expression  is 
differently  explained :  either  the  particular  name  given  to 
Christ,  as  Jesus  or  Lord ;  or  nams  is  taken  in  the  sense  of  dig- 
nity or  glory^  which  is  a  common  Old-Testament  usage,  and 
occurs  in  Eph.  i.  21 ;  Heb.  i.  4.  Under  the  former  explanation 
a  variety  of  names  are  proposed,  as  Son  of  Oodj  Lordj  Ood^ 


436  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NBW  TESTAMENT.  [Cb.  II 

Christ  Jeans.  The  Benae  of  the  personal  name  Jesus  eeeuis  tu 
meet  all  tlie  conditions,  and  tliQ  personal  sense  is  the  simpler, 
since  Jeaita  occurs  immediately  after  with  the  word  name,  and 
again  Jesus  Christ  in  ver.  11.  The  name  Jesus  was  bestowed 
on  Christ  at  the  beginning  of  His  humiliation,  hat  projilieiioalli/ 
as  the  One  who  should  save  His  people  from  their  sins,  Matt.  i. 

21.  It  was  the  personal  name  of  others  besides  ;  but  if  that  is 
aa  objection  here,  it  is  equally  an  objection  in  ver.  10.  The 
di^Uy  is  expressed  by  ab<yi)e  every  name.  He  bears  the  name 
in  His  glory.     See  Acts  ix.  5.     See  on  Malt.  i.  21. 

10.  At  the  name  of  Jesus  {ev  rot  6v6/iaTt).  Rev.,  better, 
in  the  name.  The  name  means  here  the  personal  name ;  bnt 
as  including  all  that  is  involved  in  the  name.  See  on  Matt. 
zxviii.  19.  Hence  the  salutation  is  not  at  the  name  of  Jesus, 
as  by  bowing  when  the  name  is  uttered,  but,  as  Ellicott  rightly 
says :  "  the  spiritual  sphere,  the  holy  element  as  it  were,  in 
which  every  prayer  is  to  be  offered  and  every  knee  to  bow." 
Compare  Eph.  v.  20. 

Things  in  heaven,  etc.     Compare  Apoc.  v.  13 ;  Eph.  i.  20, 

22.  The  words  may  apply  either  to  all  intelligent  beings  or 

to  all  things.  The  latter  is  in  accord  with  Paul's  treatment 
of  the  creation  collectively  in  Rora.  viii.  19-22,  and  witii  tlie 
Old-Testament  passages,  in  which  all  nature  is  represented  as 
praising  God,  as  Ps.  cxiviii. ;  Ixv.  13. 

11.  Confess  {e^fMtXo^treTai).  See  on  Matt.  iii.  6;  tltaiik. 
Matt.  xi.  25;  liom.  xiv.  11.  The  verb  may  also  be  rendered 
thank,  as  Matt.  xi.  25 ;  Luke  x.  21,  that  meaning  growing  out 
of  the  sense  of  ope7i,jo>jfui  acknowledgment.  The  sense  here 
is  that  of  frank,  open  confession.* 


*  There  is  do  objectian  to  Bdding  the  idek  tnOi  tianJugMttg,  u  Lightfoot ; 
iDt  his  staMment  tb>t  the  word  has  tlii«  McondBry  seDM  in  Iw,  xlv.  33,  whiob 
P>nl  here  adapts,  and  which  is  quoted  Rom.  xiv.  10.  11,  Deeds  qualifying, 
•8  the  Beptaa^ot  texts  vary,  and  (he  vord  is  foand  only  in  the  Alexandrian, 
"  which  Is  open  to  the  euapicion  of  having  been  contarinGd  to  the  New  Testo- 
mant"  (Toy).  The  Hebrew  is  tutar.  In  the  Vatican  Septaagint,  taear  bg 
Chd. 


A 


Ch.  IL]  the  EPISTLB  to  the  PHIUPPIAKa  437 

To  the  glory,  etc.     Connect  with  confer, 

12.  Not  as  in  my  presence  only.  Connect  with  workoutj 
not  with  obeyed.  Do  not  work  out  your  salvation  as  though 
impelled  to  action  by  my  presence  merely. 

Much  more.  Than  if  I  were  present;  for  in  my  absence 
even  greater  zeal  and  care  are  necessary. 

Work  out  your  own  salvation  (t^i;  eaur&p  awnipUuf  /caTep- 
yd^ea^).  Carry  out  "  to  the  goal "  (Bengel).  Complete.  See 
on  Rom.  vii.  8.  Your  onon  salvation.  There  is  a  saving  work 
which  God  only  can  do  for  you;  but  there  is  also  a  work 
which  you  must  do  for  yourselves.  The  work  of  your  sal- 
vation is  not  completed  in  God's  work  in  you.  God's  work 
must  be  carried  out  by  yourselves.  "  Whatever  rest  is  provided 
by  Christianity  for  the  children  of  God,  it  is  certainly  never 
contemplated  that  it  should  supersede  personal  effort.  And 
any  rest  which  ministers  to  indifference  is  immoral  and  unreal 
— it  makes  parasites  and  not  men.  Just  because  God  worketh 
in  him,  as  the  evidence  and  triumph  of  it,  the  true  child  of 
God  works  out  his  own  salvation — works  it  out  having  really 
received  it — not  as  a  light  thing,  a  superfluous  labor,  but  witli 
fear  and  trembling  as  a  reasonable  and  indispensable  service  " 
(Drummond,  "  Natural  Law  in  the  Spiritual  World,"  p.  335). 
Human  agency  is  included  in  God's  completed  work.  In  the 
saving  work  of  grace  God  imparts  a  new  moral  power  to  work. 
Compare  Kom.  vi.  8-13 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  1.  Believe  as  if  you  had 
no  power.     Work  as  if  you  had  no  God. 

Fear  and  trembling.  Compare  2  Cor.  vii.  15 ;  Eph.  vi.  5. 
Not  slavish  terror,  but  wholesome,  serious  caution.  ^^This 
fear  is  self -distrust ;  it  is  tenderness  of  conscience ;  it  is  vigi- 
lance against  temptation ;  it  is  the  fear  which  inspiration  op- 
poses to  high-mindedness  in  the  admonition  'be  not  high- 
minded  but  fear.'  It  is  taking  heed  lest  we  fall;  it  is  a 
constant  apprehension  of  the  deceitf ulness  of  the  heart,  and  of 
the  insidiousness  and  power  of  inward  corruption.  It  is  the 
caution  and  circumspection  which  timidly  shrinks  from  what- 
ever would  offend  and  dishonor  God  and  the  Saviour.    And 


438 


WORD  8TDD1B8  IK  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Cb.  II 


these  the  cliild  of  God  will  feel  aud  exorcise  the  more  he  rises 
above  the  enieebliDg,  disheartening,  distressing  influence  of  the 
fear  which  hath  torment.  Well  might  Solomon  say  of  such 
fear,  'happy  is  the  man  that  feareth  alway'"  (Wardlaw"On 
Proverbs,"  xxviii,,  14).     Compare  1  Pet.  i.  17, 

13.  For  it  is  God  which  worketh  in  you.  Completing 
and  guarding  the  previous  statement.  In  you,  not  among  you. 
Worketh  {ivep^Siv).  See  on  Mark  vi.  14;  Jas.  v,  16.  The 
verb  meaus  effectual  working.  In  the  active  voice,  to  he  at 
work.  In  the  middle  voice,  as  here  (used  only  by  James  and 
Paul,  and  only  of  things),  to  display  on^a  activity  ;  show  one's 
self  operaiii}6.     Compare  Eph.  iii.  20. 

To  will  and  to  do  (to  SeXeiv  koX  to  evepyeiv).  Lit.,  tAe  vnli- 
ing  and  the  doiiig.  Both  are  from  God,  and  are  of  one  piece, 
60  that  he  who  wiiU  inevitably  does.  The  willing  whicli  is 
wrought  by  God,  by  its  own  nature  and  pressure,  works  out 
into  action.  "  We  will,  but  God  works  the  will  in  ua.  We 
work,  therefore,  but  God  works  the  working  in  us  "  (Augus- 
tine). For  to  do.  Rev.  substitutes  to  work,  thus  preserving  the 
harmony  in  the  Greek  between  "  God  which  worketh "  and 
"to  work." 

Of  His  good  pleasure  {{nrep  t^?  evZoieCwi).  Rev.,  better, 
for  His,  etc.  ljH.,for  the  sake  of;  in  order  to  subserve.  See 
1  Tim.  ii.  4. 

14.  MurmurinES  (7077iw-/Mn').  See  on  Jnde  16;  John  vi, 
41.     Compare  1  Cor.  x.  10. 

Disputings  {^taXcrfLUfiSiv).  See  on  Mark  vii.  31.  It  ia 
doubtful  whether  disputings  is  a  legitimate  meaning.  The 
kindred  verb  ZtaKoyi^oiuu  is  invariably  used  in  the  sense  of 
to  reason  or  discuss,  either  with  another  or  in  one's  own  mind. 
Matt,  xvi,  7;  xxi.  25  ;  Mark  ii.  6  ;  Luke  xii.  17.  The  noun  is 
eometimea  rendered  thoughts,  as  Matt.  xv.  19 ;  Mark  vii.  21 ; 
but  with  tlie  same  idea  underlying  it,  of  a  suspicion  or  doubt, 
causing  inward  discuEsion.  See  1  Tim.  ii.  8.  Better  here 
questionings  or  dovhtings.     See  on  Eom.  xiv.  1.     The  mur 


Ob.  IL]  THB  BPISTLB  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANB.  439 

muring  is  the  marcU^  the  doubting  the  irUeUeotual  rebellion 
against  God. 

15.  May  be — harmless  {yhnfo-Se — iueipaiot).  May  he  is 
rather  m^y  prove  or  show  yourselves  to  be.  SarmlesSy  lit.,  tm- 
mixed.  See  on  Matt.  x.  16.  Better,  guileless.  Blamdess  in 
the  sight  of  others ;  guileless  in  jour  own  hearts. 

Sons  of  God  {riicva).  Bev.,  better,  children.  See  on  John 
i.  12.    Compare  Deut.  xxzii.  5. 

Without  rebuke  (a^fia).  Bev.,  correctly,  toithaiU  blemish. 
See  on  Col.  i.  22.  The  word  is  epexegetical  of  the  two  preced- 
ing  epithets,  unblemished  in  reputation  and  in  reality. 

Crooked  and  perverse  {a/coXliv: — Sie<rrpafifihnf^).  Crooked^ 
see  on  urUoward^  Acts  ii.  40 ;  frowardy  1  Pet.  ii.  18.  Per- 
verse^  lit.,  warped,  twisted.  See  on  Matt.  xvii.  17 ;  Luke  xxiiL 
14. 

Ye  shine  (^o/i/eo-^c).  Bev.,  more  correctly,  ye  are  seen. 
Compare  Matt.  xxiv.  27 ;  Apoc  xviii.  23,  A.  V.,  where  the 
same  error  occurs.  Shine  would  require  the  verb  in  the  active 
voice,  as  John  i.  5 ;  v.  35. 

Lights  (^a>oT^pe9).  Only  here  and  Apoc.  xxi.  11,  see  note. 
Properly,  luminaries.  So  Rev.,  in  margin.  Generally  of  the 
heavenly  bodies.     See  Gen.  i.  14, 16,  Sept. 

In  the  world.  Connect  with  ye  are  seen,  not  with  lumin- 
aries. The  world,  not  only  material,  but  moral.  For  the 
moral  sense  of  KoafUK  world,  see  on  John  i.  9. 

16.  Holding  forth  (hrtxpvre;).  The  verb  means  literally  to 
hold  upon  or  apply.  Hence  to^  attention  upon,  as  Luke  xiv. 
7;  Acts  iii.  5 ;  1  Tim.  iv.  16.  In  Acts  xix.  22,  stayed:  where 
the  idea  at  bottom  is  the  ^in&—kept  to.  So  in  Sept.,  Job 
xxvii.  8,  of  setting  the  heart  on  gain.  Job  xxx.  26,  ^'^ fixed  my 
mind  on  good."  In  G«n.  viii.  10,  of  Noah  waiting.  In  classi- 
cal Greek,  to  hold  out,  present,  as  to  offer  wine  to  a  guest  or 
the  breast  to  an  infant.  Also  to  stop,  keep  dmon,  confiAfte,  cease. 
Here  in  the  sense  oi  presenting  or  offering,  as  A.  Y.  and  Bev., 
holding  forth. 


44U  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  (Ch.  U 

That  1  may  rejoice  (et?  kovxtj/jm  e/wl).  l.it.,yor  a  cawiff 
offflori/ing  unto  me. 

In  the  day  of  Christ  (ci?  ^/iipav  Xpunov).  Lit.,  against  the 
day,  as  cli.  i.  10.  Tlie  phrase  day  of  Christ  is  peculiar  to  tliia 
epistle.     The  usual  expression  is  day  of  the  Lord. 

Have  not  run  (oi/«  eS/sa^n).  Rev.,  better,  did  not  run. 
Aoriat  tense.  Ignatius  writes  to  Poljcarp  to  ordain  aotne  one 
"beloved  and  unwearied,  who  maybe  styled  God's  courier" 
{SfohpoiMt.     To  Polycarp,  vii.). 

17.  I  am  offered  {(rn-ei^o/tot).  Lit.,  /  am-  poured  out  a«  a 
libation.  Tlie  figure  is  that  of  a  sacrifice,  in  wliicli  the  Philip- 
piaus  are  the  priests,  offering  their  faith  to  God,  and  Paul's 
life  is  the  libation  poured  out  at  this  offering.  Compare  2  Cor. 
xii.  15;  2  Tim.  iv.  6.  Ignatius:  "Brethren,  I  am  lavishly 
poured  out  in  love  for  yon"  (Philadelphia,  v.). 

Upon  the  sacrifice,  etc.  (jhri).  The  image  is  probably  drawn 
from  heathen  rather  than  from  Jewish  sacrifices,  since  Paul 
was  writing  to  converted  heathen.  According  to  Josepbus,  the 
Jewish  libation  was  poured  rouiul  and  not  upon  the  altar;  but 
the  preposition  hrl  used  here,  was  also  used  to  describe  it.  At 
all  events,  f-rrl  may  be  rendered  at,  which  would  snit  either. 

Sacrifice  and  service  (dfo-ia  xai  "Xxerovpyia).  Sacrifice,  as 
uniformly  in  the  Kew  Testament,  tlie  thing  sacrificed.  Servitk; 
see  ou  ministration,  Luke  i.  23,  and  ministeJ'ed,  Acts  xiii.  2. 
In  the  Old  Testament,  used  habitnallyof  the  ministry  of  priests 
and  Levites;  also  of  Samuel's  service  to  God;  1  Sam.  ii,  18; 
iii.  1.  Of  service  to  men,  1  Kings  i.  4,  15.  In  tlie  apostolic 
writings  this  and  its  kindred  words  are  used  of  services  to  bi>th 
God  and  man.  See  Rom.  xiii.  6;  xv.  16;  Lnke  i.  23;  Kom. 
XV.  27  ;  2  Cor.  ix.  13 ;  Philip,  ii.  25. 

Of  your  foith.     Offered  by  you  as  a  sacrifice  to  God. 

Rejoice  with  {avyxaCpm).  There  seems  to  be  no  sufficient 
reason  for  rendering  cortgroiulate. 

20.  Like  minded  {Uto^vxov).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment,    With  Paul  himself,  not  Timothy. 


i 


Ch.  II]  THB  BPISTLB  TO  THE  PHILIFPIANa  441 

Who  (&rri9).     Doable  relative,  classifying:  stu^  that  he. 

Naturally  {yptfaim).  Eev.,  truly.  The  adverb  only  here 
in  the  New  Testament.  The  kindred  adjective  71^409  true, 
otofiy  occurs  1  Tim.  i.  2 ;  Tit.  i.  4 ;  2  Cor.  viii.  8  (see  note). 

21.  All  {ol  vdirre^).  The  all ;  that  is,  one  amd  all.  The  ex- 
pression, however,  mnst  have  limitations,  since  it  cannot  include 
those  spoken  of  in  ch.  i.  14, 17.  It  probably  means,  all  except 
Timothy,  that  he  has  at  his  disposal  of  those  who  wonld  natnr- 
ally  be  selected  for  snch  an  o£Bce. 

22.  In  the  Gospel  (ei9  rd  evarffikkov).  In  furtherance  of,  as 
ch.  i.  5.     So  Rev. 

23.  i  shall  see  (o^^).  The  compounded  preposition  airi 
gives  the  sense  of  looking  a/way  from  the  present  condition  of 
affairs  to  what  is  going  to  turn  out. 

25.  Epaphroditus.  Mentioned  only  in  this  epistle.  See  on 
Epaphrasy  Philem.  23.  The  name  is  derived  from  Aphrodite 
(Yenus),  and  means  charmvng. 

Messenger  {airotrroXov).  The  same  word  as  aposUe^  one 
sent  with  a  commission. 

He  that  ministered  (}sjeiTovp^ov).  Kindred  with  Xeirovpyla 
service^  in  ver.  17.    Kev.,  minister. 

26.  Was  full  of  heaviness  {ffv  aSfffiov&v).  Bev.,  was  sore 
trovbled.    Used  of  Christ  in  Gethsemane,  Matt  xxvi.  27. 

27.  Sorrow  upon  sorrow  (Xi^y  hr\  Xumiv).  The  accusa- 
tive implies  motion.  Sorrow  coming  upon  sorrow,  as  wave 
after  wave. 

30.  The  work  of  Christ.  The  text  varies:  some  reading 
work  of  the  Zordy  and  others  the  work  absolutely.  If  the  latter, 
the  meaning  is  labor  for  the  Gospel ;  compare  Acts  xv.  38.  If 
the  Lord  or  Christy  the  reference  may  be  to  the  special  service 
of  Epaphroditus  in  bringing  the  contribution  of  the  Philip- 
pians. 

Not  regardins  his  life  {ira^afiovXevadnevo^  t§  ^^vyg).  The 
correct  reading  is  wapafioXevadfievo^,  meaning  to  vefUurCy  t^ex- 


442 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THK  NEW  TESTABiKNT.  [Ch.  IlL 


pose  one's  self.  It  was  also  a  gambler's  word,  to  throw  dovm 
a  stake,  lleiice  Paul  says  that  Epapliroditus  reckleBsIj  exposed 
his  life.  Rev.,  hazarding.  The  brotherhoods  of  the  ancient 
Church,  who  cared  for  the  sick  at  the  risk  of  their  lives,  were 
called  j?araholani,*  or  reckless  persons. 

Your  lack  of  service  {to  ufiaiv  vtrrept)/ia  Xeirovp^Ca^).     An 

unfortunate  rendering,  since  it  might  be  taken  to  imply  some 
neglect  on  the  Philippians'  part.  Kev.,  tJiat  which  was  lacking 
in  your  service.  The  expression  is  complimentary  and  affec- 
tionate, to  the  effect  that  all  that  was  wanting  in  the  matter  of 
their  service  was  tlieir  ministration  in  person,  which  was  sup- 
plied by  Epaphroditus. 


OKAPTER   in. 


1.  Finally  (to  'Konr6v).  Wt.,for  t/ie  rest.  Frequent  in  Paul's 
writings  in  introducing  the  conclusions  of  his  letters.  See  1 
Thess.  iv.  1 ;  3  These,  iii.  1 ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  11,  note.  Evidently  Paul 
was  about  to  close  his  letter,  when  his  thought  was  directed 
into  another  channel — the  Judaiziug  teachers,  and  their  at- 
tempts to  undermine  his  influence. 

Rejoice  (^a/^ere).      See  on  2  Cor.  xiii.  11. 

The  same  things.  It  is  doubtful  what  is  referred  to.  Pos- 
sibly previous  letters,  or  the  dissensions  in  the  Church. 

Grievous  {oKprjpov).  Only  here.  Matt.  xxv.  26  ;  Rom.  xii. 
11,  in  both  instances  rendered  slothyitl.  From  6m^a>  to  delay. 
lience,  in  classical  Greek,  shrinking,  backward,  unready.  The 
idea  of  delay  underlies  the  secondary  sense,  hurdensome,  trouble- 
some. It  is  the  vexation  arising  from  weary  waiting,  and  which 
appears  in  the  middle  English  irh:n  to  tire  or  to  becojiie  tired, 
cognate  with  the  Latin  urgere  to  press,  and  English  irk,  irh- 
\  work. 


fii.  lU.]  THE  EPISTUt  TO  THE  PHUJPPIANS.  443 

2.  Beware  OX^ere).  Lit.,  look  to.  Compare  Mark  iv. 
2i ;  viii.  15 ;  Luke  juci.  8. 

Dogs.  Rev.,  correctly,  the  dogs,  referring  to  a  well-kDown 
party — the  Jiidaizere.  These  were  iioiiiitially  Ciiriatians  wlio 
accepted  JeBos  as  the  Messiah,  but  as  the  Saviourof  Israel  oDly. 
Tlicy  insisted  that  Christ's  kiugdoai  could  be  entered  only 
through  the  gate  of  Judaism.  Only  circumcised  converts  were 
fully  accepted  by  God.  They  appeared  quite  early  in  the  his- 
tory of  the  Church,  and  are  those  referred  to  in  Acta  xv.  1. 
Paul  was  the  object  of  their  special  hatred  and  abuse.  Tliey 
challenged  his  birth,  his  authority,  and  his  motivea.  "'Paul 
must  be  destroyed,'  was  aa  truly  their  watchword  as  the  cry  for 
the  destruction  of  Carthage  had  been  of  old  to  the  Itoinan 
senator"  {Stanley,  "Sermons  and  Lectures  on  tiie  Apostolic 
Age  ").  These  are  referred  to  in  ch.  i.  16 ;  and  the  whole  pas- 
sage in  the  present  cliapter,  from  ver.  3  to  ver.  11,  is  wortliy 
of  study,  being  full  of  incidental  hints  lurking  in  single  words, 
and  not  always  apparent  in  our  versions;  hints  which,  while 
they  illustrate  the  main  point  of  the  discussion,  are  also  aimed 
at  the  assertions  of  the  Jtidaizers.  Dogs  was  a  term  of  reproach 
among  both  Greeks  and  Jews.  Homer  uses  it  of  both  women 
and  men,  implying  shameleaeness  in  the  one,  and  i-ecklessness 
in  the  other.  Thus  Helen ;  "  Brother-in-law  of  me,  a  mischief- 
devising  dog"  ("Diad,"  vi.,  344).  Teuccr  of  Hector;  "lean- 
not  hit  this  raging  dog"  ("Iliad,"  viii.,  298).  Dr.  Thomson 
saysof  the  dogs  in  oriental  towns:  "They  lie  about  the  streets 
in  such  numbers  as  to  render  it  difficult  and  often  dangerous  to 
pick  one's  way  over  and  amongst  them — a  lean,  hungry,  and 
sinister  brood.  They  have  no  owners,  but  upon  some  principle 
known  only  to  themselves,  they  combine  into  gangs,  each  of 
which  assumes  jurisdictioo  over  a  particnlar  street ;  and  they 
attack  with  the  utmost  ferocity  all  canine  intruders  into  their 
territory.  In  those  contests,  and  especially  during  the  night, 
they  keep  up  an  incessant  barking  and  howling,  such  as  is  rarely 
heard  in  any  Enropean  city.  The  imprecations  of  David  npon 
his  enemies  derive  their  significance,  therefore,  from  this  refer- 
ence to  one  of  the  most  odious  of  oriental  annoyances"  ("Land 


444 


WORD  aTDDIES   IN   THE   NEW   TESTAMENT. 


[Cn.  1 


and  Book,"  Central  Palestine  and  Plioenicia,  593j,  See  Pe. 
lix.  C ;  \xii.  16.  Being  unclean  animals,  doge  were  used  to  de- 
note what  was  unlioiy  or  profane.  So  Matt  vii.  6  ;  Ajwc.  xxii. 
15.  Tiie  Ifiraelites  are  forbidden  in  Deuteronomy  to  liiing  the 
price  of  a  dug  into  the  Jiouee  of  God  for  any  vow  :  Dout.  xxiii. 
18.  The  Gentiles  of  the  Christian  era  were  denominated 
"  d(^8"  by  the  Jews,  see  Matt,  xv,  26.  Paul  here  retorts  upon 
them  their  own  epithet. 

Evil  workers.     Compare  deceitful  workwa,  2  Cor,  xi.  lb 

Concision  {KoraTOfi-^v).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 
The  kindred  verb  occurs  in  the  Septuagint  only,  of  mutilations 
forbidden  by  the  Mosaic  law.  See  Lev.  xxi.  5.  The  noun 
here  is  a  play  upon  irepiTon^  ciroutncision.  It  means  vniilla- 
tion.  Paul  bitterly  characterizes  those  who  were  not  of  the  true 
circumcision  (Rom.  ii.  28,  29;  Col.  ii.  11;  Eph.  ii.  11)  as 
merely  tnutilated.  Compare  Gal.  v.  12,  where  he  uses  atroKoir- 
reivto  cut  off,  of  those  who  would  impose  circumcision  upon 
the  Christian  converts:  "I  would  they  would  out  themselveif 
off  who  trouble  you ; "  that  is,  not  merely  circumcise,  but 
mutilate  themseives  like  the  priests  of  Cybele. 

3.  The  circumcision.  The  abstract  term  for  those  who  are 
circumcieed.  In  the  Old  Testament,  circumcision  was  a  meta- 
phor for  purity.  See  Lev.  xxvi,  41;  Dent.  x.  16;  xxx.  6; 
Ezek.  xiiv.  7,  etc 

Worship  God  in  tha  spirit  {irvevfiari  Sew  XaTpevotnei:). 
The  correct  reading  is  Oeov  of  God.  Render,  as  Rev.,  worship 
hy  the  Spirit  of  God.  Worship.  See  on  Apoc.  xxii.  3,  Paul 
uses  the  Jews' word  which  denoted  their  own  service  of  Jehovah 
as  Ilis  peculiar  people.  Comp.we  Acts  xxvi.  7.  A  Jew  would 
be  scandalized  by  the  application  of  this  term  to  Christian  wor- 
ahip. 

Rejoice  in  Christ  Jesus  (neov^/ieiwi).  Rev,,  better,  glory 
Compare  Jer.  ix,  23,  24,  and  1  Cor.  i.  31 ;  2  Cor.  x.  17. 


In  the  flesh.     External  privileges  of  every  kind. 


M 


Ch.  m.]  THB  BPISTLB  TO  TH£  PHILIPPIANB.  445 

4.  Though  I  misht  also  have  confidence  {tcalirep  iya^ 
exfinv  TreiroiSi^aip).  Lit.,  even  though  myself  Juwing  cai\fidence. 
Also  should  be  joined  with  the  Jlesh  and  rendered  even.  Bev., 
though  I  myself  might  have  conjidence  even  in  the  jlesh.  The 
sense  of  the  translation  Tnighl  home  is  correct ;  bnt  Paul  puts 
it  that  he  actitaUy  has  confidence  in  the  flesh,  placing  himself 
at  the  Jews^  stand-point. 

Thinketh  that  he  hath  whereof  he  might  trust  (J^Kel 
TrerroiJ^ivcu).  The  A.  V.  is  needlessly  verbose.  Rev.,  much 
better,  thinketh  to  have  confidence. 

5.  Circumcised  the  eighth  day  {TrepirofiQ  otcraii^epo^). 
Lit.,  eight  days  old  in  circumcision;  or  jxissing  the  eighth  day. 
For  the  idiom,  see  on  John  xi.  39,  and  compare  Acts  xxviii.  13. 
Converts  to  Judaism  were  circumcised  in  maturity:  Ishma- 
elites  in  their  thirteenth  year.  He  was  thus  shown  to  be  neither 
a  heathen  nor  an  Ishmaelite. 

Of  the  stock  of  Israel.  Not  a  proselyte,  but  of  the  original 
stock  {yevoir:) ;  not  grafted  into  the  covenant  race.  A  descend- 
ant of  Jacob,  not  an  Idumaean  nor  an  Ishmaelite.  For  Itraely 
see  on  Acts  iii.  12,  and  compare  Kom.  ix.  4 ;  xi.  1 ;  John  i  47. 
Descended  not  from  Jacobj  the  sujpplanter^  but  from  Israel^  the 
prince  of  Qod.     See  Gen.  xxxii.  28. 

Of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin.  Kot  from  one  of  the  lost  tribes, 
but  from  that  which  gave  to  Israel  its  first  king ;  which  alone 
was  faithful  to  Judah  at  the  separation  under  Behoboam,  and 
which  had  always  held  the  post  of  honor  in  the  army.  See 
Judg.  V.  14 ;  Hos.  v.  8.  Benjamin  only  of  the  twelve  patri- 
archs was  born  in  the  land  of  promise.  Mordecai,  the  deliverer 
of  the  Jews  from  Haman  was  a  Benjamite.  Paul's  own  orig- 
inal name,  Savlj  was  probably  derived  from  Saul  the  son  of 
Kish,  the  Benjamite. 

A  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews  (Efipaio^  i^  'Efipaiwp).  The 
(Hebrews)  of  the  A.  V.  gives  a  wrong  coloring  to  the  phrase, 
as  if  Paul  were  claiming  to  be  preeminently  a  Hebrew  among 
other  Hebrews.  He  mesLUs  a  Hebrew  from,  (if)  Hebrew  parents. 
Rev.,  a  Hebrew  of  Hebrews^  which  is  no  special  improvement. 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Cu.  UL 


446 

The  expreeBion  iiiipliea  characterisCice  of  language  and  iiiau- 
nere.  He  inigbt  be  aa  Israelite  aud  jet  a  child  of  Greek-epeak- 
ing  Jewe:  but  his  parents  had  retained  their  uative  tongue  and 
cuBtoms,  and  he  himself,  while  understanding  and  speaking 
Greek,  also  spoke  in  Hebrew  on  occasion.  See  Acts  xxi.  40  ; 
xxii.  2. 

The  law.  The  Mosaic  law.  See  on  Rom.  ii.  12.  The  va- 
lidity of  tliat  law  was  the  principle  upheld  by  the  Judaizers. 

A  Pharisee.  See  Acts  xxiii.  6  ;  Gal.  i.  14.  Compare  on  the 
whole  verse,  2  Cor.  xi.  22. 

6.  Zeal.     Ironical. 

Blameless  {-/evoixettK  df^effirrtK).  The  A.  V.  does  not  render 
the  participle, ^rtweji  <jT_foujtd.     Rev,,  correctly, ybwnrf  hlaitie- 


7.  What  things  {artva).  The  double  relative  classifies; 
things  which  came  under  His  categt/ry  of  gain.  Compare  Gal. 
iv.  24;  Col.  ii.  23. 

Gain  {Ktp&ri).  Lit.,  gains.  So  Rev.,  in  margin,  and  better. 
The  various  items  of  privilege  are  regarded  separately. 

I  counted  \qsz  {^^YT)f^at  l^rtfilav).  Better,  as  Rev.,  A(«idcou»iterf. 
The  perfect  tense  implies  that  he  still  counts  them  ae  loss.  See 
on  ver.  S.  Notice  the  singular  number  li>8s,  and  the  plural  gains. 
The  various  gains  are  all  counted  as  one  loss. 

8.  Yea  doubtless  (oXAa/iwoCc).  Mxxi  Ju^ver.  7,  putsthat 
verse  in  direct  contrast  with  the  preceding  verse.  '^XX^  yea  or 
verily,  in  this  verse  affirms  more  than  the  preceding  statement, 
while  avv  therefore  (not  rendered),  collects  and  concludes  from 
what  has  been  previously  said :  Yea  verily  therefore. 

All  things.     An  advance  on  those  (things)  of  ver.  7. 

For  the  excellency,  etc.  (StA).  On  account  of:  because  the 
knowledge  of  Christ  is  so  much  greater  than  all  things  else. 

1  have  suffered  the  loss  {i^-r\u.w^y).  Rev.,  better,  I  suf- 
fered;  when  I  embraced  Christianity.  \At.,  was  mulcted.  See 
on  Hatt.  xvi.  26,  and  cast  away,  Luke  ix.  25. 


A 


ch.  hl]  the  bpistlb  to  the  philippian&  447 

All  things  (r^  irdvra).  Collectively.  All  things  mentioned 
in  vv.  5-7. 

Dung  {atcvfidKa).  Bev.,  refuse.  Either  exoremeni  or  what 
is  thrown  anjoay  from,  the  table  ;  leamngs.  The  derivation  is 
uncertain.  According  to  some  it  is  a  contraction  from  i<i  kvpck 
fidXKu  to  throw  to  the  dogs.  See  oxajHth^  1  Cor.  iv.  13.  Notice 
the  repetition  of  gavn^  county  loss,  aU  things^  Christ. 

Win  {KepSi^aw).  Rev.,  better,  gain^  corresponding  with 
gadfly  ver.  7. 

9.  Be  found  (evpeSA).  Discovered  or  proved  to  be.  See 
on  ch.  iL  8.     Compare  Bom.  viL  10  ;  Oal.  ii.  17. 


line  own  righteousness  {if^ifv  Bucaioawriv).  Bev.,  cor- 
rectly, a  righteousness  of  mine  own.  The  A.  Y.  wonld  require 
the  article  with  ifiiiv  miney  and  assumes  the  existence  of  a  per- 
sonal righteousness ;  whereas  Paul  says,  not  having  any  right- 
eousness  which  can  he  called  mine. 

Which  is  of  the  law  {ri^p  ix  pofiov).  Bev.,  better,  even  that 
which  is  of  the  law  ;  thus  bringing  out  the  force  of  the  article 
which  defines  the  character  of  that  righteousness  which  alone 
could  be  personal,  viz.,  righteousness  consisting  in  the  strict 
fulfilment  of  the  law. 

Through  the  faith  of  Christ  (SiA  ir^em  XpurroO).  Bev., 
better,  through  faith  in  Christ.  Faith  as  opposed  to  the  law. 
The  change  of  prepositions,  through  {Biii)  faith,  and  of{iic)  the 
law,  as  turning  on  the  distinction  between  faith  represented  as 
the  m^diumy  and  the  law  as  the  source  of  justification,  cannot 
be  insisted  upon  as  a  rule,  since  both  the  prepositions  are  used 
ynXhfa/ithy  as  in  Gtd.  ii.  16.     Compare  Bom.  iiL  30 ;  v.  1. 

Of  God.    Contrasted  with  my  own. 

By  faith  (M).  Besting  ttpon  faith,  or  on  the  condition  of 
Compare  Acts  iii.  16. 

10.  That  i  may  know  Him  (rot)  yv&va^  axnhv).  Know  is 
taken  up  from  JcnowUdgey  ver.  8,  and  is  joined  with  he  found 


443  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  UL 

in  Him,  qualified  by  not  having,  etc.  That  I  maj  be  fouud  in 
liitii  not  liaviug,  etc.,  but  having  the  righteousnese  which  is  of 
God  ao  as  to  know  Sim,  etc. 

The  power  of  His  resurrection  {ttjp  Swa/i.iv  rffi  avcur- 
TOfftws  avTov).  Power  of  IIU  reaurrectlon  a.iiA  fellowship  of 
Ilis  sufferinyB  furniah  two  specific  poiiitB  further  defining  the 
knowledge  of  Iliin..  By  the  power  of  Chrises  resurrect'ioit  is 
meant  the  power  which  it  exerts  over  believers.  Here,  raoic 
eapecially,  according  to  the  context,  in  assuring  their  preaent 
justification,  aod  its  outcome  in  their  final  glorification.  See 
Kotn.  iv.  24,  25;  viii.  11,  30;  1  Cor.  sv.  17;  Col.  iii.  i; 
Philip,  iii.  21. 

Fellowship  of  His  sulTerings.  Participation  iu  Christ's 
aufferiiigs.  See  Matt.  sx.  22,  23 ;  and  on  Col.  i.  24.  Compare 
2  Cor.  i.  5  ;  1  Pet.  iv.  13,  Faith  makes  a  believer  one  with  a 
suffering  Christ. 

Being  made  conformable  {avfiftoptfti^ofieviK:).  Explaining 
the  previous  clause:  iy  my  becoming  conformed,  etc.  Rev., 
hecoming  conformed.  Compare  2  Cor.  iv.  10 ;  Rom.  vi.  5. 
For  conformed  see  on  Matt.  xvii.  2,  and  oa  form,  ch.  iL  6.  The 
most  radical  conformity  is  thus  indicated :  not  merely  under- 
going physical  death  like  Christ,  but  conformity  to  the  spirit 
and  temper,  the  meekness  and  snbmissivenees  of  Christ ;  to 
Hia  unselfish  love  and  devotion,  and  His  anguish  over  human 


11.  If  by  any  means  (si  inm).  For  the  form  of  expression 
compare  Rom.  i.  10  ;  xi.  14.  Not  an  expreasion  of  doubt,  but 
of  humility. 

I  might  attain  {/carairr^a-ea).     See  on  Acta  xxvi.  7. 

The  resurrection  of  the  dead  {rijv  i^avwrraatv  ri)v  iic  veic- 
p&v).  Rev.,  more  correctly,yrowi  the  dead.  Lit.,  the  resurrec- 
tion, that,  namely,  from  tJie  dead.  Compare  Acts  iv.  2.  This 
compound  nonn  for  rtxui-rection.  is  found  only  here,  and  ex- 
presses the  rising  from  or  from  among  (e'f ),  which  is  further 
emphasized  by  the  repetition  of  the  preposition  ix  (from). 


i. 


Ch.  m.]  THE  EPISTLB  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN&  449 

The  kindred  compound  verb  occurs  Mark  xii.  19 ;  Luke  xx.  28 ; 
Acts  XV.  5,  but  in  neither  passage  of  raising  the  dead.  Tlie 
word  here  does  not  differ  in  meaning  from  opocrrcurK,  com- 
monly used,  except  that  the  idea  is  more  vividly  conceived  as  a 
risingy/w/i  the  earth.  See  Matt.  xxii.  31 ;  Luke  xx.  35.  The 
phrase  resurrection  of  or  from  the  dead  does  not  often  occur  in 
the  Gospels,  and  resurrection  i/cfrom  the  dead  only  twice  in  the 
Kew  Testament,  Acts  iv.  2 ;  1  Pet.  i.  3.  For  the  phrase,  see 
on  Luke  xvi.  31.  Hesmrection  of  the  dead  is  a  generic  phrase, 
denoting  the  general  resurrection  of  the  dead,  bad  and  good. 
Resurrection  from  the  dead^  in  the  only  two  passages  where  it 
occurs,  signifies  resurrection  unto  life.  In  1  Pet.  i.  3,  it  is  ap- 
plied to  Christ. 

12.  Not  as  though  (ov^  irC),  Lit.,  not  that^  as  Rev.  By 
this  I  do  not  mean  to  say  that.  For  similar  usage,  see  John 
vii.  22 ;  2  Cor.  i.  24 ;  Philip,  iv.  17. 

Had  attained — were  perfect  {ekaffop — rereKeUofuu).  Rev., 
ha/ve  attainedf  am  made  perfect.  There  is  a  change  of  tenses 
which  may  be  intentional ;  the  aorist  attained  pointing  to  the 
definite  period  of  his  conversion,  the  perfect,  am  made  perfect^ 
referring  to  his  present  state.  Keither  when  I  became  Chrisf  s 
did  I  attain,  nor,  up  to  this  time,  have  I  been  perfected.  With 
attained  supply  the  prize  from  ver.  14.  Rev.,  am  made  perfect^ 
is  preferable,  as  preserving  the  passive  form  of  the  verb. 

I  follow  after  {Suokcj).  Rev.,  better,  press  on.  The  A.  V. 
gives  the  sense  of  chasing  /  whereas  the  apostle's  meaning  is 
the  pressing  toward  a  fixed  point.  The  continuous  present 
would  be  better,  I  am  pressing. 

May  apprehend  {icaTaXdfi<o).  American  Rev.,  lay  hold  on. 
Neither  A.  V.  nor  Rev.  give  the  force  of  teal  also ;  if  I  may 
also  apprehend  as  well  as  pursue.  For  the  verb,  see  on  John 
i.  5. 

For  which  also  I  am  apprehended.    Rev.,  correctly,  was 

apprehended.     American  Rev.,  lairl  hold  on.     Paul's  meaning 

is,  "  I  would  grasp  that  for  which  Christ  grasped  me.     Paul's 

conversion  was  literally  of  the  nature  of  a  seizure.    That  for 

Vol.  ni 20 


450  WORD  STUDIES   IN   THE  HEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IIL 

which  Chriet  laid  hoM  of  him  was  indeed  liis  mission  to  the 
Gentiles,  but  it  was  also  his  personal  salvation,  and  it  is  of  this 
that  the  context  treats.  Homo  reader,  aeeing  that  also  I  was 
appreheiuiad.     Rev,,  in  margin. 

13.  Myself.     As  others  count  themaelves, 

14.  One  thing.  I  do  is  supplied.  Some  supply  /  muni, 
which  is  less  appropriate,  since  what  follows  is  concerned  with 
action  rather  than  with  thinking  or  reckoning. 

Reaching  forth  {en-e/cretwi/tei'os).  Only  here  in  the  New 
Testament.  'Ett/ direction,  o/Vc*-/  Ik  forth  ;  Telvm  to  stretch. 
Kev.,  stretching  forward.  The  metaphor  is  that  of  the  foot- 
race. Beugel  says :  "  The  eye  outstrips  and  draws  onward  the 
hand,  and  the  hand  the  foot." 

14.  Toward  the  mark  («aTA  tTKovav).  Rev.,  goal.  Bear 
down  upon  {Kard).  Skotto^  mark,  only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. See  on  look,  ch.  ii.  4,  Used  in  the  classics  of  a  mark 
for  ahooiing  at,  or  as  a  moral  or  intellecttial  end.  A  some- 
what similar  figure  occurs  1  Tim.  i.  6;  vi.  21;  3  Tim.  ii.  18, 
in  the  verb  d<rToj(ica  to  miss  the  aim.  or  the  shot.  A.  V.,  swerved 
and  erred. 

Prize  (^pa^ctov).  See  on  1  Cor.  ix.  M.  Ignatius  hbbb  the 
word  BifM  that  which  is  deposited  as  a  prize :  a  prize  of  money 
as  distinct  from  the  crown.  "  Be  temperate  as  God's  athlete. 
The  prize  is  iucorruption  and  eternal  life"  (to  Polycai-p,  ii.). 
Chrysostora  says:  "He  that  runs  looks  not  at  the  spectators, 
but  at  the  prize.  Whether  they  be  rich  or  poor,  if  one  mock 
them,  applaud  them,  insult  them,  throw  stones  at  them — if  one 
plunder  their  house,  if  they  see  children  or  wife  or  anything 
whatsoever — the  runner  is  not  turned  aside,  but  is  concerned 
only  with  his  running  and  winning  the  prize.  He  that  runneth 
stoppeth  nowhere ;  since,  if  he  be  a  little  remiss,  all  is  lost.  He 
that  runneth  relaxeth  in  no  respect  before  the  end,  bat  then, 
most  of  all,  stretcheth  over  the  course." 

High  calling  {a,v<a  xXiJo-ew;)-  ^^t.,  wpward  calling.  A  call- 
ing which  is  from  heaven  and  to  heaven.     KX^o-t;  calling,  is 


I 


CH.IIL]  THB  BPISTLB  TO  THB  PHILIPPIANS.  451 

habitaally  used  in  the  New  Testament  oi  the  act  of  calling. 
Compare  Heb.  iii.  1.  The  prize  is  bound  up  with  the  calling ; 
promised  when  the  call  is  issued,  and  given  when  the  call  is 
fulfilled. 

15.  Perfect  ij&s/^ioC).  Mature  Christians.  See  on  1  Cor. 
ii.  6. 

Be  thus  minded.  Lit.,  think  this^  or  haoe  this  mind, 
namely,  to  forget  the  past  and  to  press  forward. 

16.  Nevertheless.  Bev.,  onZy.  Notwithstanding  the  minor 
points  in  which  jou  may  be  otherwise  minded. 

Whereto  we  have  already  attained  (ek  ft  i^Adnraiicv), 
Whatever  real  christian  and  moral  attainment  you  may  have 
made,  let  that  serve  as  a  rule  for  your  further  advance.  The  char- 
acter of  this  standard  of  attainment  is  illustrated  by  the  words 
in  ver.  15,  he  thus  minded^  and  by  those  in  ver.  17,08  ye  home  u% 
for  am,  exarryple.  The  individual  variations  are  not  considered. 
He  regards  rather  the  collective  development,  and  assumes  the 
essentials  of  christian  attainment  on  the  part  of  his  readers. 
For  attained,  see  on  we  are  come,  2  Cor.  x.  14. 

Let  us  walk  by  the  same  rule  (r^  axn^  aroixeiv).  The 
idea  of  a  regulative  standard  is  implied,  but  rule  /cav6vi  must 
be  omitted  from  the  Oreek  text.  Bev.  brings  out  the  antithes- 
is better :  wAereimto  we  home  already  attavned,  hy  that  earns 
rule  let  tie  walk.     Omit  let  tea  mind  the  same  thing. 

17.  Followers  together  of  me  {av^fiifjurfrai  fuw).  Only 
here  in  the  New  Testament.  Rev.,  more  correctly,  imitators. 
Compare  1  Cor.  xi.  1.  Not  imitators  of  Christ  in  common 
with  msj  but  he  together,  jointly,  imitators  qfms. 

Mark  (o-KOTreiTe).     See  on  loohiiig,  ch.  ii.  4. 

So  as  (oirra>9  Ka>^w^).  Rev.,  "  which  so  walk  even  as  ye 
have,''  etc.  The  two  words  are  correlative.  Briefly,  imitate 
m^e  and  those  who  follow  my  eacample. 

18.  Many  walk.  No  word  is  supplied  describing  the  char- 
acter of  their  walk  ;  but  this  is  brought  out  by  enemies  of  the 


452  WORD   STUDIES  IN   THE   NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ca.  III. 

cross  of  Ckriat,  and  in  the  details  of  ver.  19.  The  pereons  al- 
liidod  to  were  probably  those  of  Epicurean  tendencies.  This 
and  Judaic  formaliBm  were  the  two  prominent  errors  in  the 
Philippian  church. 

19.  Belly.  Eoin.  xvi.  18,  So  the  Cyclops  in  Euripides: 
"  Mj  flocks  which  I  sacrifice  to  no  one  but  myself,  and  not  to 
the  gods,  and  to  this  my  belly  the  greatest  of  the  gods:  for 
to  eat  and  drink  each  day,  and  to  give  one's  self  no  trouble, 
this  ia  the  god  for  wise  men  "  ("  Cyclops,"  334—338). 

Glory.     That  which  they  esteem  glory. 

Earthly  things  (tA  evCyeui).  See  on  2  Cor.  v.  1.  Compare 
Col.  iii.  2. 

20.  Conversation  (•jroX/reu/ia).  Only  here  in  the  New  Test- 
ament. Bev.,  citizenship,  cominonweaUh  in  margin.  The 
retidering  conversation,  in  the  sense  of  mujmer  of  life  (see  on  1 
Pet.  i.  15),  has  no  sufficient  warrant ;  and  that  iroXlTevfia  com- 
monwealtA,  is  used  interchangeably  with  wokireia  dtisenship,  is 
not  beyond  question.  Commonweatth  gives  a  good  and  consist- 
ent sense.  The  state  of  which  we  are  citizens  is  in  heaven. 
See  on  ch.  i.  27.  Compare  Plato:  "That  city  of  which  we 
are  the  founders,  and  which  exists  in  idea  only ;  for  I  do  not 
believe  that  there  is  such  an  one  anywhere  ou  earth.  In 
Heaven,  I  replied,  there  is  laid  up  the  pattern  of  it  methinks, 
which  he  who  desires  may  behold,  and  beholding  may  settle 
himself  there"  ("Republic,"  592). 

Is  in  heaven  {irjrdp-)(ei,).  The  use  of  this  word  instead  of  eerti. 
ia  is  peculiar.  See  on  being,  ch.  ii.  6.  It  has  a  backward  look. 
It  exists  now  in  heaven,  having  been  established  there  of  old. 
Compare  Heb.  xi.  16 ;  John  xiv.  2. 

We  look  for  (aireKSexofie^)-  Rev,,  waitjbr.  See  on  1 
Cor.  i.  7.  Used  only  by  Paul,  and  in  Ileb.  ix,  28.  Compare 
Rom.  viii.  19,  23,  25;  G-al.  v.  5.  It  indicates  earnest,  patient 
waiting  and  expectation.  As  in  diroKapaSoKia  earnest  expect/t- 
ti(m,  ch.  i.  20,  the  compounded  ]>repoBition  diro  denotes  the 
withdrawal  of  attention  Jrom  inferior  objects.    The  word  is 


Ch.  UL]  THB  epistle  to  the  PHlLIPPIANa  453 

habitnallj  need  in  the  New  Testament  with  reference  to  a 
future  manifestation  of  the  glory  of  Christ  or  of  His  people. 

The  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  {caniipa).  Sav^iour  has 
no  article,  and  its  emphatic  position  in  the  sentence  indicates 
that  it  is  to  be  taken  predicatively  with  Jesus  Christy  and  not 
as  the  direct  object  of  the  verb.  Hence  render :  we  await  as 
Saviour  the  Lordy  etc.  Compare  Heb.  ix.  28,  "  To  them  that 
wait  for  Him  will  He  appear  a  second  time  unto  saloationP 

21.  Shall  change  {jierwryfiiuiTUTtC),  See  on  Matt.  xvii.  2  ; 
1  Cor.  iv.  6  ;  xi.  13.  Also  onforrn^  ch.  ii.  6 ;  and^o^Aton,  ch. 
ii.  8.  The  word  thus  indicates  a  change  in  what  is  outward 
and  shifting — the  body.  Rev.,  correctly,  shall  fashion  anew. 
Refashion  (?). 

Our  vile  body  (to  a&fui  r^  raireiv^en^  t^fiAv).  Wrong. 
Render,  as  Rev.,  the  body  of  our  humiliation.  See,  for  the  vic- 
ious use  of  hendiadys  in  A.  Y.,  on  £ph.  i.  19.  Lightfoot  ob- 
serves that  the  A.  Y.  seems  to  countenance  the  stoic  contempt 
of  tlie  body.  Compare  Col.  i.  22.  The  biographer  of  Arch- 
bishop Whately  relates  that,  during  his  last  illness,  one  of  his 
chaplains,  watching  during  the  night  at  his  bedside,  in  making 
some  remark  expressive  of  sympathy  for  his  sufferings,  quoted 
these  words :  "  Who  shall  change  our  vile  body."  The  Arch- 
bishop interrupted  him  with  the  request  "  Read  the  words." 
The  chaplain  read  them  from  the  English  Bible ;  but  he  reiter- 
ated, '^  Read  his  oton  words."  The  chaplain  gave  the  literal 
translation,  "  this  body  of  our  humiliation."  "  That's  right," 
interrupted  the  Archbishop,  "  not  vile — nothing  that  He  made 
is  vile." 

That  it  may  be  fashioned  like  (ek  to  yevifrBai  airrb  avfi- 
fiop<f>ov).  The  words  that  it  may  he^  or  become^  are  omitted 
from  the  correct  Greek  text,  so  that  the  strict  rendering  is  the 
body  of  our  humiliation  oonform^y  etc.  The  words  are,  how- 
ever, properly  inserted  in  A.  Y.  and  Rev.  for  the  sake  of 
perspicuity.  Rev.,  correctly,  conformed  for  fashioned  like. 
Fashion  belongs  to  the  preceding  verb.  See  on  shall  change. 
The  adjective  conformed  is  compounded  with  lAop^form,  (see 


454 


WORD  STUDIES   IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ca.  IV 


on  ch.  ii.  6,  and  made  c&njbrmaile,  cli.  iii.  10).  Aa  ihe  body 
of  Christ's  glory  is  a  spiritual  body,  this  word  is  appropriate  to 
deBcribe  a  conformation  to  what  is  more  essential,  permanent, 
and  characteristic.     See  1  Cor.  xv.  35-53. 

His  glorious  body  (t^  o-u/uiti  t^^  So^t  avroO).  Wrong. 
Rev.,  correctly,  the  body  of  His  glory.  The  body  in  which  He 
appears  iu  His  present  glorified  state.     See  on  Col.  ii.  9. 

The  working  whereby  He  is  able  (t^v  ivipyeuw  tov 
BvirturSai).  Lit.,  t/m  energy  of  Jlis  being  able.  AvvaaSat  ex- 
preBsee  ability,  Jaculty,  natural  ability,  not  necessarily  mani- 
fest. 'Epepyeia  i&power  in  exercise,  used  only  of  superhuman 
power.  See  on  John  i.  12 ;  9  Pet.  ii.  11.  Ilence,  as  Calvin 
remarks,  "  Paul  notes  not  only  tlie  power  of  God  as  it  resides 
in  Hiiu,  but  the  power  as  it  puts  itself  into  act."  See  Eph.  i. 
19,  where  four  of  the  sis  words  [orjwwer  are  used. 

Subdue  (wTTOTafot).  Rev.,  suitject.  See  on  Jas.  iv.  7,  It  is 
more  than  merely  subdue.  It  is  to  bring  all  things  within  His 
divine  economy ;  to  marshal  them  all  under  Himself  in  the  new 
heaven  and  the  new  earth  in  which  shall  dwell  righteousness. 
Hence  the  perfected  heavenly  state  as  depicted  by  John  is 
thrown  into  the  figure  of  a  city,  an  organized  commonwealth. 
The  verb  is  thus  in  harmony  with  ver.  20.  The  work  of  God 
in  Christ  is  therefore  not  only  to  transform,  but  to  subject,  and 
tliat  not  only  the  body,  but  all  things.  See  1  Cor.  xv.  25-27  ; 
Rom.  viiL  19,  20  ;  Eph.  i.  10,  21,  22;  iv.  10. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

1.  Longed  for  (en-iTTftVrot).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. Compare  /  lo'iig  for  you,  ch.  i,  S ;  and  for  kindred 
woi'ds  see  2  Cor.  vii.  7;  Rom,  xv.  23. 

Joy  and  crown  (x'^P^  ***'  (xre^aco?).  Nearly  the  same 
phrase  occurs  1  Theas.  ii.  19.  The  Philippian  converts  are  his 
chaplet  of  victory,  showing  that  he  has  not  nrn  in  vain,  ch.  ii. 
16.     For  oroum,  Bee  on  Apoc.  iv.  4 ;  1  Pet,  v.  4. 


Cu.  IV.]  THE  BPISTLB  TO  THB  PHILIPPIANa  455 

So  stand  fast.  As  I  have  exhorted,  and  have  borne  myself 
in  the  conflict  which  you  saw  and  heard  to  be  in  me,  ch.  i.  30. 

2.  I  beseech  Euodias  and  beseech  Syntyche  {EwoSUip 
TrapoKoKA  tcdl  Xwrvyviv  'irapcuccCKS}),  Ettodiaa  is  incorrect,  the 
name  being  feminine,  JEuodia.  According  to  the  Tex.  Bee., 
with  the  long  o,  the  name  meskUB  Jroffranoe/  but  the  correct 
reading  is  with  the  short  o,  the  meaning  being  jnvaperotis 
journey.  Syntyche  means  happy  chance.  These  were  promin- 
ent women  in  the  Church,  possibly  deaconesses.  The  position 
of  women  in  Macedonia  was  exceptional.  In  Greece,  gener- 
ally, their  standing  was  inferior.  The  Athenian  law  prescribed 
that  everything  that  a  man  might  do  by  the  consent  or  request 
of  a  woman  should  be  null  in  law.  In  Macedonia  monuments 
were  erected  to  women  by  public  bodies,  and  in  Macedonian 
inscriptions  records  of  male  proper  names  are  found  formed 
on  the  mother's  name  instead  of  the  father's.  Macedonian 
women  were  permitted  to  hold  property.  In  the  account 
of  Paul's  labors  in  Macedonia  there  are  notices  of  the  ad- 
dition of  women  of  rank  to  the  church  in  Thessalonica  and 
Beroea.* 

For  heseechj  render  exhort^  and  notice  the  repetition  of  that 
word  with  each  name,  making  the  exhortation  individual  and 
specific. 

To  be  of  the  same  mind  (to  airo  ^povuii).  The  same  ex- 
pression  as  in  ch.  ii.  2,  see  note.  Compare  Bom.  xii.  16.  The 
verb  if>popi(o  to  he  minded^  occurs  eleven  times  in  this  epistle, 
and  but  seventeen  times  in  the  rest  of  the  New  Testament. 

3.  True  yoke-fellow  (yviiaie  avv^vye).  For  truey  see  on  not- 
urallyy  ch.  ii.  20.  It  is  supposed  by  some  that  the  word  rend- 
ered yoke-fellow  is  a  proper  name,  Symygvs^  and  that  true  is 
to  be  explained  as  rightly  so  called.  This  explanation  would  be 
favored  by  the  play  upon  the  name  Onesimiis  in  the  Epistle  to 
Philemon,  and  is  not  improbably  correct.     The  name  has  not 

*  On  the  absurdities  of  interpretation  which  certain  German  critics  have 
drawn  from  these  two  names,  see  Bishop  Lightfoot'i  "  Easaji  on  Supernatural 
Religion,"  p.  21 


456  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Un.  IV. 

been  found  in  inBcriptions,  as  is  the  case  with  manj  of  tLe 
□amee  in  these  epiBtlee,  as,  for  instance,  Euodia  and  Syutjclie, 
Some  suppose  that  the  chief  of  the  bishops  or  e  ii  peri  n  ten  dent  a 
at  Philippi  is  thus  addressed  ;  but,  in  that  case,  the  word  would 
probably  appear  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament.  Clement  of 
Alexandria,  assuming  that  Paul  was  married,  thinks  that  lio 
addressee  his  wife.     Others  suppose  that  Ljdia  is  addressed.^ 

Help  (trvWafiffdvov).  Lit.,  take  hold  with.  Compare  Luke 
V,  7.  The  verb  is  used  of  condition,  Luke  i.  24 ;  arrest, 
Matt.  xxvi.  55;  Acts  xii.  3;  catchinff,  as  fish,  Luke  v.  9, 
Compare  the  compound  trwapriXd/i^avo/uu  /ielp,  Luke  x,  40 
(note) ;  Rom.  viii.  26. 

Which  labored  with  me  (ahivei  oTfl^^Xijo-ov  fuii).  The 
double  relative  explains  and  classities :  J'of  thej'  heloiu/nd  to  the 
number  of  those  who  labored.  S£\.,  for  they  lahoretl,  Lahored, 
\\t.,8trove  as  af/iletes, as  ch.i.  27.  Compare  Sophocles:  "These 
girls  preserve  me,  these  my  nurses,  these  who  are  men,  not 
women,  in  laboring  with  me"  ("Oedipus  at  Colonus,'"  1367- S). 

Clement.  Supposed  by  some  to  be  Clement  the  Bishop  of 
Rome.  Origen  identifies  them,  saying:  "Clement  to  whom 
Paul  bears  Testimony  in  Philippians  iv.  3."  So  also  Eueebius, 
Epiphanius,  and  Jerome.  Chrysostom  speaks  of  Clement  as 
the  constant  companion  of  Paul  in  all  his  travels.  Irenaeus, 
on  the  contrary,  who  mentions  him  as  the  pnpil  of  an  apostle, 
says  nothing  of  his  connection  with  Paul,  by  name,  and  would 
not  have  been  likely  to  pass  over  this  identity  in  silence  had 
be  been  aware  of  it,  Clement  was  a  member  of  the  Roman 
clnirch,  and  the  name  was  a  very  common  one.  A  Roman 
consul.  Flavins  Clemens,  was  sentenced  to  death  by  Domitian 
on  account  of  atheism,  which  was  the  common  pagan  designa- 
tion of  Christianity.  The  Roman  catacombs  furnish  evidence 
that  Christianity  had  penetrated  into  the  Flavian  family,  so 
that  there  may  have  been  two  prominent  Christians  in  Rome 
of  the  same  name.     The  identity  of  Clement  of  Rome  with  the 


*  See  Farrar,   ia   "  The  Expositor,"  SrBt  series,    z.,   24  ;    txA.  "  Life  ot 


Ch.  IV.  J  THE  BPIBTLB  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  457 

Clement  of  this  epistle  has  been  very  generally  abandoned 
The  latter  was  probably  a  Philippian. 

Other  {t&p  Xoiir&v).     Be  v.,  correctly,  the  rest, 

3ook  of  life.  The  phrase  occurs  seven  times  in  the  Apoca- 
lypse. Compare  Luke  x.  20 ;  Ueb.  xii.  23,  and  see  on  Apoc. 
iii.  5.  The  figure  is  founded  on  the  register  of  the  covenant 
people.  Isa.  iv.  3;  Ezek.  xiii.  9;  Exod.  xxxii.  32;  Psalm 
Ixix.  28 ;  Dan.  xii.  1.  The  phrase  was  also  used  by  the  Rab- 
bins. Thus  in  the  Targum  *  on  Ezek.  xiii.  9 :  ^^  In  the  book 
of  eternal  life  which  has  been  written  for  the  just  of  the  house 
of  Israel,  they  shall  not  be  written."  Ood  is  described  as  *^  the 
king,  sitting  upon  the  judgment-seat,  with  the  books  of  the  liv- 
ing and  the  books  of  the  dead  open  before  Him." 

5.  Rejoice.    See  on  ch.  i.  4,  and  2  Cor.  xiii.  11. 
Moderation   (to  hrieuch).     Wrong.     Rev.,  correctly,  far- 
hear  cunce.     See  on  gerMe^  1  Pet  ii.  18. 

The  Lord  is  at  hand.    See  on  1  Cor.  xvi.  22. 

6.  Be  careful  (fiepifivare).  See  on  Matt  vi.  25.  Rev.,  bet- 
ter, be  anxUnu. 

Prayer  and  supplication.  Oeneral  and  special.  See  on 
Luke  V.  33 ;  viii.  38.  Hpocevx^  prayer^  only  of  prayer  to 
God.  The  two  words  often  occur  together,  as  Eph.  vi.  18 ;  1 
Tim.  ii.  1  ;  v.  5. 

Requests  (otn^^ra).     Specific  details  of  supplication. 

Unto  God  (9r/909  tov  Geop).  The  force  of  irpo^  is  rather  in 
your  intercourse  with  God.     See  on  toith  Oodj  John  i.  1. 

7.  Peace  of  God.    As  the  antidote  to  anxiety^  ver.  6. 

Which  passeth  all  understanding  (^  xmepkxpwra  irdpra 
vovv).     Either,  which  passes  all  power  of  comprehension^  com- 

*  Targum  means  trandaUon^  and  was  the  name  given  to  a  Ghaldee  Tereion 
or  paraphrase  of  the  Old  Testament  After  the  exile  it  became  customary  to 
read  the  law  in  public  with  the  addition  of  an  oral  paraphrase  in  the  Chaldee 
dialect.  Neh.  yiii.  8.  These  were  afterward  committed  to  writing.  The  two 
oldest  are  the  Targum  of  Onkelos  on  the  law,  and  that  of  Jonathan  ben  Us- 
ziel  on  the  prophets. 


458  WORD  STUDIES  IN   TUB  NEW  TESTAMENT,  [Ch.  IV. 

pare  Eph.  iii.  20;  or,  better,  which  surpasses  every  {human) 
reason,  in  ite  power  to  relieve  aDxiety.  Compare  Matt,  vi,  31, 
32.     For  understandingy  see  on  Rom.  vii.  23. 

Shall  keep  {ff>povp^v€i).  Lit.,  guard,  as  Rev.,  or  mount 
guard  over.  God's  peace,  like  a  Beotiuel,  patrols  before  the 
lieart.     Compare  Tennyson : 

"  Love  is  uid  wm  mj  King  ftcd  Lard, 
And  wilt  be,  tliougli  is  jtA  I  keep 
Within  Ilia  oourt  on  eartb,  imd  sleep 
Enoompused  by  bia  faitUul  ga&rd, 
And  beu-  al  timea  a  sentinel 
Who  moTei  about  from  place  to  place, 
And  wblnperB  to  the  vorlda  of  apsoe, 
Id  tbe  deep  night,  tbat  all  ia  well." 

"  In  Memorlam." 

Gurnall,  a  little  differently :  "  The  peace  of  God  is  said  to  gar- 
rison the  believer's  heart  and  mind.  He  is  sarronnded  with 
Buch  blessed  privileges  that  he  is  as  safe  as  one  in  an  impreg- 
nable castle  "  ("  Christian  in  Complete  Armor,"  p.  419), 

Hearts — minds  («apSio! — po^fiMTo).  For  hearts,  see  on 
Rom.  i.  21.  For  minds,  Rev.,  tfiougfiU,  on  2  Cor.  iii,  1-t. 
The  guardianship  is  over  the  soarce  and  the  issnea  of  thought 
and  will,     "  Your  hearts  and  their  fruits"  (Alford). 

8.  Honest  (aefivA).  Rev.,  honorable,  reverend  in  margin. 
In  clasBicul  Greek  an  epithet  of  tlie  gods,  venerable,  reverend. 
Tlie  word  occnrs  only  here  and  in  the  pastoral  epistles,  I  Tim. 
iii.  8,  11 ;  Tit.  ii.  2,  where  it  is  rendered  gra/i>e,  both  in  A.  V. 
and  Rev.  Tliere  lies  in  it  the  idea  of  a  dignity  or  majesty 
which  iayet  inviting  and  attractive,  and  which  inspires  rever- 
ence. Gram,  as  Trench  observes,  does  not  exhaust  the  mean- 
ing. Gravity  may  be  ridiculouf.  "The  word  we  want  is  one 
in  which  the  sense  o£  gravity  and  dignity,  and  of  these  as  in- 
viting reverence,  is  combined."  Ellieott's  veiterahle  is  perhaps 
as  near  as  any  word,  if  venerable  be  divested  of  its  modern  con- 
ventional sense  as  implying  age,  and  confined  to  its  original 
sense,  worthy  ofn 


J 


Ch.  IV.l  THB  BPI8TLB  TO  THE  PHIIiIPPIAM&  459 

Pure  (ayvd).     See  on  1  John  iii.  3. 

Lovely  {irpoa^CKSj).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament 
Adapted  to  excite  love,  and  to  endear  him  who  does  such 
things. 

Of  good  report  (eiS^^).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment Lit,  sounding  wM.  The  kindred  verb  is  commonly 
used  in  an  active  sense.  Hence  not  wM  spoken  ofj  hwifavr- 
speakinffy  and  so  vnnnmffj  ffracious  (Bev.,  in  margin). 

Virtue  (oper^).  With  this  exception  the  word  occnrs  only 
in  Peter's  epistles ;  1  Pet  ii.  9 ;  2  Pet.  i.  3,  5 ;  see  notes  on 

both. 

Praise  (hnuposi).  Conmiendation  corresponding  to  the  moral 
value  of  the  virtue.  In  the  Septuagint,  dperij  virtue  is  four 
times  used  to  translate  the  Hebrew  j/raiee.  The  two  ideas  seem 
to  be  coordinated.  Lightfoot  remarks  that  Paul  seems  studi- 
ously to  avoid  this  common  heathen  term  for  moral  excellence, 
and  his  explanation  is  very  suggestive :  ^^  Whatever  value  may 
reside  in  your  old  heathen  conception  of  virtue,  whatever  con- 
sideration is  due  to  the  praise  of  men." 

10.  Your  care  of  me  hath  flourished  again  {iaftSdKere  ri 
inrip  ifiov  j>pov€l»).  Lit,  ye  caused  your  thinking  on  my  behalf 
to  bloom  anew.  Rev.,  ye  revived  your  thought  for  me.  The 
verb  occurs  only  here  in  the  New  Testament  In  the  Septua- 
gint  it  appears  as  both  transitive  and  intransitive,  toflouriehy  or 
to  cause  tofiowrieh.  Thus  Ps.  xxvii.  7,  where  Septuagint  reads 
for  my  heart  greatly  rejoioethy  my  fteah  flourished  {aviSaXep) ; 
Ezek.  xvii.  24,  have  made  the  dry  tree  to  flourish. 

Wherein.  The  matter  of  my  wants  and  sufferings.  Im- 
plied in  your  care  ofms. 

Ye  were  careful  (i^povelre).  Bev.,  ye  did  take  thought. 
Note  the  imperfect  tense :  ye  were  all  along  thoughtfvl. 

11.  Content  (aur<£piri;9).  JAtj  self-sufficient.  Only  here  in  the 
New  Testament.  A  stoic  word,  expressing  the  favorite  doctrine 
of  the  sect,  that  man  should  be  sufficient  to  himself  for  all 
things ;  able,  by  the  power  of  his  own  will,  to  resist  the  shock 


460 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  ICb.  IV. 


of  circumstance.  Paul  is  sdfsufficieiit  through  the  power  of 
the  7iew  self:  not  he,  but  ChTisi  in  him.  The  kindred  noun 
ainapKela  siifficietwy,  occurs  3  Cor.  ix.  8  ;  1  Tim.  vi.  6. 

12.  I  am  instructed  {/le/iintfuu).  Kev.,  fuwe  I  learned  tlii 
tecret.  The  metaphoi-  is  from  the  initiatory  rites  of  the  pag:in 
mysteries.     /  have  been  initiated.     See  on  Col.  i.  26. 

To  be  full  (xopToiJeffSot),     See  on  Matt.  v.  6. 

13.  I  can  do  {Itrxym).     See  on  Luke  xW.  30. 
Strengtheneth    {evSwafimnn-t).      More     literally,    infuses 

ttrength  inU>  tiie.  as  the  old  verb  inforce. 

14.  Notwithstanding.  Lest,  in  declaring  hia  independence 
of  human  aid,  he  should  seem  to  disparage  the  Pbilippiaus' 
gift, 

15.  When  I  departed  from  Macedonia.  On  his  first  Eu- 
ropean circuit,  going  by  way  of  Atiieus  to  Corinth,  where  he 
was  joined  by  Silvanus  and  Timothy,  bringing  a  contribution 
from  Macedonia.     Acts  xviii.  5  ;  2  Cor.  %\.  9. 

16.  Even  in  Thessalonica  (koi).  Better  also :  in  addition  to 
the  contribution  received  at  Corinth. 

18.  I  have  (ajr^^^at).  I  have  received  in  full.  See  on  Matt. 
Ti.  2;  Luke  vi.  24. 

Odor  of  a  sweet  smell.  See  on  2  Cor.ii.  15, 16.  Frequent 
in  Septuagint,  of  the  odor  of  sacrifices. 

19.  In  glory.  This  is  differently  connected  by  expositors. 
Some  with  riJiea,  as  A.  V.  and  Rev.  Others  with  shall  aupjdy, 
but  with  different  explacations,  as,  shall  supply  your  need  loltJi 
glory  :  in  a  glorious  way  :  by  placing  you  in  glory.  It  is  better 
to  construe  with  shall  s^ijyply,  and  to  explain  in  glory  as  the 
element  and  inBtruinent  of  the  supply.  The  need  shall  be  sup- 
plied in  glory  and  hj  glory  ;  by  placing  you  in  glory  where  you 
shall  be  partakers  of  glory. 


22.  Of  Caesar's   household, 
freed  men  attached  to  the  palace. 


Probably   the    slaves  and 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS. 


CHAPTER  L 


2.  Colossae.  The  form  of  the  name  appears  to  have  been 
both  Kolossai  and  KoUusaij  the  former  being  probably  the 
earlier. 

The  city  was  in  Phrygia,  in  the  valley  of  the  Lyons,  abont  ten 
or  twelve  miles  beyond  Laodicaea  and  Hierapolis.  The  region 
is  volcanic,  and  the  earthquakes  common  to  large  portions  of 
Asia  Minor  are  here  peculiarly  severe.  The  tributaries  of  the 
Lycus  carried  calcareous  matter  which  formed  everywhere  de- 
posits of  travertine,  said  to  be  among  the  most  remarkable 
formations  of  this  character  in  the  world.  *^  Ancient  monu- 
ments are  buried,  fertile  lands  overlaid,  river-beds  choked  up, 
and  streams  diverted,  fantastic  grottos  and  cascades  and  arches 
of  stone  formed  by  this  strange,  capricions  power,  at  once  de- 
structive and  creative,  working  silently  and  relentlessly  through 
long  ages.  Fatal  to  vegetation,  these  incrustations  spread  like 
a  stony  shroud  over  the  ground.  Gleaming  like  glaciers  on 
the  hillside,  they  attract  the  eye  of  the  traveller  at  a  distance 
of  twenty  miles,  and  form  a  singularly  striking  feature  in 
scenery  of  more  than  common  beauty  and  impressiveness " 
(Lightfoot). 

The  fertility  of  the  region  was  nevertheless  great.  The  fine 
sheep,  and  the  chemical  qualities  of  the  streams  which  made 
the  waters  valuable  for  dyeing  purposes,  fostered  a  lively  trade 
in  dyed  woollen  goods.  All  the  three  cities  were  renowned  for 
the  brilliancy  of  their  dyes. 

Colossae  stood  at  the  junction  of  the  Lycus  with  two  other 


462 


WORD  STCD1E8   IS   THB   NEW   TESTAMKNT. 


[Cu.  1 


BtreamB,  on  a  highway  between  eastern  and  western  Asia,  and 
commanding  the  approaclieB  to  a  pasB  in  the  Cadmus  moun- 
taiiJB.  Both  Ilerodotns  and  Xenophoii  speak  of  it  as  a  prosper- 
ous and  great  city  ;  but  in  Paul's  time  its  glory  had  waned. 
Its  site  was  at  last  completely  loBt,  and  was  nut  identified  until 
the  present  century.  Its  rnins  are  iuBignificant.  Paul  never 
visited  either  of  the  three  cities.  The  church  at  Colossae  was 
the  least  important  of  any  to  which  Paul's  epistles  were  ad- 
dressed. 

To  the  saints.  A  mode  of  address  which  characterizes 
Paul's  later  epistles.  The  word  is  to  be  taken  as  a  nonn,  and 
not  construed  as  an  adjective  with  JaiiAful  lirei/iren:  to  the  holy 
midfaithfid  brethren. 

And  faithful  brethren  in  Christ.  Or  heliminff  brethren. 
Compare  Eph.  i.  1.  There  is  no  singling  out  of  the  faithful 
brethren  from  among  others  who  are  less  faithful. 

Our  Father.  Tlio  only  instance  in  which  the  name  of  the 
Fatiier  etiinds  in  the  opening  benediction  of  an  epistle  without 
the  addition  and  Jesit«  Christ. 

3.  And  the  Father.  Some  of  the  best  texts  omit  and.  So 
Kov.  Tlie  form  with  and  is  the  more  common.  Compare  ch. 
iii.  17. 

Praying  always  for  you.  Rather  connect  ahsays  with  vm 
ffive  thanh,  and  render  we  gvm  tltanka  for  you  always,  pray- 
ing, or  in  our  prayers.  According  to  the  Greek  order, praying 
for  you  (as  Rev.  and  A.  V.),  would  make^or  you  unduly  em- 
phatic 

5,  For  the  hope  (8tA  t^i/  ^7r^).  The  A.  V.  connects  with 
we  give  thanks  (v&r.  Z).  But  the  two  are  too  far  apart,  and 
Paul's  introductory  thanksgiving  is  habitually  grounded  on  the 
spiritual  condition  of  his  readers,  not  on  something  objective. 
See  Rom.  i.  8;  I  Cor.  i.  4;  Eph.  i.  15.  Better  connect  witli 
what  immediately  precedes,  love  which  ye  have,  and  render  as 
Rev.,  because  of  the  hope,  etc.  Faith  works  by  love,  and  the 
gronnd  of  their  love  is  found  in  tiie  hope  set  before  them. 
Compare  Rom.  viii.  24,     The  motive  is  subordinate,  but  legiti- 


Ch.  L]  THB  EPI8TLB  TO  THB  GOLOSSIANa  4G3 

mate.  ^^  The  hope  laid  up  in  heaven  is  not  the  deepest  reason 
or  motive  for  faith  and  love,  but  both  are  made  more  vivid 
when  it  is  strong.  It  is  not  the  light  at  which  their  lamps  are 
lit,  but  it  is  the  odorous  oil  which  feeds  their  flame''  (Maclaren). 
Hope,  See  on  1  Pet.  i.  3.  In  tlie  New  Testament  the  word 
signifies  both  the  sentiment  of  hope  and  the  thing  hoped  for. 
Here  the  latter.  Compare  Tit.  ii.  13  ;  Q«l.  v.  5 ;  Heb.  vi.  18 : 
also  Rom.  viiL  24,  where  both  meanings  appear.  Lightfoot 
observes  that  the  sense  oscillates  between  the  subjective  feeling 
and  the  objective  realization.  The  combination  oifaUh^  hopcj 
and  love  is  a  favorite  one  with  Paul.  See  1  Thess.  i.  3 ;  1  Cor. 
xiii.  13  ;  Rom.  v.  1-5  ;  xii.  6-12. 

Laid  up  (airoKeifJLhnfp).  Lit.,  laid  away^  as  the  pound  in  the 
napkin,  Luke  xix.  20.  With  the  derivative  sense  of  reserved 
or  awaiting^  as  the  crowrij  2  Tim.  iv.  8.  In  Heb.  ix.  27,  it  is 
rendered  appointed  (unto  men  to  die),  where,  however,  the  sense 
is  the  same :  death  awaUs  men  as  something  laid  up.  Rev., 
in  margin,  laid  up  for.  Compare  treasure  in  heamen^  Matt  vL 
20 ;  xix.  21 ;  Luke  xiL  34.  "  Deposited,  reserved,  put  by  in 
store  out  of  the  reach  of  all  enemies  and  sorrows"  (Bishop 
Wilson). 

Ye  heard  before  {^pwiKovfrari).  Only  here  in  the  New 
Testament,  not  in  Septuagint,  and  not  frequent  in  classical 
Greek.  It  is  variously  explained  as  denoting  either  an  unde- 
fined period  in  the  past,  or  as  contrasting  the  earlier  Christian 
teaching  with  the  later  heresies,  or  as  related  to  Paul's  letter 
(before  I  wrote),  or  as  related  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  hope  (ye 
have  had  the  hope  jprd-announced).  It  occurs  several  times  in 
Herodotus  in  this  last  sense,  as  ii.  5,  of  one  who  has  heard  of 
Egypt  without  seeing  it :  v.,  86,  of  the  Aeginetans  who  had 
learned  beforehand  what  the  Athenians  intended.  Compare 
viii.  79 ;  vi.  16.  Xenophon  uses  it  of  a  horse,  which  signifies  by 
pricking  up  its  ears  what  it  heave  beforehand.  In  the  sense  of 
mere  priority  of  time  withont  the  idea  of  anticipation,  Plato : 
^'  Hear  ine  once  more,  though  you  have  heard  me  say  the  same 
before  "  ('*  Laws,"  vii.,  797).  I  incline  to  the  more  general  ref- 
erence, ye  heaad,  in  the  past.    The  sense  of  hearing  before  the 


464 


WORD   STDDIES   IN   THE  NEW  TES'l'AMKNT. 


fultilinent  of  the  liope  would  seem  rather  to  require  the  perfect 
tense,  eiDce  the  hope  still  remained  unfulfilled. 

The  word  of  the  truth  of  the  Gospel.  The  truth  is  the 
contents  of  ihe  wortl,  and  the  Goapd  defines  the  character  of  the 
truth. 

6.  Which  is  come  unto  you  (toS  vapovro^  ett  vfM<;).  Lit., 
which  is  present  unto  you.  Has  come  and  is  present.  Com- 
pare Luke  xi.  7,  "  are  with  me  into  bed." 

In  all  the  world.  Hyperbolical.  Compare  Kom.  i.  8 ;  1 
Thess.  i.  8 ;  Acts  xvii.  6.  Possibly  with  a  Biiggestioii  of  U»e 
universal  character  of  the  Gospel  as  contrasted  with  the  local 
and  sj^cial  character  of  false  Gospels.     Compare  ver.  23. 

And  bringeth  forth  fruit  {koX  eim  ieapTro<f)opov/ieifov).  Lit., 
a7ui  is  hearing  fruit.  The  text  varies.  The  best  texts  omit 
a7\d.  Some  join  eim  is  witli  the  previous  clause,  as  it  is  in  all 
tiie  world.,  and  take  hearing  fruit  as  a  parallel  participle.  So 
liev.  Others,  better,  join  is  with  the  participle,  "even  as  it  is 
bearitiff  fruit."  This  would  emphasize  the  cojitinuous  fruitfnl- 
ness  of  the  Gospel.  The  middle  voice  of  the  verb,  of  which 
this  is  the  sole  instance,  marks  the  fruitfulness  of  the  Gospel  hy 
its  oion  inhermtt  power.  Compare  the  active  voice  in  ver.  10, 
and  see  Mark  iv.  28,  "the  earth  bringeth  forth  fruit  avro/ian; 
of  herself,  self-avting.  For  a  similar  uee  of  the  middle,  see 
tho^c,  Eph.  ii.  7 ;  tcorketh,  Gal.  v.  6. 

Increasing  {av^avofj^v^v).  Not  found  in  Tex.  Rec.,  nor  in 
A.  v.,  but  added  in  later  and  better  texts,  and  in  Rev.  "  Not 
like  those  plants  which  exhaust  themselves  in  bearing  frnit. 
The  external  growth  keeps  pace  with  the  reproductive  energy  " 
(Lightfoot).     "  It  makes  wood  as  well  "  (Maclaren). 

7.  Fellow-servant.     Used  by  Paul  only  here  and  ch.  iv.  7. 
Minister  {hiaKovo'i).     See  on  Matt.  xx.  26  ;  Mark  ix.  35, 
For  you  {xnrip  vixSsv).    Read  ^/tuv  -us,  as  Rev.,  on  our  bo- 

half:  as  Paul's  representative. 

8.  Declared  (Sij\<icra?V     Or  tnade  manifest.     See  on  1  Cor 


J 


Ch.  L]  THB  epistle  to  the  OOLOS8IAN&  465 

In  the  Spirit.  Connect  with  your  love.  Compare  Gal. 
V.  22. 

9.  We  also.  Marking  the  reciprocal  feeling  of  Paul  and 
Timothy  with  that  of  the  Colossiana. 

Pray — desire  {^pofrevypiuvo^ — alroviiepoC).  The  words  occur 
together  in  Mark  xi.  24.  The  former  is  general,  the  latter 
special.  Bev.  make  request  is  better  than  desire.  The  A«  Y. 
renders  indiscriminately  CLsk  and  desire.  Bev.  alters  desire  to 
ask.  Desire  in  the  sense  of  ask  occurs  in  Shakspeare  and 
Spenser. 

Knowledge  {hr(yvwruf).  See  on  Rom.  iiL  20;  Philem. 
6.  FtM  knowledge.  See  Bom.  L  21,  28;  1  Cor.  xiii.  12, 
where  Paul  contrasts  yuHoatceip  to  knoWj  yp&ai^  knowledge^  with 
hnrfivtoaiceaf  to  know  fuUyj  hrlypwri^  fvJl  krunoledge.  Here 
appropriate  to  the  knowledge  of  Ood  in  Christ  as  the  perfec- 
tion of  knowledge. 

Wisdom  and  spiritual  understanding  {m^  tuX  tnwiau 
irveviiarue^).  Bev.,  better,  applies  spirit/ual  to  both — spiritual 
wisdom  and  understanding.  The  kindred  adjectives  ao^ 
wise  and  crweri^  jprudemt^  occur  together,  Matt.  zi.  25 ;  Luke 
X.  21.  For  ao^ia  wisdom^  see  on  Bom.  zi.  33,  and  on  ynse, 
Jas.  iii.  13.  For  avpeatq  tmderstandingy  see  on  Mark  xii.  33, 
tjid  prudenty  Matt  xi  25.  The  distinction  is  between  general 
and  special.  Understanding  is  the  critical  apprehension  of 
particulars  growing  out  of  wisdom^  which  apprehension  is  prac- 
tically applied  by  ^povfiav^  prudenoe^  see  on  Luke  L  17 ;  Eph. 
i.  8.  Spiritual  is  emphatic,  as  contrasted  with  the  vain  philos- 
ophy of  false  teachers. 

10.  Walk  worthy  (irepvirarfia'ai  af4»9).  The  phrase  occurs 
Eph.  iv.  1 ;  1  Tliess.  ii.  12.  Bev.  gives  the  correct  adverbial 
rendering  worthily. 

Unto  all  pleasing  {ehiraaav  apia/eeuip).  So  as  to  please 
God  in  all  ways.  Compare  1  Thess.  iv.  1,  ^Apiaxeia  pteasing, 
only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  In  classical  Greek  it  has  a 
bad  sense,  obsequiousness^  cringing.  Compare  manpleasers^  ch. 
iii.  22. 

Vol.  m.— 80 


466 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Cb.  L 


in  the  knowledge  («'?  t^i*  tTrlyvwriv).  Lit.  unto  the 
knowledge.  The  best  texts  read  t^  eTrtyiwo-et "'  by  tbe  knowl- 
edge :  "  by  means  of. 

11.  Strengthened  {ZwafLovti^oC).  Only  here  in  the  New 
Testament,  but  found  in  Septnagint.  The  compound  {hi&vva- 
fioio  to  make  strong)  is  frequent  in  Paul,  Rum.  iv.  20;  Epb. 
vi.  10  ;  Philip,  iv.  13;  1  Tim.  i.  12. 

Power — might  {hwdt^e^ — KpdriK).  See  on  2  Pet.  ii.  11 ; 
John  i.  12. 

Glory.     See  on  Rom.  iii.  23. 

Patience— I ong'suffe ring  {uwofiovrfv — fuucpoSvfilav).  See 
on  2  Pet.  i.  6 ;  Jas.  v.  7. 

With  joyfulness.  Compare  ver.  24  ;  Jas.  i.  2,  3 ;  1  Pet  iv. 
13.  Some  connect  with  giving  thanks,  ver.  12,  and  this  is 
favored  by  tlie  construction  of  the  previous  clauscB :  in  every 
good  work  bearing  fruit :  iDith  all  jxmvr  strengthened  :  wit/i 
joy  giving  thanks.  But  Paul  is  not  always  careful  to  maintain 
the  symmetry  of  his  periods.  The  idea  of  joy  is  contained  in 
tkankagi/oing.  which  would  make  the  emphatic  position  of  with 
joy  inexplicable ;  besides  which  we  lose  thus  the  idea  oi  joyful 
endurance  (ver.  24)  and  oijoyfid  tuffering  easpreating  itse^  in 
thanksgiving.     Compare  Rom.  y.  3. 

12.  Made  us  meet  (I'xatwo-ain-i).     See  on  2  Cor.  iii.  6. 

To  be  partakers  of  the  inheritance  (eiV  r^f  ftep&a  roS 
K\^pov).  Lit,,  Jbr  the  portion  of  the  lot  y  that  is,  the  jyortion 
which  is  the  lot.  Compare  Acts  viii.  21,  where  the  two  words 
are  coordinated. 

In  light  (en  T^  ^tI).  Connect  with  inheritance:  the  inherit- 
ance which  is  in  light.  This  need  not  be  limited  to  future  glory 
The  children  of  God  walk  in  light  on  earth.  See  John  iii.  21 ; 
xi.  9 ;  xii.  36 ;  Eph.  v.  8 ;  1  These,  v.  5  ;  1  John  i.  1 ;  ii.  10. 

13.  Power  {i^vala-i).     See  on  Mark  ii.  10  * 

*  Lightfoot'a  expluifttlon  of  l^aimta  arbilTitTy  power  or  tf/ranng,  as  con- 
tnuted  with  Bainkila  kinf/iUnn.  a  wM-orderfd  totereigtUy,  la  not  liome  out  b; 
New-Teitament  uuge,  uid  is  coDtradiatad  b;  Septnigint  usage,  wliere  ^aviXtia 


A 


Cn.  L]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OOLOSSIANa  467 

Translated  (jAeriarffaai).  The  word  occurs  five  times  in  the 
New  Testament :  oi putting  oiU  of  the  stewardship,  Lnke  xvL 
i;  of  the  removal  of  Saul  horn  the  kingdom,  Acts  xiii.  22 ;  of 
Paul  turning  away  mnch  people,  Acts  xix.  26  ;  and  of  remav- 
mg  moantains,  1  Cor.  xiiL  2.  A  change  of  kingdoms  is  indi- 
cated. 

Kingdom.  Hence  God's  kingdom  is  in  the  present,  no  less 
than  in  heaven.     8ee  on  Lnke  vi.  20. 

Of  His  dear  Son  {^^  vlov  rrj^  arydirrf^  airav).  Lit,  of  the 
Son  of  His  love.  So  Bev.  The  8on  who  is  the  object  of  His 
love,  and  to  whom,  therefore,  the  kingdom  is  given.  See  Ps.  ii. 
7, 8 ;  Heb.  i.  3-9.  It  is  tme  that  love  is  the  essence  of  the  Son 
as  of  the  Father ;  also,  that  the  Son's  mission  is  the  revelation 
of  the  Father's  love ;  bnt,  as  Meyer  correctly  says,  "  the  lan- 
guage refers  to  the  exalted  Christ  who  rtdes.^ 

14.  Redemption  (airoXurpwrip).  See  on  Rom.  iiL  24.  Con- 
tinning  the  image  of  an  enslaved  and  ransomed  people.  Omit 
through  Hie  blood. 

Forgiveness  {i^aip).  See  on  remieeiony  Rom.  iii.  25 ; 
forgiven^  Jas.  v.  15.  Forgivenesa  defines  redemption.  Light- 
foot's  suggestion  is  very  interesting  that  this  precise  definition 
may  convey  an  allusion  to  the  perversion  of  the  term  inroTsAnpio-' 
(Tw  by  the  Gnostics  of  a  later  age,  and  which  was  possibly 
foreshadowed  in  the  teaching  of  the  Colossian  heretics.  The 
Gnostics  used  it  to  signify  the  result  of  initiation  into  cer- 
tain mysteries.  Lightfoot  qnotes  from  Irenaens  the  baptismal 
formula  of  the  Marcosians :  *    ^^  into  unity  and  redemption 

and  ifyiwla  appear,  used  ooordinatelj  of  God^%  dominion.  See  Dan.  iy.  81 ; 
yii.  14.  The  word  never  occnrs  in  the  New  Testament  in  the  sense  of  aHjii' 
trary  authority.  It  is  used  coUectivelj  of  the  empire  of  Satan,  Eph.  ii  2 ;  of 
lawf ol  human  magistracy,  Rom.  xiiL  1  ;  of  hearenly  powers,  Eph.  iiL  10. 

*  Followers  of  Marcos,  in  the  second  half  of  the  second  oentnrj.  A  dis- 
ciple of  Valentinus.  the  author  of  the  most  influential  of  the  Gnostic  systems. 
Marcos  taught  probably  in  Asia  Minor,  and  perhaps  in  GauL  The  character- 
istics of  his  teaching  were  a  numerical  symbolism,  and  an  elaborate  ritual. 
He  sought  to  attract  beautiful  and  wealthy  women  by  magical  arts.  See 
Schaff,  *'  History  of  the  Christian  Church,"  ii.,  480. 


468  WORD  BTCDI^  IS  THE  SKW  TBSTAMBMT.  [Ce.  1 

[u-iroKvTpwTO')  and  communion  of  powers."  The  idea  of  a  re- 
demption of  tbe  world,  and  (in  a  perverted  form)  of  the  person 
and  work  of  Christ  as  having  part  in  it,  distiactivelv  marked 
the  Gnostic  scIiooIb.  That  from  which  the  world  was  redeemed, 
however,  was  not  sin,  in  tije  proper  sense  of  the  term,  but 
ijometbing  inherent  in  tbe  coostitution  of  the  world  itself,  and 
therefore  due  to  its  Creator. 

In  tbe  following  passage  the  person  of  Christ  is  defined  as 
related  to  God  and  to  creation ;  and  absolute  supremacy  is 
claimed  for  Him.  See  Introduction  to  this  volume,  and  com- 
pare  Eph.  i.  20-23,  and  Thilip.  iL  6-11. 

15.  The  image  {fUatv).  See  on  Apoc.  xiii.  14.  For  the 
Logos  (Word)  underlying  the  passage,  see  on  Jolm  i,  1.  Ima^e 
is  more  than  likeness  wbicb  may  be  snperficial  and  incidental. 
It  implies  a  prototype,  and  embodies  the  essential  verity  of  its 
prott>type.  Compare  in  th-eform  of  God,  Philip,  ii.  6  (note), 
and  the  ^idgertce  of  the  Father'a  glory,  Ileb.  i.  3.  Also  I  John 
i.  1. 

Of  the  invisible  God  (roij  Qeou  roS  aopaTov).  Lit,  of  iha 
God,  the  invieible.  Thus  is  brought  ont  tbe  idea  of  manifeeta- 
tion.  which  lies  in  image.     See  on  Apoc.  xiii,  14. 

The  first-born  of  every  creature  {Trpttn&roKiK  Troff^?  mt- 
treas).  Rev.,  the  firet-hom  of  all  creation.  For  Jtrst-bomy  see 
on  Apoc.  i.  5 ;  for  t-reaiion,  on  2  Cor.  v.  17.  As  image  points  to 
revelation^  so  firstrbom  points  to  eternal  preexistence.  Even 
tbe  Rev.  is  a  little  ambiguous,  for  we  must  carefully  avoid  any 
suggestion  that  Christ  was  the  first  of  created  things,  vhich  is 
contradicted  by  tbe  following  words :  in  Ilim.  were  all  things 
created.  The  true  sense  is,  horn  "before  the  creation.  Compare 
hefore  aU  things,  ver,  17.  This  fact  of  priority  implies  sover- 
eignty. He  is  exalted  above  all  thrones,  etc.,  and  all  things 
are  unto  (et?)  Him,  as  tbey  are  elsewhere  declared  to  be  unto 
God.     Compare  Ps.  Isxxix.  27 ;  Heb.  i.  2. 

16.  By  him  (eifaurcij).  "RRv^in  Him.  /n  is  not  in«fruni«n^ 
al  but  local ;  not  denying  tbe  instrumentality,  but  pntting  the 
fact  of  creation  with  reference  to  its  sphere  and  centre.     In 


Ch.  L]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0S8IAN&  469 

Ilim^  within  the  sphere  of  His  personality,  resides  the  creative 
will  and  the  creative  energy,  and  in  that  sphere  the  creative  act 
takes  place.  Thus  creation  was  dependent  on  Ilim.  In  Christ 
is  a  very  common  phrase  with  Paul  to  express  the  Church's  re- 
lation to  Him.  Thus  "  one  body  in  Chtnst^^'^  Rom.  xii.  5 ; 
"  fellow-workers  in  Jesua  Christy^  Rom.  xvi.  3.  Compare  Rom. 
xvi.  7,  9,  11 ;  1  Cor.  i.  30 ;  iv.  15,  etc. 

All  things  {rh  irdvra).  The  article  gives  a  collective  sense 
— the  all,  the  whole  nniverse  of  things.  Without  the  article  it 
would  be  all  things  severally. 

Were  created  {itcrCaSff).  See  on  John  i.  3.  The  aorist 
tense,  denoting  a  definite  historical  event. 

Visible — invisible,  l^ot  corresponding  to  earthly  and  heav- 
enly.  There  are  visible  things  in  heaven,  such  as  the  heavenly 
bodies,  and  invisible  things  on  earth,  such  as  the  souls  of  men. 

Thrones,  dominions,  principalities,  powers  (SpoW,  kv- 
ptoTirre^,  apxoij  i^ovcrioi).  Compare  £ph.  i.  21  ;  iii.  10;  vi. 
12 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  24 ;  Rom.  viii.  38 ;  Col.  ii.  10, 15 ;  Tit.  iii.  1.  In 
Tit.  iii.  1,  they  refer  to  earthly  dignities,  and  these  are  probably 
included  in  1  Cor.  xv.  24.  It  is  doubtful  whether  any  definite 
succession  of  rank  is  intended.  At  any  rate  it  is  impossible  to 
accurately  define  the  distinctions.  It  has  been  observed  that 
whevQYer  principalities  (apxaX)  and  powers  {i^ovaiai)  occur  to- 
gether, j?rmo^E>aZi^te«  always  precedes,  and  that  huvaiu^  power 
(see  Eph.  i.  21)  when  occurring  with  either  of  the  two,  follows 
it ;  or,  when  occurring  with  both,  follows  both.  The  primary 
reference  is,  no  doubt,  to  the  celestial  orders ;  but  the  expres- 
sions things  on  earthy  and  not  only  in  this  world  in  the  parallel 
passage,  Eph.  i.  21,  indicate  that  it  may  possibly  include  earthly 
dignities.  Principalities  and  powers  are  used  of  both  good 
and  evil  powers.  See  Eph.  iii.  10 ;  vi.  12 ;  Col.  ii.  15.  The 
passage  is  aimed  at  the  angel-worship  of  the  Colossians  (see  In- 
troduction) ;  showing  that  while  they  Iiave  been  discussing  the 
various  grades  of  angels  which  fill  the  space  between  God  and 
men,  and  depending  on  them  as  media  of  conmmnion  with 
God,  they  have  d^raded  Christ  who  is  above  them  all,  and  is 


470  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  I, 

til©  sole  mediator.  Compare  Ileb.  i.  5-14,  where  the  ideas 
o£  the  Son  as  Creator  aud  as  Lord  of  the  augels  are  also  com- 
hiued.*  Thrones  occurs  oiil;  here  in  enumerationa  of  thie  kind. 
It  seems  to  indicate  the  highest  grade.  Compare  Apoc,  jv,  4, 
^povai  thrones,  A.  V.  seats,  aud  see  note.  Throiiea  here  prob- 
ably means  the  enthroned  angels.  Dominions  or  dominations, 
alsfj  Eph.  i.  21.  Prinaipoilitiea  or  princedoms.  In  Rom.  viii. 
38,  thie  occurs  without  ^cuwrs  which  ueuallj  accompanies  it. 

All  things  (t^  iraina).  Recapitulating.  Collectively  as  be- 
fore. 

Were  created  {imurrai).  'Rev.,  carKet\y,luet}eheen  created. 
The  perfect  tense  instead  of  the  aorist,  as  at  the  beginning  of 
the  verse.  "  The  latter  describee  the  definite,  historical  act  of 
creation ;  the  former  the  continuous  aud  present  relations  of 
creation  to  the  Creator  "  (Lightfoot).  So  John  i.  3.  "  With- 
out Him  did  not  any  thing  cwne  into  heing  {fyivero,  aorist) 
which  hath  come  into  being  "  {and  exists,  y^vev,  see  note). 

By  Him  and  for  Him  (£t'  ain-ov  xai  evi  airrbv).  Rev.,  bet- 
ter, through  IliTn  and  unto  Ilim..  See  on  Rom.  xi.  36.  Compare 
in  Him  at  the  beginning  of  the  verse.  There  Christ  was  rep- 
reeented  as  the  conditional  cause  of  all  things.  All  things  came 
to  paes  within  the  sphere  of  His  pereonality  and  as  dependent 
upon  it.  Here  He  appears  as  the  mediaiing  cause ;  through 
Him,  as  1  Cor,  viii.  6.  Unto  Him.  All  things,  as  they  had 
their  beginning  in  Him,  tend  to  Him  as  their  coneummation,  to 
depend'  on  and  serve  Him.  Compare  Apoc.  xxii.  13 ;  and 
Heb.  ii.  10 ;  '''■for  whose  sake  (St'  hv)  and  through  wliose  agency 
{Si  o5)  are  ail  things."  Rev.,  "/or  whom  and  through  whom." 
See  also  Eph.  i.  10,  23;  iv.  10;  Philip,  ii,  9-11;  1  Cor.  xv.  28. 
The  false  teachers  maintained  that  the  universe  proceeded  from 
God  indirectly,  through  a  succession  of  emanations.  Christ,  at 
best,  was  only  one  of  these.  Ae  such,  the  UDirerse  could  not 
find  its  consummation  in  Him. 


•  On  the  Jewlsli  and  Jnd»eo-ChriBllan  spoouUtlonB  oonoemliig  lie  fradoa  o( 
tlie  celestial  hieruohy,  see  Lighttoot's  note  on  this  pattogs. 


J 


Ch.  L]  THB  EPIBTLB  to  THB  GOLOS8IAN8.  471 

17.  He  18  {airro^  itrnv).  Both  words  are  emphatic.  "Eotib 
isy  i&  used  as  in  John  viiL  58  (see  note),  to  express  Christ's  ab- 
solute existence.  ^^  Se  emphasizes  the  jperamialityy  is  the  jrre- 
existence "  (Lightf oot).  For  similar  emphasis  on  the  pronoun, 
see  Eph.  ii.  14 ;  iv.  10,  11 ;  1  John  iL  2 ;  Apoc.  xix.  15. 

Before  all  things.    In  time. 

By  Him  {iv  oAr^).    In  IKm  as  ver.  16.    So  Bey. 

Consist  {avpioTfjieev).  Cohere^  in  mutual  dependence.  Com- 
pare Acts  xxvii.  28 ;  Heb.  i.  3.  For  other  meanings  of  the 
verb,  see  on  Som.  iiL  5.  Christ  not  only  creates,  but  mava- 
tains  in  continuous  stability  and  productiveness.  ^^He,  the 
All-powerful,  All-holy  Word  of  the  Father,  spreads  His  power* 
over  all  things  everywhere,  enlightening  things  seen  and  un- 
seen, holding  and  binding  all  together  in  Himself.  Nothing  is 
left  empty  of  His  presence,  but  to  all  things  and  through  all, 
severally  and  collectively.  He  is  the  giver  and  sustainer  of 
life.  .  .  .  He,  the  Wisdom  of  Ood,  holds  the  universe  in 
tune  together.  He  it  is  who,  binding  all  with  each,  and  order- 
ing all  things  by  His  will  and  pleasure,  produces  the  perfect 
unity  of  nature  and  the  harmonious  reign  of  law.  While  He 
abides  unmoved  forever  with  the  Father,  He  yet  moves  all 
things  by  His  own  appointment  according  to  the  Father's  will " 
(Athanasius). 

18.  And   He.     Emphatic.     The  same  who  is  before  all 

things  and  in  whom  all  things  consist. 

The  head  of  the  body,  the  Church.  The  Church  is  de- 
scribed as  a  body,  Rom.  xii.  4  sq. ;  1  Cor.  xii.  12-27 ;  x.  17,  by 
way  of  illustrating  the  functions  of  the  members.  Here  the 
image  is  used  to  emphasize  the  position  and  power  of  Christ  as 
the  head.  Compare  ch.  ii.  19 ;  Eph.  i.  22,  23 ;  iv.  4,  12,  15, 
16 ;  V.  23,  30. 

Who  is  the  beginning  (09  itrnv  ofyxjn)-  ^^  ^9  equivalent 
to  seeing  He  is.  Beginning^  with  reference  to  the  Church  ;  not 
the  beginning  of  the  Church,  but  of  the  new  life  which  subsists 
in  the  body — the  Church* 


472 


WORD  STUDlEiS   IN   THE   NEW  TESTAMENT. 


[Cu.  L 


The  first-born  from  the  dead  {-TpaToroKiK  ix  r&v  vexp&if). 
Dciiiiing  how  Clirist  is  the  beginning  of  tlie  new  spiritual  life: 
by  Uis  reaun-ection.  Compiire  1  Cor.  xv.  20,  23,  and  Prince  of 
life.  Acts  iii.  15  (note).  See  on  Apoc.  i.  5,  wtiere  the  phrase 
is  slightly  different,  "first-born  ^  the  dead."  lie  comes 
forth  from  among  the  dead  as  the  first-born  issues  from  the 
womb.  Compare  Acts  ii.  4,  "  having  loosed  the  jming  of 
death,"  where  the  Greek  is  mSipiK  birlh-tkroea*  There  ia  a 
parallelism  between  f  rat-bom  of  the  creation  &TiA  fret-Iiom 
from  the  dead  as  regards  the  relation  of  headship  iu  which 
Christ  stands  to  creation  and  to  the  Church  alike;  but  the 
parallelism  is  not  complete.  ^'  lie  is  the  first-born  from  the 
dead  as  having  been  nimself  one  of  the  dead.  He  is  not 
the  first-born  of  all  creation  as  being  himself  created  "  (Dwiglit). 

In  all  things.     Tlie  universe  and  the  Church. 

Might  have  the  preeminence  {•yevqrai  irptureimtv).     Lit., 

might  beGome  heiiuf  jirsl.  Uparrevai  to  be  first  only  here  in  the 
New  Testament.  FetnfTai  become  states  a  relation  into  which 
Christ  caine  in  the  course  of  time  :  i<mv  is  (the  first-born  of 
all  creation)  states  a  relation  of  Christ's  absolule  being.  He 
became  head  of  the  Church  throngh  Uis  incarnation  and  passion, 
as  He  is  head  of  the  universe  in  virtue  of  His  absolute  and 
eternal  being.  Compare  Philip,  ii,  6,  "hein/j  (vTrdpj(y>i')  in  the 
form  of  God — was  made  (yevofievo^)  obedient  uiiUi  death." 
This  sense  is  lost  in  the  rendering  might  have  tlie preeiaiiience. 

19.  It  pleased  the  Father  that  in  Him  should  all  fulness 
dwell  {hi  aiirai  tii&oicqaev  irav  to  irK^pafui  Koroijif^CTai').  Kir&O' 
Keea  to  think  /'/.  good,  to  be  well  pleased  in  used  in  the  New  Test- 
ament, both  of  divine  and  of  human  good-pleasure ;  but,  in 
the  former  case,  always  of  God  the  Father,  So  Matt.  iii.  17  ; 
Luke  xii.  32  ;  1  Cor.  i.  21.  The  subject  of  icaa  toeU  pUaaed^ 
God,  is  omitted  as  in  Jas.  i.  12,  and  must  be  supplied;  bo  that, 
literally,  the  passage  would  read,  God  was  toell pleased  that  fn 


a  the  Toriation  of  Iba  S«p(u&gliit  trmn  tlie 


Oh.  L]  the  EPISTLB  TO  THE  COLOS8IAN&  473 

Hinhy  etc.*  Rev.,  it  was  the  good  pUaaure  of  the  JFiUher. 
FulnesSy  Rev.,  correctly,  the  fulness.  See  on  Rom.  xi.  12 ; 
John  i.  16.  The  word  must  be  taken  in  its  passive  sense — 
that  with  which  a  thing  ie  filled^  not  tha;t  which JiUs,  Thefvl- 
1168%  denotes  the  sufn-total  of  the  divine  pov>ers  cmd  attribiUea. 
In  Christ  dwelt  all  the  fulness  of  God  as  deity.  The  relation 
of  essential  deity  to  creation  and  redemption  alike,  is  exhibited 
by  John  in  the  very  beginning  of  his  gospel,  with  which  this 
passage  should  be  compared.  In  John  the  order  is:  1.  The 
essential  nature  of  Christ ;  2.  Creation ;  3.  Redemption.  Here 
it  is :  1.  Redemption  (ver.  13) ;  2.  Essential  being  of  the  Son 
(16) ;  3.  The  Son  as  Creator  (16) ;  4.  The  Church,  with  Christ 
as  its  head  (18).  Compare  2  Cor.  v.  19 ;  Eph.  i.  19,  20,  23. 
Paul  does  not  add  of  the  Godhead  to  ihefulneeSj  as  in  ch.  ii.  9, 
since  the  word  occurs  in  direct  connection  with  those  which  de- 
scribe Christ's  essential  nature,  and  it  would  seem  not  to  have 
occurred  to  the  apostle  that  it  could  be  understood  in  any  other 
sense  than  as  an  expression  of  the  plenitude  of  the  divine  at- 
tributes and  powers. 

Thus  the  phrase  m  Him  ehovld  all  thefvlneee  dwell  gathers 
into  a  grand  climax  the  previous  statements — image  of  Qodj 
Jirat'hom  of  all  oreatiorij  Creator ^  the  eternally  jpreeoBistentj  the 
Head  of  the  Churchy  the  victor  over  deaths  fi/rst  in  all  things. 
On  this  summit  we  pause,  looking,  like  John,  from  Christ  in 
His  fulness  of  deity  to  the  exhibition  of  that  divine  fulness  in 
redemption  consummated  in  heaven  (vv.  20-22). 

There  must  also  be  taken  into  the  account  the  selection  of 
this  word  fulness  with  reference  to  the  false  teaching  in  the 
Colossian  church,  the  errors  which  afterward  were  developed 
more  distinctly  in  the  Gnostic  schools.  Pleroma  fulness  was 
used  by  the  Gnostic  teachers  in  a  technical  sense,  to  express  the 
sum-total  of  the  divine  powers  and  attributes.  ^^From  the 
pleroTiia  they  supposed  that  all  those  agencies  issued  through 
which  God  has  at  any  time  exerted  His  power  in  creation,  or 
manifested  His  will  through  revelation.      These  mediatorial 

*  The  explanation  which  makes  all  thf,  fulne$8  the  snbjeci,  aU  thefidness 
wu  plecued  to  dioell  in  Him  (so  EUioott)  is  against  New-Testament  UHSge. 


i'ii  WORD   STUDEES   IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMBITr.  (Ch.  L 

beings  would  retain  more  or  lesB  of  its  influence,  according  as 
tliey  claimed  direct  parentage  from  it,  or  traced  their  deecent 
through  successive  evolutions.  But  in  all  cases  this  pleroma 
was  distributed,  diluted,  transformed,  and  darkened  by  Foreign 
admixture.  They  were  only  partial  and  blurred  images,  often 
deceptive  caricatures,  of  their  original,  broken  lights  of  the 
great  Central  Light "  (Lightfoot).  Christ  may  have  been 
ranked  with  ihese  inferior  images  of  the  divine  by  the  CoIob- 
sian  teacliers.  Uence  tiie  significance  of  the  assertion  that  the 
totality  of  the  divine  dwells  in  Him* 

Dwell  {KaTotKfjtTeu).  Permanently.  See  on  Luke  xi.  26. 
Compare  the  Septuagint  usage  of  KaroiKetv  pei-manenl  dwelling, 
and  irapoiKelv  transient  sojourning.  Thus  Gen.  xxxvii.  1, 
"  Jacob  dwelt  (permanently,  Kar^Ku)  in  the  land  where  his 
father  sojourned  (-rapioKqaai,  A.  V.,  wat  a  stranger).  Perhaps 
in  contrast  with  the  partial  and  transient  connection  of  the 
pleroma  with  Christ  asserted  by  the  false  teachers.  The  word 
is  used  of  the  indwelling  of  the  Father,  Eph.  ii.  22  {xorotieijTij- 
pu>v  Tov  ©eoO  habitation  of  God) ;  of  the  Son,  Eph.  iii.  17 ;  and 
of  the  Spirit,  Jas.  iv.  5, 

20.  Having  made  peace  {elprivoTrotija-tvi).  Only  herein  the 
New  Testament.  Having  concluded  peace;  see  on  John  iii. 21. 
The  participle  is  parallel  with  to  reconcile,  and  marks  peace- 
making and  reconciliation  as  contemporaneous.  The  kindred 
eiprjvoiroto^  peacemaker,  only  in  Matt.  v.  9.  The  phrase  mak- 
ing peace,  in  which  the  two  factors  of  this  verb  appear  separ- 
ately, occurs  only  Epli.  ii.  15. 

To  reconcile  (avoKardKKd^at).  Only  here,  ver.  21,  and 
Eph.  ii.  16.  The  connection  is:  it  was  the  goodpleasure  of  the 
Father  (ver.  19)  to  reconcile.  The  compounded  preposition  airo 
gives  the  force  of  hack,  hinting  at  restoration  to  a  primal  unity. 
So,  in  Eph.  ii.  12-16,  it  occurs  as  in  ver.  21,  in  connection  with 
awrpOiMTpii-sfiivoi  alienated,  as  if   they  had  not  always  beeD 


*  See  Li)(fatfoot'i  note  on  this  puaage.  p.  323  ;  EUteoCI  on  GkL  Iv.  4 ;  Eph. 
I   Z.i.     MsiipharsDn,  "  Eaposilor,"  lacond  wries,  It.,  463.. 


J 


Cu.  L]  THE  KPI8TLB  TO  THB  GOLOSSIAN&  475 

Strangers.  See  on  Eph.  ii.  12.  Others  explain  U>  reconcile 
whoUy.  For  the  verb  iKaroXXio-o-co  to  reconcile^  see  on  Horn. 
V.  10. 

All  things  (t^  ir6vTa).  Mast  be  taken  in  the  same  sense  as 
in  vv.  16, 17, 18,  the  whole  tmiverse^  material  and  spiritual.* 
The  arrangement  of  danses  adopted  by  Rev.  is  simpler. 

21.  Enemies.    To  God,  in  the  active  sense. 

Mind  ifiuMvoUf).  See  on  irnoffinationj  Luke  L  51.  The  spir- 
itual seat  of  enmity. 

By  wicked  works  {iv  rok  ipyoi^  rw;  irovffpok).  Bey.,  bet- 
ter, in  your  evil  works.  In  the  performance  of — the  sphere  in 
which,  outwardly,  their  alienation  had  exhibited  itself. 

22.  Body  of  His  flesh.  Which  consisted  of  flesh ;  without 
which  there  could  have  been  no  death  (see  next  clause). 

To  present  {^apcurrrjaoA).  Purpose  of  the  reconciliation. 
Compare  Rom.  viiL  30.  See  on  shewed  himself^  Acts  i.  3. 
Compare  Kom.  xii.  1,  where  it  is  used  of  presenting  a  sacri- 
fice.f 

Holy,  unblamable,  unreprovable  {arflov^,  ofuofiov^,  ovey- 
/c\i;toi/9).  Holyy  see  on  saints^  Acts  xxvi.  10;  Apoc.  iii.  7. 
The  fundamental  idea  of  the  word  is  separ(Uion  unto  God 
and  from  worldly  defilement.  UnManuMej  Bev.  much  better, 
vnthoiU  blemish.  Compare  Eph.  i.  4;  v.  27;  and  see  on  1 
Pet  i.  19,  and  blemishes^  2  Pet.  ii.  13.  Unreprovable^  not 
only  actually  free  from  blemish,  but  from  the  charge  of  it. 
See  on  1  Cor.  i.  8,  and  compare  1  Tim.  vi.  14. 

In  His  sight  (ii^reycDTrioy  avrot)).  ^SJ&w.^hefoTe  ERm.  Him 
refers  to  Qod^  not  Christ.    Whether  the  reference  is  to  Gk>d's 


*  The  range  of  discussion  opened  by  these  words  is  too  wide  to  be  entered 
upon  here.  Paul's  declarations  elsewhere  as  to  the  ultimate  fate  of  evil  uicn 
and  angels,  must  certainly  be  allowed  their  full  weight ;  jet  such  passages  an 
this  and  Eph.  i.  10,  seem  to  point  to  a  larger  purpose  of  Ood  in  redemption 
than  is  commonlj  conceived. 

f  Bishop  Lightfoot,  howerer,  nndnlj  presses  unbUmUhed  as  a  sacrificial 
term,  going  to  show  that  the  figure  of  a  saorilice  underlies  the  whole  passage. 


470  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Oh.  t 

future  judgment  or  to  His  present  approval,  can  liardly  Im 
determined  hy  the  almost  unexceptional  usage  of  tcarevcoTriop 
be/ore,  in  the  latter  sense,  as  is  unquestionably  the  case  in  Epli. 
i.  4.  The  simple  evtiymoii  before,  is  used  in  the  former  sense, 
Luke  xii.  9.  'Eixftrpoa^ev  before,  occurs  iu  both  senses.  The 
reference  to  the  future  judgtueiit  seems  the  more  natural  »s 
marking  the  consummation  of  the  redemptive  work  described 
in  vv.  20-22.  Compare  1  Thess.  iii.  13,  and  Eph.  v.  27,  which 
eorresponds  with  the  figure  of  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,  in 
Apoc.  xxi.  9  sqq.  This  view  is  further  warranted  by  the  fol- 
lowing words,  if  ye  continue,  etc.,  the  final  presentation  being 
dependent  on  steadfastness.* 

23.  Continue  in  the  faith  (hntiAvere  T^T-itnet).  The  verb 
means  to  stay  at  or  with  (eVi ).  So  Philip,  i.  24,  to  ah'd^  hy  tha 
Jlesh..  See  on  Rom.  vi.  1,  The  faith  is  not  the  gospel  system 
(see  on  Acts  vi.  7),  but  the  Colossians'  faith  in  Christ.  Your 
faith  would  be  better. 

Grounded  and  settled  (tcScX^u^oi  koX  khptuoi).  For 
tji'ounded,  see  on  settle,  1  Pet-  v,  10  ;  compare  Luke  vi.  48,  49  ; 
Jiph.  iii.  17.  Settled,  from  ffipa  a  seat.  Kev.,  ateadfoM.  See 
1  Cor.  vii.  37 ;  xv.  58,  the  only  other  passages  where  it  occurs. 
Compare  iBpaim/ia  ground,  1  Tim.  iii.  15.  Bengel  says:  "The 
former  is  metaphorical,  the  latter  more  literal.  The  one  im- 
plies greater  respect  to  the  foundation  by  which  believers  are 
supported ;  but  settled  snggests  inward  strength  which  believers 
themselves  p 


Moved  away  {/ieraKivovfievoi).  The  present  participle  sig- 
nifying continual  shifting.     Compare  1  Cor.  xv.  58. 

To  every  creature  {ev  trdtjij  tcriaei).  Rev.,  correctly,  in  all 
oreaiioii.     See  on  2  Cor.  v.  17,  and  compare  ver.  15. 

34.  Who  now.  Omit  who.  Now  is  temporal :  in  the  midst 
of  my  imprisonment  and  sufferings,  after  having  become  a 
miniBter  of  the  Gospel,  and  having  preached  it. 


*  Blihop  Ligbttoot  Ib  influenoed  in  hia  preference  for  the  other  a 
liil  aRcrlBcial  figure 


Ou.  L]  THB  EPI8TLB  TO  THB  C0L0BSIAN8.  477 

In  my  sufFerings.  Not  as  our  idiom,  rejoioe  in,  as  refoioe 
in  the  Lardj  bat  in  the  midst  of;  while  endurinff. 

Fill  up  {avTavamXffp&).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 
Lity  Jill  up  in  turn.  Rev.,  on  my  part  {optI).  *Apair\ffp6<o  to 
jUl  up  occurs  1  Cor.  xiv.  16 ;  xvi.  17 ;  Gal.  vi.  2,  and  else- 
where. The  doable  compound  irpoaava'irkffpoio  to  fill  up  hy 
adding^  2  Cor.  ix.  12  (note) ;  xi.  9.  ^Avrl  on  my  pa/rt  o£Psets 
Christ  in  the  next  clause.  Lightfoot  explains  well:  ^'It  sig- 
nifies that  the  supply  comes  from  on  opposite  quarter  to  the 
deficiency,  and  so  describes  the  correspondence  of  the  personal 
agents,"  and  not  merely  the  correspondence  of  the  supply  with 
the  deficiency. 

That  which  ia  lacking  of  the  afflictions  of  Christ  {rh 

vaT€fyqfiaTa  r&v  SXly^tov  rou  Xpurrou).  Lacking^  lit.,  behind. 
Used  with  different  compounds  of  irXripow  to  fiU^  1  Cor.  xvi. 
17 ;  2  Cor.  ix.  12 ;  xi.  9 ;  Philip,  ii.  30.  Cf  the  afflictions  of 
Christ  The  afflictions  which  Christ  endured;  which  be- 
longed to  Him:  not  PavJ^s  afflictions  described  as  Christ's 
because  endured  in  fellowship  with  Him  (Meyer);  nor  the 
afflictions  which  Christ  endures  in  His  Church  (Alford,  Elli- 
cott,  Eadie). 

These  afflictions  do  not  include  ChrisCs  vicarioi^  svfferings^ 
which  are  never  denoted  by  ^X/^i9  trihtUations.  That  which 
is  lacking  of  the  afflictions  of  Christ  signifies  that  portion  of 
Christ's  ministerial  sufferings  which  was  not  endured  by  Him 
in  person,  but  is  endured  in  the  suffering  of  Christians  in  all 
generations  in  carrying  out  Christ's  work.  Compare  2  Cor.  L 
5,  7 ;  Philip,  iii.  10.  Hence  those  are  mistaken  interpretations 
which  explain  the  filling  up  as  a  correspondence  of  the  supply 
with  the  deficiency.  The  correspondence  is  between  the  two 
parties,  Christ  and  His  followers,  and  the  supply  does  not  cor- 
respond with  the  deficiency,  but  works  toward  supplying  it. 
The  point  is  not  the  identification  of  Paul  with  Christ  in  His 
sufferings  (which  is  true  as  a  fact),  but  the  distinction  between 
Paul  and  Christ.  Hence  the  present  tense,  /  am  filling  up^ 
denoting  something  still  in  progress.  The  full  tale  of  sufferings 
will  not  be  completed  until  the  Church  shall  have  finished  her 


478  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THB  NKW  TESTAMENT.  [Cn.  L 

cuiifiict,  and  shall  have  come  np  "  ont  of  great  tribulation  "  to 

Bit  at  the  inarriage-eiipper  of  the  Lamb. 

In  my  flesh.     Connect  with^^  uj>. 

For  His  body's  sake,  which  is  the  Church.  Stip^jf^oi/t 
is  never  used  uf  a  metaphurical  organiem  like  tlie  Church,  hut 
irmfui  body.  See  on  flesh,  Rom.  vii.  5,  sec.  3.  In  ver.  22,_fiesh 
was  used  with  body  in  order  to  define  the  reference  of  body  to 
the  fleshly  liunian  organisui  of  Ciirist.  Compare  Jolin  L  14. 
Here  amfui  body  only,  defined  by  Church. 

25.  The  dispensation  {oUovofiliw).  From  oixo;  houge  and 
vk^iM  to  dUpettae  or  manage.  Hence  oUovofioii  a  housesUward. 
Here  the  meaning  is  stewardship — the  office  of  a  stewaiti  or 
administrator  in  God's  house.  See  on  1  Cor.  ix.  17,  and  com- 
pare Luke  xvi.  2-4 ;  1  Cor.  iv.  1 ;  Tit.  i.  7 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  10.  In 
Eph.  iii.  2,  the  word  is  used  of  the  divine  arranycmeni  or  ecofi- 
omy  committed  to  Panl.  In  Eph.  i.  10  of  the  divine  govem- 
meiU  or  regulation  of  the  woild. 

For  you  (ew  u/ias).  Rev.,  more  strictly,  to  yomoard.  Con- 
nect with  was  given.  The  stewardship  was  assigned  to  me 
with  yon  as  its  object.     Compare  Eph.  iii.  2;  Rom.  xv.  16. 

To  fulfil  {irKTfpwrat).  Fnlly  discharge  my  office,  so  tliat 
the  divine  intent  shall  be  fully  carried  ont  in  the  preaching  of 
the  Qoapel  to  thti  Gentiles  no  less  than  to  the  Jews.  Compare 
fiUly  preoif^ed,  Rom.  xv.  19. 

26.  The  mystery.  See  on  Rom.  xi.  25.  The  kindred  word 
fitfivtjfioi  I  have  been  initiated  (A..  V.,  irtstructed)  occurs  Philip. 
iv,  12,  in  the  sense  drawn  from  the  technical  nee  of  the  term, 
denoting  the  induction  into  pagan  mysteries.  Ignatius  ad- 
dresses the  Epiiesians  as  ^'•feUow-initiutes  {wfifivtrrai),  or  stii- 
tlents  of  the  mysteries,  vith  Panl"  (Eplies.  xii.).  In  the  New 
Testament  the  word  implies  something  which,  while  it  may  bo 
obscure  in  its  nature,  or  kept  hidden  in  the  past,  is  now  re- 
vealed. Hence  used  very  commonly  with  words  denoting  rev- 
elation or  kfiowledge.  So,  "  to  know  the  mysteries,"  Matt.  xiii. 
11 ;  "  revelation  of  tlie  mystery,"  Rom.  xvi.  a5 ;  maile  known., 


Cii.  L]  THB  BPISTLB  TO  THB  COL08SIAN8.  479 

V 

Eph.  iii.  3,  etc.  I  In  Coloseians  and  Ephesians  it  is  nsed,  with  a 
single  exception,  of  the  admisBion  of  the  Oentiles  to  gospel 
privileges.     Compare  Koin.  xvi.  25,  26. 


From  ages — generations  {airo  —  altopwv — yeve&v).  The 
unit  and  the  factors :  the  cteon  or  age  being  made  np  of  ffenera- 
tions.  Compare  Eph.  iii.  21,  where  the  literal  translation  is 
unto  dH  the  generaiiona  of  the  age  of  the  ages.  The  preposition 
airofrom^  differs  from  irpo  before  (1  Cor.  ii.  7),  as  marking  the 
ipoiut  from  wliich  concealment  could  properly  begin.  Before 
the  beginning  of  the  ages  of  the  world  the  counsel  of  God  was 
ordained^  but  not  concealed^  because  there  were  no  human 
beings  from  whom  to  conceal  it.  The  concealment  hegKufrom 
the  beginning  of  the  world,  with  the  entrance  of  subjects  to 
whom  it  could  be  a  fact. 

27.  Would  make  known  {fi^iKfiaep  yvrnpUraC).  Lit,  willed 
to  make  krwvm.  Bev.,  woe  jpleased.  Hence  the  apostles  who 
were  called  to  make  known  the  Gospel  were  such  hy  the  toill 

of  Ood  (ver.  1). 

Riches.    See  on  Horn.  ii.  4. 

Of  the  glory  of  this  mystery  among  the  Gentiles.    The 

mystery  of  the  admission  of  the  Gentiles  to  the  gospel  cove- 
nant, now  revealed  through  Paul's  preaching,  was  divinely  rich 
and  glorious.  This  glory  is  the  manifestation  of  the  kingdom 
of  Christ  among  the  Gentiles  as  their  inheritance  (ver.  12 ; 
compare  Rom.  viii.  18,  21 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  17).  The  richness  ex- 
hibited itself  in  the  free  dispensation  of  the  Gospel  to  the  Gen- 
tile as  well  as  to  the  Jew.  It  was  not  limited  by  national  lines. 
Compare  '^  the  same  Lord  is  rich  unto  all,"  Rom.  x.  12 ;  and 
beggarly  elementSj  Gal.  iv.  9. 

Which  is  Christ  in  you.  The  readings  differ.  Some 
read  09,  masculine,  whichy  referring  to  the  riches:  others  t, 
neuter,  whichy  referring  to  mystery.  The  latter  corresponds 
witli  ch.  ii.  2,  the  mystery  of  God^  Christy  etc.  In  either  ease 
the  defining  words  are  Christ  in  you,  i.e.,  in  the  Oentiles; 
either  as  constituting  the  richness  of  glory  in  this  mystery,  or 
as  being  the  essence  of  the  mystery  itself.    In  you  may  be 


480  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW    TESTAMENT.  (Ca.  L 

either  within  yon,  dwelliag  in  your  hearte,  or  among  yoii. 
The  latter  accorde  vith  amofig  the  Gentilfes,  the  former  with 
dwell  in  yovr  Itearta,  Eph.  iii.  17,  Compare  Rom.  viii,  10;  2 
Cor.  xiii.  6;  Gal.  iv.  19. 

The  hope  of  glory  (^  eKirti  t^  Softj?).  Lit,,  of  the  glory. 
The  Gentilee,  in  receiving  the  manifeetation  of  Christ,  did  not 
realize  all  its  glory.  The  full  glory  of  the  inheritance  was  a 
hope,  to  be  realized  when  Christ  eliould  appear  "  the  eecond 
time  unto  salvation "  (lleb.  ix.  28).  Compare  1  Tim.  i.  1. 
Glory  refers  to  the  glory  of  the  mystery  ;  hence  the  glory,  but 
with  more  emphasis  upon  the  idea  of  the  same  glory  conanm- 
mated  at  Christ's  coming — the  glory  which  shall  be  revealed. 
See  Rom.  viii.  18;  2  Cor.  iv.  17;  1  Pet.  i.  7. 

28.  Warning  {vovSerouvre'i).  Rev.,  admonishing.  See  on 
Acts  XX.  31.     Compare  povSeaia  admonition,  Eph.  vi.  4. 

Every.  Thrice  repeated,  in  order  to  emphasize  the  nnivere- 
ality  of  the  Gospel  against  the  intellectual  exclusiveness  en- 
conraged  by  the  false  teachers.  For  similar  emphatic  repeti- 
tions of  all  or  every,  compare  1  Cor.  z.  1,  2 ;  xii.  13 ;  Kom.  ix. 
6,  7 ;  xi.  32,  etc. 

In  all  wisdom  {iv  iratrr)  a-oipla).  In  every  form  of  wisdom. 
Thus  opposed  to  tlie  idea  of  esoteric  and  exoteric  *  wisdom 
represented  by  the  false  teachers;  higher  knowledge  for  the 
few  philosophic  minds,  and  blind  faith  for  the  masses.  In 
christian  teaching  the  highest  wisdom  is  freely  open  to  all. 
Compare  ch.  ii.  2,  3. 

Perfect.  Compare  1  Cor.  ii.  6,  7,  and  see  note.  There  may 
he  in  this  word  a  hint  of  its  use  in  the  ancient  mysteries  to 
designate  the  fully  instrncted  as  distinguished  from  the  novices. 
Peter  uses  the  teebnical  word  eiroirrcu  eye-wiinesseSy  which  de- 
signated one  admitted  to  the  highest  grade  in  the  Eleusinian 
mysteries,  of  those  who  beheld  Christ's  glory  in  His  translig- 

*  Btoteric,  inrier- :  tbat  vhlcli  is  profounder  and  more  ■bBtnue,  and  wbiob 
ia  rasarved  onlj  (or  the  eiiltiTaled  few  who  can  receive  it.  S^^erir.  outer: 
that  which  Is  more  rudinuntary  aod  simple,  and  adapted  to  the  popular  com- 


Oh.  L]  the  BPISTLB  TO  THB  GOL088IAN&  481 

nration,  2  Pet.  i.  16.  From  this  point  of  view  Bishop  Light- 
foot  appropriately  says :  ^'  The  language  of  the  heathen  mys- 
teries is  transferred  by  Panl  to  the  christian  dispensation,  that 
he  may  the  more  effectively  contrast  the  things  signified.  The 
true  Oospel  also  has  its  mysteries,  its  hierophants,  its  initiation ; 
but  these  are  open  to  all  alike.  In  Christ  every  believer  is 
riXeio^;  fully  initiated,  for  he  has  been  admitted  as  iviimf^ 
eye-witness  of  its  most  profound,  most  awful  secrets." 

29.  I  labor  {lamiA).  Unto  weariness.  See  on  Luke  v.  5. 
The  connection  with  the  following  ofymvi^o/iepo^  contending  in 
the  arena,  seems  to  show  that  I  labor  has  the  special  sense  of 
labor  vn  preparing  for  the  contest.  The  same  combination  oc- 
curs 1  Tim.  iv.  10,  where  the  correct  reading  is  ofytDVi^ofieSa 
we  sitrive  for  opeiSi^ofieSa  we  suffer  reproach  /  and  there  is  a 
similar  combination,  Philip,  ii.  16,  run  and  Idhor.  So  Ignatius, 
Epistle  to  Polycarp,  vi. :  "  Labor  ye  one  ^th  another  {avytcoTr^- 
are) ;  stri7)e  together  {awaSXeire,  see  Philip,  i.  27) ;  ^nin  to- 
gether, suffer  together,  go  to  rest  together,  arise  together "  (the 
last  two  probably  with  reference  to  the  uniform  hours  pre- 
scribed for  athletes  under  training).  So  Clement  of  Rome: 
'^  Who  have  labored  {icoiridaavTes;)  much,  and  contended  (ayenn- 
adfievoi)  honorably  "  (iL  7).     See  on  1  Cor.  ix.  24-27. 

Striving  {ofye^Pi^ofAeposi).  From  arytov,  originally  an  assembly, 
a  place  of  assembly,  especially  for  viewing  the  games.  Hence 
the  contest  itself,  the  word  being  united  with  different  adjectives 
indicating  the  character  of  the  contest,  as  imrum  of  horses ; 
yv/jLviK6^  gymnastic  /  funnrum  of  nhusic ;  yfSkjceo^t  where  the 
prize  is  a  brazen  shield,  etc.  Generally,  any  struggle  or  trial. 
Hence  the  verb  means  to  enter  a  contest,  to  contend,  to  struggle. 
Tlie  metaphor  is  a  favorite  one  with  Paul,  and,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  three  instances  (Luke  xiii.  24 ;  John  xviii.  36 ;  Heb. 
xii.  1),  the  words  ary<ov  contest  and  arytovi^ofuu  to  contend  are 
found  only  in  his  writings.  See  1  Tim.  vi.  12 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  7 ; 
1  Cor.  ix.  26  (note) ;  1  Thess.  ii.  2. 

Working  (ivipyeuiv).  From  ivefyyi]^,  iv  in,  Spyov  work  ;  lit., 
being  in  or  at  work.     See  on  1  Cor  xvi.  9.     ^Evipyeui  is  the 


482  WORD  8TUDIKB  IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Cb.  II 

ttate  of  being  at  work;  energy,  efficiency.     Used  only  of  super- 
Liiinan  energy,  good  or  evil. 

Which  worketh  (t^  evepyovfUvrfv).     Kindred  with  the  pre- 
ceding.    See  on  Jae.  v.  16.* 


CHAPTER  II. 

1.  I  would  that  ye  knew  {^eKu  vfidt  eUhnu).  Panl's  more 
usual  form  of  expresBion  is,  I  would  not  hatie  you  to  he  iytwr- 
ant.     See  on  Iloin.  i.  13. 

What  great  conflict  I  have  {^XiKov  cvyStva  e^a).  Rev., 
koto  greatly  I stri/ve.  'HXCkop  what  great,  only  here  and  Jas. 
iii.  5.  C'onfiict,  continuing  the  metaphor  of  ch.  i.  39.  Here  of 
in WJar(Z  conflict,  anxiety,  prayer,  as  ch.  iv.  12. 

Laodicaea.     See  on  Apoc.  iii.  14. 

And  for  as  many  as  (xai  iaot).  Inclnding  all  who  corae 
under  the  same  category  as  the  ColoaeianB  and  Laodicaeaus. 
Hence  equivalent  to  ail  who,  like  yoitrse/veg,  have  not  seen,  etc. 
See,  for  a  similar  usage.  Acts  iv.  6  ;  Apoc.  xviii.  17.  Indicat- 
ing that  the  Coloseiane  and  Laodicaeans  were  both  personally 
unknown  to  Paul. 

2.  Comforted  {vapaKXrfSauriv).  Not  BO  much  tranquiUlsed 
as  braced.     See  on  John  xiv.  16. 

Knit  together  {avft^i.^aaHinei).  See  onproving.  Acts  ix. 
22.  In  the  Septiiagint  it  means  to  ifuitriK;t,  as  Exod.  xviii.  16  ; 
Dent.  iv.  9  ;  lea.  xl.  13  (compare  1  Cor.  ii.  16) ;  Ps.  xxxi.  8. 
Used  of  putting  togetJier  in  on^s  mind,  and  so  to  concliule  by 
comparison.  Thus  Acts  xvi,  10,  assuredly  gathering.  Rev., 
eonduiUfig. 

*  In  the  middle  Totoe  when  the  htiDUui  xgeiit,  the  mind,  or  m  faculty  of  tlia 
mind  !)  represented  as  working  (Bom.  Til  f>;  Epb.  iii.  SO;  GkI.  t.  S.  el«.). 
Id  tha  active  TOloe  when  Ood  or  some  erl!  power  works  on  the  man  (1  Cor. 
zli.  6, 11 ;  Gftl.  U.  S  -,  Eph.  i  20,  ete.]. 


J 


Ch.  n.]  THB  EPISTIiB  TO  THE  GOLOS8IAN&  483 

Full  assurance  {irkifpoifwpUK).    Or  fiUneM.     See  Heb.  vi. 

11 ;  X.  22. 

Of  understanding  {<nn4a€€k).  See  on  Mark  xii.  33  ;  Lnke 
ii.  47. 

To  the  acknowledgment  (€^  hrlrfpcnnv).  Wrong.  'Ett^ 
vma^f;  is  the  full  hnovaiUdge^  as  ch.  i  9  (note).  Rev.,  iiujil  they 
may  know. 

Of  God.  The  best  textual  authorities  add  Xpurrov  of 
Christ.  So  Rev.,  of  Oody  even  Christ.  Christ  is  in  apposition 
with  mystery.     Compare  ch.  i.  27. 

3.  Hid  (airoicpu^oi).  Only  here,  Mark  iv.  22;  Luke  viii.  17. 
Compare  1  Cor.  ii.  7.  Not  to  be  joined  with  a/re^  as  A.  V. 
Its  position  at  the  end  of  the  sentence,  and  so  far  from  are^ 
sliows  that  it  is  added  as  an  emphatic  secondary  predicate. 
Hence,  as  Rev.,  in  whom,  are  all  the  treasuresj  etc.,  hidden. 
For  a  similar  construction,  see  ch.  iii.  1,  '^  where  Christ  is  on 
the  right  hand  of  God  seated  (there)."  Jas.  i.  17,  "  Every  per- 
fect gift  is  from  above,  coming  down?^  *  Grammatically,  hidden 
may  be  taken  as  an  attribute  of  treasures  ;  *^  in  whom  the  hid- 
den treasures  are  contained  ; "  but  the  other  is  preferable  The 
words  which  immediately  follow  in  ver.  4,  suggest  the  possibility 
that  hidden  may  convey  an  allusion  to  the  Apocrypha  or  secret 
writings  of  the  Essenes,  whose  doctrines  entered  into  the  Colos- 
sian  heresy.  Such  writings,  which,  later,  were  peculiar  also  to 
the  Gnostics,  contained  the  authoritative  secret  wisdom,  the 
esoteric  teaching  for  the  learned  few.  If  such  is  Paul's  allus- 
ion, the  word  su^ests  a  contrast  with  the  treasures  of  christ- 
ian wisdom  which  are  accessible  to  all  in  Christ. 

Wisdom  and  knowledge.    See  on  Rom.  xi.  33. 

4.  Beguile  (iropaXoY/^irroi).  Only  here  and  Jas.  i.  22.  See 
note.  Rev.,  delude.  So  Ignatius,  speaking  of  the  duty  of 
obedience  to  the  bishop,  says :  '^  He  that  fails  in  this,  does  not 
deceive  the  visible  bishop,  but  aUempts  to  cheat  {irapaKoyi^^- 
rai)  the  Invisible  "  (Epistle  to  Magnesians,  iii.).     The  word  is 


^  I  take  this  oppoiianitj  to  oomot  mj  own  note  on  Jas.  L  17,  eameth  down. 


484  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Ca  IL 

foimd   in  the  Septuagint,   Josh.    ix.  22;   1   Sam.   xix.  17;   2 
Sam.  xxi.  5. 

Enticing  words  (-n-iSavoXfryla,).  Rev.,  perauativejteaa  of 
sfieech.  Only  liere  in  the  New  Teetaiuent.  In  classical  Greeli, 
oipro^johh  argument  as  opposed  to  deJitonstration.  So  Plato  ; 
"Tleflect  whether  you  are  disposed  to  admit  oi  2>rohahUity 
{iriSavoKoyia)  and  figures  of  speech  in  matters  of  aucli  import- 
ance" {"Theaetetiifl,"  163).     Compare  1  Cor.  ii.  4. 

5.  Order  {rd^iv).  Or  orderly  array.  A  military  metaphor, 
quite  possibly  suggested  by  Paul's  intercourse  with  the  soldiers 
io  his  confinement.     See  on  Pliilip.  i.  13. 

Steadfastness  {arepkafid).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. See  on  1  Pet.  v,  9.  The  kindred  adjective  trrepeot 
solid,  occurs  2  TJJii.  ii.  10;  Heb.  v.  12;  1  Pet.  v,  9;  and  the 
verb  arepeoio  to  -make  solid,  Acts  iii.  7 ;  xvi.  5.  The  military 
metaphor  is  continued.  Faith  is  represented  as  a  host  solidly 
drawn  up:  your  solid  front,  close  phalanx.  The  verb  is  found 
in  this  sense  in  the  Apocrypha,  1  Mace.  x.  50,  "  iarepitoae  tod 
iroXe/ioii,  he  solidified  tfie  battle  ;  "  massed  his  lines.  Compare 
Ezek.  xiii.  5,  where  the  noun  has  the  sense  of  stronghold: 
"  Tliey  stood  not  en  tnepemfiaTt  in  the  stronghold."  So  Ps.  xviL 
2,  "  The  Lord  is  my  strength  ;  "  stronghold  or  hulioark.  The 
armament.  Gen.  i.  6 ;  Ezek.  i.  22.  In  Esther  ix.  22,  of  tKe 
co)\lirmation  of  a  letter. 

6.  Ye  received  {TrapeKa^ere).  By  tranBmiseion/)*0"i  {■rra.pd) 
yonr  teacliers. 

Christ  Jesus  the  Lord  (toi'  Xpurrov  ^Iijtrovv  tov  Kipwv). 
The  Christ,  specially  defined  by  the  following  words,  thus  em- 
phasizing the  personal  Christ  rather  than  the  Gospel,  because 
the  true  doctrine  of  Christ's  person  was  perverted  by  the  Colos- 
sian  teachers.      The  Clirist,  even  Jesus,  the  Lord. 

7.  Rooted — built  up  (ippi^oiftSvoi — iwoiKoZofiovfievoi).  Note 
the  change  of  metaphor  from  the  solidity  of  military  array  to 
wtilking,  rooting  of  a  tree,  and  then  to  huilding.  The  meta- 
phors of  rooting  and  being  founded  occur  togetlier,  Eph.  iii.  17 


ch.  il]  the  epistle  to  the  COLOSSIANS.  485 

Compare  1  Cor.  iii.  9.  In  Jer.  i.  10,  i/cpi^ovp  to  root  oiU  is  ap- 
plied to  a  kingdom,  and  the  words  to  build  and  tojplmit  follow. 
It  must  be  said  that  pinion  to  cavse  to  take  7*oot  is  often  used  in 
the  sense  oijirmness  or  ^fixedness  without  regard  to  its  primary 
meaning.  BuiU  up.  The  preposition  hri  upon  indicates  the 
placing  of  one  layer  upon  another.  See  on  Acts  xx.  32,  and  1 
Cor.  iii.  9.  Compare  1  Cor.  iii.  10-14 ;  Eph.  ii.  20.  Note  also 
the  change  of  tenses :  homing  been  rooted  (perfect  participle), 
being  (in  process  of)  buiit  up  and  strengthened  (present  parti- 
ciple). 

In  Him  {ip  airrw).  Bather  than  upon  Him,  as  might  have 
been  expected.  In  this  and  in  the  Ephesian  epistle,  Christ  is 
represented  as  the  sphere  within  which  the  building  goes  on. 
Compare  Eph.  ii.  20.  The  whole  upbuilding  of  the  Church 
proceeds  within  the  compass  of  Christ's  personality,  life,  and 
power. 

Thanksgiving {evxapurrla).  For  PauPs  emphasis  on  thanks- 
giving, see  Rom.  i.  21;  xiv.  6;  2  Cor.  i.  11;  iv.  15;  ix.  11, 
12;  Eph.  V.  20;  1  Tim.  ii.  1,  etc.  Eifxapurro^  thanlrful,  ev- 
XapiaTelv  to  give  tha/nksj  evxapurria  thanksgimngy  are  found 
only  in  Paul's  writings. 

8.  Beware  {fikerrere).     Lit.,  see  to  it. 

Lest  any  man  spoil  you  (ji^  rU  itrrai  vfia^  6  avXarfwy&p). 
The  Greek  is  more  precise  and  personal :  lest  t/iere  shall  be  any 
Ofie  that  maketh  spoil.  So  Bev.  XvKarifoyito  to  carry  off  booty ^ 
only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  A  very  strong  expression 
for  the  work  of  the  false  teachers;  make  you  yourselves  a 
booty.  The  A.  Y.  is  ambiguous,  and  might  be  taken  to  mean 
corrupt  or  damruige  you. 

Philosophy  and  vain  deceit  (r^  ^Xckto^/ik  fcaX  /m^ 
aTraTff^),  Rev.  gives  the  force  of  the  article,  his  philosophy : 
Kal  and  is  explanatory,  philosophy  which  is  also  vain  deceit. 
Ilcnce  the  warning  is  not  against  all  philosophy.  tiXoav<f>la 
p/tilosoj^hy,  only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  It  had  origrnally 
a  good  meaning,  the  love  ofwisdoin^  but  is  used  by  Paul  in  the 
sense  of  vain  speculation^  and  with  special  reference  to  its 


486  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT,  [Cir.  n 

being  the  name  bv  which  the  falee  teachers  at  ColoBsae  desig- 
nated not  only  their  speculative  system,  but  also  their  practical 
Bjetem,  so  tliat  it  covered  tlieir  ascetic  practices  no  less  than 
their  mjsticistii.  Bishop  Liglitfoot  remarks  i]pon  the  fact  that 
philosopAy,  hy  which  the  Greeks  expressed  tlie  highest  effort 
of  the  intellect,  and  virtue  {aperq),  their  expression  for  the 
liighest  moral  excellence,  are  each  used  but  once  bj  Paul,  show- 
ing "  that  the  Gospel  had  deposed  the  terms  as  inadequate  to 
the  higher  standard,  whether  of  knowledge  or  practice,  which 
it  had  introduced," 

After  the  tradition.  Connect  with  the  whole  phraee  jjAt2- 
osophy  and  vain  deceit,  aB  descriptive  of  its  source  and  aubject- 
matter.  Others  connect  with  rnuhi  spoil.  The  term  Is  espe- 
cially appropriate  to  the  Judaeo- Gnostic  teacliinge  in  Colossae, 
wluch  depended  for  their  authority,  not  on  ancient  writings, 
bnt  on  tradition.  The  later  mystical  theology  or  nietaphysic  of 
the  Jews  was  called  Kabbala,  literally  meaning  reception  or 
received  doctrines,  tradition. 

Rudiments  {aroixeta).  See  on  2  Pet,  iii.  10.  Rudiment- 
ary teachings,  as  in  lleb.  v.  12  ;  applicable  alike  to  Jewish  and 
to  Gentile  teaching.  Ceremonialism — meats,  drinks,  washings, 
Eesenic  asceticism,  pagan  symbolic  mysteries  and  initiatory 
rites — all  belonged  to  a  rudimentary  moral  etage.  Compare 
vv.  11,21,  and  Gal.  iv.  9. 

Of  the  world.     Material  as  contrasted  with  spirituaL 

9.  Fulness.     See  on  ch.  i.  19. 

Godhead  (StoTip-os).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 
See  on  Eom.  i.  20,  where  SetoTrj-i  divinity  or  godh/yod  is  need. 
Appropriate  there,  becauBe  God  ^/-aoHo^y  would  not  be  known 
from  His  revelation  in  nature,  but  only  His  attributes — His 
majesty  and  glory.  Here  Paul  is  speaking  of  the  essential  and 
personal  deity  as  belonging  to  Chriat.  So  Bengel :  "Not  the 
divine  attribntes,  but  the  divine  nature." 

Bodily  (cra)/taT(iK<oO'  ^^  bodily  fashion  or  hodilj-wise.  The 
verse  contains  two  distinct   aseertioiiB :  1.  That  the  f nlnese  of 


Ch.  n.]  THE  EPIBTLB  TO  THE  OOL088IAN8.  487 

the  Godhead  eternallj  dwells  in  Christ.  The  present  tense 
tcaroiKei  dioeUethj  is  used  like  iarw  is  (the  image),  ch.  i.  15,  to 
denote  an  eternal  and  essential  characteristic  of  Christ's  being. 
The  indwelling  of  the  divine  folness  in  Him  is  characteristic  of 
Him  as  Christ,  from  all  ages  and  to  all  ages.  Hence  the  ful- 
ness of  the  Godhead  dwelt  in  Him  hefore  His  incarnation, 
when  He  was  "  in  the  form  of  God  "  (Philip,  ii.  6).  The  Word 
in  the  beginning  was  with  God. and  was  God  (John  L  1).  It 
dwelt  in  Him  d/wring  His  incarnation.  It  was  the  Word  that 
became  flesh  and  dwelt  among  ns,  fall  of  grace  and  truth,  and 
His  glory  which  was  hehdd  was  the  gloiy  as  of  the  Onlj-begot- 
ten  of  Uie  Father  (John  i.  14 ;  compare  1  John  L  1-3).  The 
fulness  of  the  Gkxlhead  dwells  in  His  glorified  hwnainity  in 
heaven. 

2.  The  fulness  of  the  Gkxlhead  dwells  in  Him  in  a  bodily 
toaj/y  clothed  with  a  body.  This  means  that  it  dwells  in  Him 
as  one  having  a  human  body.  This  could  not  be  true  of  His  pre- 
incamate  state,  when  He  was  "  in  the  form  of  God,"  for  the 
human  body  was  taken  on  by  Him  in  the  fulness  of  time,  when 
^'  He  became  in  the  likeness  of  men  "  (Philip.  iL  7),  when  the 
Word  became  flesh.  The  fulness  of  the  Gk)dbead  dwelt  in  His 
person  from  His  birth  to  His  ascension.  He  carried  His  human 
body  with  Him  into  heaven,  and  in  His  glorified  body  now  and 
ever  dwells  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead. 

«'  O,  for  a  sight,  a  bliBsfnl  light 

Of  our  Almigbtj  Father's  throne  I 
There  sits  the  Saviour,  crowned  with  lights 
Clothed  in  a  bodj  like  oar  own. 

*'  Adoring  saints  around  Him  stand, 

And  thrones  and  powers  before  Him  fall ; 
The  God  shines  gracious  through  the  man. 
And  sheds  sweet  glories  on  them  alL" 

WATm 

'^  What  a  contrast  to  the  human  tradition  and  the  rudiments 
of  the  world  "  (Meyer).  What  a  contrast  to  the  spiritual  agen- 
cies conceived  as  intermediate  between  God  and  men,  in  each 
of  which  the  divine  fulness  was  abridged  and  the  divine  glory 


488  WORD  STUDIES   IS    THE  NEW   TESTAMKNT.  [Co.  IL 

shaded,  in  proportion  to  the  remoteaesB  from  G'od  in  succeeeive 
emanation. 

10.  Ye  are  complete  in  Him  (eWe  eV  awry  ireirXtipa/Uvot). 
Hev.,  madeyuU.  Compare  Joho  i.  16;  Epli.  L  23;  iii.  19;  iv. 
13.  Not,  ye  are  madefidl  jV*  mm,  but  ye  are  in  Sim,  vmde 
fuU.  In  Iliui  dwellfl  the  fulnesB ;  being  in  Him,  ye  are  filled. 
Compare  John  xvii.  21 ;  Acts  xvii.  28.* 

11.  Not  made  with  hands.  Compare  M&rkxiv.  58;  2  Cor. 
V.  1.  In  alliision  to  the  literal  circumciBion  insisted  on  bj  the 
false  teachers. 

In  the  putting  off  {h  t§  oTmcSvaet).  Ooly  here  in  the  New 
Testament;  and  the  kindred  verb  oTrenrSiio/uu  to  jjwi  o^,  only 
ver.  15  and  cK.  iii.  9.  Tlie  verb  ixSvofiai  means  to  stiijf  off 
from.  on^8  self,  as  clotlies  or  armor ;  «  out  of,  having  the  force 
o£  getimff  out  s/' one's  garments.  By  the  addition  to  the  verb 
of  avofrom,  tliere  is  added  to  the  idea  of  getting  out  of  one's 
clothes  that  of  getting  away  from  them  ;  so  that  the  word  is  a 
strong  expression  for  wholly  putting  away  from  ffite'a  telf.  In 
the  putting  off,  is  m  tlie  act  oi' process  of.     Not  by. 

The  body  of  the  sins  of  the  flesh  {tou  cw/Mtrof  r&v  dftap- 
Ti&v  T^  ffffl/jKOT).  Omit  of  the  sine.  The  hody  of  the  jUsh 
(compare  on  ch.  i.  23)  is  the  body  which  consists  of  the  fle«I), 
jl^h  having  its  moral  sense  of  that  material  part  which  is  the 
seat  and  organ  of  sin,  "  the  flesh  with  its  passions  and  Inste  " 
(Gal.  V.  24;  compare  1  John  ii.  16).  See  on  ch.  i.  24,  For 
t!ie  distinction  between  cru/ia  hody  and  odp^  flesh,  see  on  flesh, 
Rom.  vii.  5,  sec.  3. 

In  the  circumcision  of  Christ  (eV  r^  irtptTOfi^  tov  Xpux- 
Tov).  The  spiritual  circumcision  effected  through  Christ.  See 
Eph.  ii.  11;  Philip,  iii.  3 ;  Rom.  ii.  29.  /«,  as  above.  The 
fleshly  circnmcision  removed  only  a  portion  of  the  body.  In 
spiritnal  circumcision,  through  Christ,  the  whole  cormpt,  carnal 
nature  is  put  away  like  a  garment  which  is  taken  off  and  laid 
aside. 

*  See  Heniy  DTummond,  "  Nitnr&l  Law  In  the  Spiritual  World,"  p.  3TS 


Ch.  n.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIAK&  489 

12.  Buried  (or/in-o^^e?).  See  on  Bom.  vi  4.  The  aorist 
tense  puts  the  burial  as  contemporaneous  with  the  circumcis- 
io...     Ye  were  circnmdBed  when  ye  were  buried,  etc. 

In  baptism  (eV  r^  fiamrtaiuiT^  or  /8a7rTur/^r>).  The  article, 
the  baptism  points  to  the  familiar  rite,  or  may  have  the  force  of 
your. 

Wherein   also  (h  ^  seal).    Beferring  to  bapttsniy  not  to 

Chnst. 

Ye  were  raised  with  Him  {trvptiyipSfiTe).  The  burial  and 
the  raising  are  both  typified  in  baptism.  The  raising  is  not 
tlie  resurrection  to  eternal  life  at  Christ's  second  coming, 
but  the  moral  resurrection  to  a  new  life.  This  corresponds 
with  the  drift  of  the  entire  passage,  with  the  figurative  sense 
of  buried,  and  with  Bom.  vi.  4,  which  is  decisive. 

Through  the  faith  of  the  operation  of  God.    Not  the 

faith  which  God  works,  but  your  faith  in  God's  working: 
faith  in  God's  energy  as  displayed  in  Christ's  resurrection. 
Hence  the  emphasis  which  is  laid  on  faith  in  the  resurrection. 
See  1  Cor.  xv.  3,  4  (note) ;  Bom.  x.  9 ;  Eph.  i.  19.  Vv.  11,  12 
should  be  compared  with  Bom.  vi.  2-6. 

13.  Dead  {wKpoifsi),  Morally,  as  Eph.  ii.  i.  5;  Bom.  vi.  11. 
In  your  sins  {iv  roi9  irapairrAfuurw),  The  best  texts  omit  iv 
tn,  and  the  dative  is  instrumental,  through  or  hy.  Bev.,  through 
your  trespasses.     See  on  Matt.  vi.  14. 

The  uncircumcision  of  your  flesh.  That  sinful,  carnal 
nature  of  which  uncircumcision  was  the  sign,  and  which  was 
the  source  of  the  trespasses.     Compare  Eph.  ii.  11. 

He  quickened  together  {avpe^aHnro^'qo'ev).  Only  here  and 
Eph.  ii.  5.  Endowed  with  a  new  spiritual  life,  as  ver.  12. 
This  issues  in  immortal  life.     Compare  Eph.  ii.  6. 

Having  forgiven  us  (^apio-^/t€i/o9  ^m^)-  Freely  (x^pi^ 
gracsjfree  gift\  as  Luke  vii.  42  ;  2  Cor.  ii.  7,  10 ;  Col.  iii.  13. 
Note  the  change  of  pronoun  from  you  to  uSy  believers  gener- 
ally, embracing  himself.    This  change  from  the  second  to  the 


490  WORD  STDDffiS  IS  THK  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Cb.  1L 

first  person,  or,  vice  versa,  is  common  in  Paul's  writlngB,     See 
ch.  i.  10-13 ;  iii.  3,  4 ;  Epb.  ii.  2,  3,  13,  14 ;  iv.  31,  32. 

14.  Blotting  out  (efoXf^^?).  See  on  Acta  iii.  19;  com- 
pare Apoc.  iii.  5.  The  simple  verb  uXci<^  means  to  anoint^  see 
on  John  xi.  2,  Hence  to  he»t>iear.  The  compounded  preposi- 
tion ef  means  completely.  The  compound  verb  here  is  need  by 
Thucydides  of  whitewashing  a  wall ;  1  Chron.  xxix,  4,  of  over- 
laying walls  with  gold.  The  preposition  also  carries  the  sense 
of  removed  /  hence  to  smear  oui  ;  to  wipe  cnoay. 

The  handwriting  (to  x^^P^^P"^^)-  The  A.  V.  has  simply 
translated  according  to  the  composition  of  the  noun,  x^ip  hand-, 
ypdtfw  to  write.  Properly  an  autograph,  and  specially  a  note 
of  hand,  hond.  Compare  Tobit  v.  3 ;  ix.  5.  Transcribed, 
chirographua  and  chirographon,  it  appears  often  in  Latin 
authors,  especially  in  law-books.  So  Juvenal,  of  a  rascally 
neighbor,  who  declares  his  twte  ofh4md  void,  and  the  tablets  on 
which  it  is  written  as  so  much  useless  wood  (xvi.,  41).  Sueton- 
ius, of  the  promise  of  marriage  given  by  Caligula  to  Ennia 
Naevia  "  under  oath  and  hond"  (chirographo,  "Caligula,"  12). 

Of  ordinances  (rot?  ^ir^fuiau/).  See  on  Luke  ii.  1.  Lit.,  in 
ordinances;  consistitig  in,  or,  as  Rev.,  written  in,  as  suggested 
by  handwritijig.  As  Paul  declares  this  bond  to  be  against  im, 
including  both  Jews  and  Gentiles,  the  reference,  while  primar- 
ily to  the  Mosaic  law,  is  to  be  taken  in  a  wider  sense,  as  includ- 
ing the  moral  law  of  God  in  general,  which  applied  to  the  Gen- 
tiles as  much  as  to  the  Jews.  See  Kom.  iii.  19.  The  law  is 
frequently  conceived  by  Paul  with  this  wider  reference,  as  a 
principle  which  has  its  chief  representative  in  the  Mosaic  law, 
but  the  applications  of  which  are  much  wider.  See  on  Rom. 
ii.  12.  This  law  is  conceived  here  as  a  hond,  a  hill  (>f  debt, 
standing  against  those  who  have  not  received  Christ.  As  the 
form  of  error  at  Oolossae  was  largely  Judaic,  insisting  on  the 
Jewish  ceremonial  law,  the  phrase  is  probably  colored  by  this 
fact.     Compare  Eph.  ii.  15. 

Which  was  contrary  to  us  (S  ^f  inrevavrlov  ^fiiv).  He  has 
just  said  which  was  against  us  (to  koSt  riftSiv) ;  which  stood  to 


Cu.  IL]  THB  EPISTLB  TO  THB  GOLOSSIANa  491 

our  debit,  binding  us  legally.  This  phrase  enlarges  on  that 
idea,  emphasizing  the  hostile  character  of  the  bond,  as  a  hin- 
drance. Compare  Bom.  iv.  15 ;  v.  20 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  56 ;  Gal.  iii. 
23.  ''  Law  is  against  us,  because  it  comes  like  a  taskmaster, 
bidding  us  do,  but  neither  putting  the  inclination  into  our 
hearts  nor  the  power  into  our  hands.  And  law  is  against  us,  be- 
cause the  revelation  of  unfulfilled  duty  is  the  accusation  of  the 
defaulter,  and  a  revelation  to  him  of  his  guilt  And  law  is 
against  us,  because  it  comes  with  threatenings  and  foretastes 
of  penalty  and  pain.  Thus,  as  standard,  accuser,  and  avenger 
it  is  against  us  "  (Maclaren). 

Took  it  out  of  the  way  {airrh  Hp/eev  i/e  rod  fii<rov).  Lit,  out 
of  the  midst 

Nailing  it  to  His  cross  {yrpo(niK&aa^  avrh  r^  cravp^). 
Bev.,  the  cross.  The  verb  occurs  nowhere  else.  The  law  with 
its  decrees  was  abolished  in  Chiist's  death,  as  if  crucified  with 
Him.  It  was  no  longer  in  the  midsty  in  the  foreground,  as  a 
debtor's  obligation  is  perpetually  before  him,  embarrassing  his 
whole  life.  Ignatius :  '^  I  perceived  that  ye  were  settled  in  un- 
raovable  faith,  as  if  nailed  {KoSrfXtofUvov^)  upon  the  cross  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  both  in  flesh  and  spirit "  (To  Smyrna,  i.). 

15.  Having  spoiled  principalities  and  powers  {iirexSv- 
adfievo^  r^9  apx^  ^  "^^  i^va-la^).  For  the  verb  spoiled^  see 
on  putting  offj  ver.  11.  Tlie  principalities  and  powers  are  the 
angelic  hosts  through  whose  ministry  tlie  law  was  given. 
See  Deut  xxxiii.  2 ;  Acts  vii.  53 ;  Heb.  ii.  2 ;  Gal.  iii.  19. 
Great  importance  was  attached,  in  the  later  rabbinical  schools, 
to  the  angels  who  assisted  in  giving  the  law ;  and  that  fact  was 
not  without  influence  in  shaping  the  doctrine  of  angelic  media- 
tors, one  of  the  elements  of  the  Colossian  heresy,  which  was 
partly  Judaic.  This  doctrine  Paul  strikes  at  in  ch.  i.  16 ;  ii. 
10 ;  here,  and  ver.  18.  God  put  off  from  himself ^  when  the 
bond  of  the  law  was  rendered  void  in  Clirist's  crucifixion,  that 
ministry  of  angels  which  waited  on  the  giving  of  the  law,  re- 
vealing Christ  as  the  sole  mediator,  the  head  of  every  principal- 
ity and  power  (ver.  10).  The  directness  of  the  gospel  ministi-a- 
tion,  as  contrasted  with  the  indirectness  of  the  \egBX  ministra- 


WORD   STtrulES   IK  THB  NEW  TE8TAMBKT. 


.  19  sqq.;  3  Cor.  ui.  12 


tion,  is  tonched  upoc  by  Paul  in  Gal.  i 
sqq. ;  Heb.  ii.  2. 

He  made  a  show  of  them  {iSetrf/jATia-fv).  Only  here  and 
Matt.  i.  1!:*,  see  note.  Tiie  coinpoiiiid  wapoBeiy/iaTC^a  to  ejjpogo 
to  public  infamy,  is  found  Heb.  vi.  6  ;  and  Beiy/io,  example,  in 
Jude  7.  Tbe  word  ia  unknown  to  claasieal  Greek.  Tlie  mean- 
ing here  is  to  niake  a  display  of,  exhibit.  He  showed  tbein  as 
subordinate  and  enbject  to  Christ,  Compare  especially  Heb,  i. 
tliroughout,  where  many  points  of  contact  with  the  first  two 
chapters  of  this  epistle  will  be  found. 

Openly  (en  iro/Jprjo-io).  Or  boldly.  See  on  Philem.  8.  Not 
publicly,  but  as  by  a  hold  stroke  putting  His  own  ministers, 
chosen  and  employed  for  anch  a  glorioaa  and  dignified  office, 
in  subjection  before  the  eyes  of  the  world. 

Triumphing  over  them  {Hpiafiffevaav  avrovt).  See  on  3 
Cor.  ii.  14.  If  we  take  this  plirase  in  the  sense  which  it  bears 
in  that  passage,  leading  in  triumph,  there  seems  something  in- 
congrnous  in  picturing  tlie  angelic  ministers  of  the  law  as  cap- 
tives of  war,  subjugated  and  led  iu  procession.  The  angeU 
"do  His  commandments  and  hearken  unto  the  voice  of  His 
word."  But  while  I  hold  to  that  explanation  in  2  Cor.,  I  see 
no  reason  why  the  word  may  not  bo  used  here  less  specifically 
in  the  sense  of  leading  a  festal  procession  in  which  all  share 
the  triumph;  the  heavenly  ministers,  though  set  aside  as  medi- 
ators, yet  exulting  in  the  triumph  of  the  one  and  only  Media- 
tor. Even  in  the  figure  in  2  Cor.,  the  captives  rejoice  in  the 
triumph.  Compare  Apoc.  xix,  11.  Our  knowledge  of  the 
word  5piafiffevto  is  not  so  extensive  or  accurate  as  to  warrant 
too  strict  limitations  in  our  definition. 

In  it  (ci>  airp).  The  cross.  Many  expositors,  however,  ren- 
der in  Ilim,  Christ.  This  I  adopt  as  harmonizing  with  the 
emphatic  references  to  Christ  which  occur  in  every  verse  from 
5  to  14;  Christ,  four  times;  in  Him,  four;  in  whom,  two; 
with  Him,  three.  In  it  is  necessary  only  if  the  subject  of  the 
sentence  is  Christ;  but  tlie  very  awkward  change  of  subject 


Ch.  il]  thb  epistle  to  the  colossians.  493 

from  God  {quickeTied  ics  together^  ver.  13)  is  qaite  unnecessary. 
God  is  the  subject  througliout.* 

16.  Therefore.  Conclusion  from  the  cancelling  of  the 
bond.  The  allusions  which  follow  (w.  16-19)  are  to  the  prac- 
tical and  theoretical  forms  of  the  Colossian*  error,  as  in  vv.  9- 
15  ;  excessive  ritualism,  asceticism,  and  angelic  mediation. 

Judge  (Kp^pirca).     Sit  in  judgment. 

Meat — drink  (JSpanrei — iroa-ei).  Properly,  eating^  drinking^ 
as  1  Cor.  viii.  4 ;  but  the  nouns  are  also  used  for  that  which  is 
eaten  or  drunk,  as  John  iv.  32  (see  note) ;  yi.  27,  55 ;  Bom.  xiv. 
17.  For  the  subject-matter  compare  Bom.  xiv.  17;  1  Cor. 
viii.  8 ;  Heb.  ix.  10,  and  note  on  Mark  vii.  19.  The  Mosaic 
law  contained  very  few  provisions  concerning  drinks.  See 
Levit.  X.  9 ;  xi.  34,  36 ;  Num.  vi.  3.  Hence  it  is  probable  that 
the  false  teachers  had  extended  the  prohibitions  as  to  the  use 
of  wine  to  all  Christians.  The  Essenes  abjured  both  wine  and 
animal  food. 

*  I  adopt  this  explmnation  of  this  most  dif&oult  passage,  which  is  Ritsohl's 
and  Sabatier^s,  followed  bj  Alford,  as,  on  the  whole,  satisfying  most  of  the 
conditions  of  the  exegesis.  The  great  bodj  of  modem  ezegetes  interpret 
principeUitiei  and  powen  as  meaning  the  &Uanie  ho§U.  Some  explain  that 
Christ,  in  His  final  victorj  on  the  cross,  forever  put  awaj  from  Himself  the 
Satanic  powers  which  assailed  His  humanity,  and  which  clung  to  Him  like  a 
robe  (so  Lightr'oot  and  Ellicott).  Others,  that  Christ  stripped  off  the  armor 
from  these  vanquished  enemies  (so  Meyer,  Eladie,  Maolaren).  But  on  either 
of  these  explanations  it  may  fairly  be  asked  what  point  of  connection  with 
the  context  is  furnished  by  the  ideas  of  despoiling  or  of  putting  away  the 
poiT^ers  of  darkness.  How  is  the  fact  that  Christ  triumphed  over  the  infernal 
hosts  relevant  to  His  abrogating  the  legal  bond  in  His  crucifixion  ?  Our  ex- 
planation links  itself  with  the  fact  of  Christ's  headship  of  the  ranks  of  angels 
(ver.  10),  and  is  appropriate  in  view  of  the  heresy  of  angel- worship,  against 
which  a  direct  warning  follows  in  ver.  18.  It  also  enables  us  to  retain  the 
proper  middle  sense  of  kw§K9ua4fjMPot,  and  does  not  compel  us  to  read  it  here 
in  one  way.  and  in  another  way  in  ch.  iii.  9 ;  and  it  also  enables  us  to  avoid 
the  very  awkward  change  of  subject  from  Ood  to  Chrut^  which  Bishop  Light- 
foot's  explanation  necessitates.  I  find  my  own  view  confirmed  by  Mr.  G.  C. 
Findlay's  article  in  the  '*  Expositor,"  first  series,  x  ,  403.  The  case  is  put  by 
him  in  a  singularly  lucid  manner.  Without  admitting  his  conclusion  that 
Paurs  metaphor  in  2  Cor.  ii.  14  was  distinctly  shaped  by  the  Bacchic  festival, 
I  think  he  has  shown  suflicient  reason  for  aUowing  a  wider  interpretation  of 
I^^a,u3«^fl»,  as  indicated  in  my  note. 


494  WORD  BTODIBS  IH  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  (Ca.  It 

in  respect  {iv  i*ipti).     See  un  2  Cor.  iii.  10.    Lit.,  in  the  di- 

vision  or  category. 

Holyday  (copTiJv).  Festival  or  feaat-day.  The  annual  fes- 
tirala.  The  word  holyda/y  is  used  iu  its  earlier  BeDse  o£  a  sacred 
day. 

New  moon  {vovfj^viat).     Only  here  m  the  New  Testament. 

The  moiilMy  feetivals.  The  festival  of  the  new  moon  is  placed 
beside  the  Sabbath,  lea.  i.  13 ;  Ezek.  xlvi.  1.  The  day  was 
celebrated  by  blowing  of  trunipela,  special  sacrifices,  feasting, 
and  religious  instruction.  Labor  was  suspended,  and  no  na- 
tional or  private  fasta  were  permitted  to  take  place.  The 
authorities  were  at  great  pains  to  fix  accurately  the  commence- 
ment of  the  month  denoted  by  the  appearance  of  the  new 
moon.  Messengers  were  placed  on  commanding  heights  to 
watch  the  sky,  and  as  soon  as  the  new  moon  appeared,  they 
hastened  to  eommnnicate  it  to  the  synod,  being  allowed  even  to 
travel  on  tiie  Sabbath  for  this  purpose.  The  witnesses  were 
assembled  and  examined,  and  when  the  judges  were  satisfied 
the  president  pronounced  the  words  if  is  sanctified,  and  the  day 
was  declared  new  vioon. 

Sabbath  days  {aa^^artav).  The  weekly  festivals.  Kev„ 
correctly,  daij,  the  plural  being  need  for  the  singular.  See  on 
Luke  iv.  31 ;  Acts  xx.  7,  The  plural  is  only  once  used  in  the 
New  Testament  of  more  than  a  single  day  (Acts  xvii.  2).  The 
same  enumeration  of  sacred  seasons  occurs  1  Chron.  xxxiii.  31 ; 
2  Chron.  ii.  4;  xxxi.  3;  Ezek.  xlv.  17;  Hos.  ii.  11. 

17.  Which  are.  Explanatory.  Seeing  they  are.  Referr- 
ing to  all  the  particulars  of  ver.  16, 

Shadow  of  things  to  come.  Shadow,  not  sketch  or  out- 
line, as  is  shown  by  hoily  following.     The  Mosaic  ritual  system 

was  to  the  great  verities  of  tiie  Gospel  what  the  shadow  is  to  the 
man,  a  mere  general  type  or  resemblance. 

The  body  Is  Christ's.  The  suhntance  belongs  to  the  Clirist- 
ian  economy.  It  is  derived  from  Christ,  and  can  be  realized 
only  throngh  anion  with  Him. 


I 


A 


Ch.  U.]  THB  EPISTLB  to  THB  GOLOSSIANa  495 

18.  Beguile  of  reward  {/carafipafieuirm).  Only  here  Id  the 
New  Testament  From  /card  agaifistj  fipafievm  to  act  as  a 
jvdge  or  umpire.  Hence  to  decide  against  one,  or  to  declare 
him  unworthy  ofthejrrize.  Bishop  Lightfoot's  rendering  rob 
you  of  your  prize^  adopted  by  Rev.,  omits  the  judicial  idea,* 
which,  however,  I  think  mast  be  retained,  in  continuation  of  the 
idea  of  judgment  in  ver.  16,  ^^  let  no  man  judge,"  etc.  The  at- 
titude of  the  false  teachers  would  involve  their  sitting  in  judg- 
ment as  to  the  future  reward  of  those  who  refused  their 
doctrine  of  angelic  mediation.  Paul  speaks  from  the  stand- 
point of  their  daim. 

In  a  voluntary  humility  {BiXav  hf  Taweivo^poavvTn).  ^^' 
der  delighting  in  humility.  This  rendering  is  well  supported 
by  Septuagint  usage.  See  1  Sam.  xviii.  22 ;  2  Sam.  xv.  26 ; 
1  Kings  X.  9;  2  Chron.  ix.  S.f  It  falls  in,  in  the  regular 
participial  series,  with  the  other  declarations  as  to  the  vain 
conceit  of  the  teachers ;  signifying  not  their  purpose  or  their 
wish  to  deprive  the  Christians  of  their  reward,  but  their  vain 
enthusiasm  for  their  false  doctrine,  and  their  conceited  self- 
complacency  which  prompted  them  to  sit  as  judges.  The  wor- 
ship of  angels  involved  a  sliow  of  humility,  an  affectation  of 
superior  reverence  for  God,  as  shown  in  the  reluctance  to  at- 
tempt to  approach  God  otherwise  than  indirectly  :  in  its  as- 
sumption that  humanity,  debased  by  the  contact  with  matter, 
must  reach  after  God  through  successive  grades  of  intermediate 
beings.     For  humility^  see  on  Matt.  xi.  29. 

Worship  of  angels  {^prfocelif).  See  on  religious,  Jas.  i.  26. 
Defining  the  direction  which  their  humility  assumed.  The 
usage  of  the  Septuagint  and  of  the  New  Testament  limits  the 
meaning  to  the  external  aspects  of  worship.  Compare  Acts 
xxvi.  5 ;  Jas.  1.  27. 


*  Which  is  ezoladed  bj  Mejer  and  D wight. 

f  The  argument  that  it  is  not  borne  oat  bj  New-TeftMnent  usage  is  some- 
what weakened  in  the  case  of  an  epistle  which  bristles  with  norel  expressions. 
There  are  seventeen  words  in  this  chapter  which  ooour  nowhere  else  in  the 
New  Testament 


WORD  STUDIES   IN   THE   NEW   TESTAMENT. 


ICn.  n 


Intruding  {ift^aTtwov),  Bsv.,  diceliin^  in.  On\y  bere  in 
the  New  Tebtauieiit,  It  Ib  used  in  tliree  senses:  1.  To  step  in 
or  upon,  thence  to  haunt  or  frequent.  So  Aesch^'lus  :  "  A  cei't- 
ain  island  wliicli  Pan  freqtieiiia  on  itB  bcacli  "  ("Persae,"  449). 
2.  To  invade.  So  iu  Apocrypha,  1  Mace.  xii.  25;  xiii.  20;  xiv. 
31 ;  XV,  40.  3.  To  enter  into  for  examinatiwi  /  to  itiveeiiffate 
or  discuss  a  subject.  So  3  Mace.  ii.  30,  and  so  Pbilo,  who  com- 
pares truth-seekers  to  well-diggers.  Patristic  writers  use  it  of 
aewrching  the  heart,  and  of  investigating  divine  mysteries.  By- 
zantine lexicographers  explain  it  by  fip-ew  to  seek ;  efepewtwu  to 
track  out;  tTKOTreti)  to  consider.  In  this  last  sense  the  word  is 
probably  need  here  of  tlie  false  teachers  who  professed  to  see 
heavenly  truth  in  visions,  and  to  investigate  and  discuss  philo- 
BOphically  the  revelation  they  had  received. 

Which  he  hath  not  seen.  Not  must  be  omitted:  which 
be  imagines  or  professes  tliat  he  has  seen  in  vision.  Ironical. 
"If,  as  we  may  easily  imagine,  these  pretenders  were  accust- 
omed to  say  with  an  imposing  and  mysterious  air,  '  I  have 
seen,  ah  1  I  liave  seen,' — in  relating  alleged  visions  of  lieavenly 
things,  the  Colosaiana  would  understand  the  reference  well 
enough  "  (Fiiidlay). 

Vainly  puffed  up  {elui)  ^werKnj/Mvo?).  Yainly  charactei'izes 
the  emptiness  of  such  pretension;  puffedup,  the  swelling  intel- 
lectual pride  of  those  who  make  it.  See  on  1  Cor.  iv.  6  ;  and 
compare  1  Cor,  viii,  1.  The  humility  is  thus  characterized  aa 
affected,  and  the  teachers  as  charlatans. 

By  his  fleshly  mind  {irrrh  tov  voo<!  t^s  aapKov  avrov).     Lit., 

hy  the  mind  of  hia  flesh.  The  intellectual  faculty  in  its  moral 
aspects  as  determined  by  the  fleshly,  sinful  nature.  See  on 
Rom.  viii.  23.  Compare" Rom.  vii,  22-25;  viii.  7.  The  teach- 
ers boasted  that  they  were  gnided  hy  the  higher  reason.  Paul 
describes  their  higher  reason  as  carnal.* 


*  The  passage  is  beset  irilh  difficulties.  Bishop  Lighlfoot  gives  up  the 
words  ft  iiaoKwr  liifianiur.  aasumiug  ■  oormptioll  ot  the  text,  and  sulisti luting 
•□  ingenioiii  cnnjeotnrkl  reading.  His  note  Is  deeply  interesting.  See  also 
Ut.  Fiadlay's  irticle  alluded  to  In  note  on  ver.  IQ,  and  Hejer. 


ch.  u.]  the  epistle  to  the  colossians.  497 

19.  Holding  the  head  {xpar&v  rijp  KetJMXijp).  Holding  hi/ 
or  fasty  as  commonly  in  the  New  Testament.  Compare  Soph- 
ocles: ^'If  thou  art  to  nde  {ap^i^)  this  land,  even  as  thou  hold- 
est  it  (/tf/)aT€i9."  "  Oedipns  Tyrannus,"  54).  The  head,  Christ 
as  contrasted  with  the  angelic  mediators. 

From  whom  (e^  ou).  Fixing  the  personal  reference  of  t/ie 
^^ead  to  Christ.     Compare  Eph.  iv.  16. 

By  joints  and  bands  {tih  r&v  cufwp  koX  awSicfA^p).  Joints 
{a(f>&v)  only  here  and  Eph.  iv.  16.  The  word  means  primarily 
touching^  and  is  used  in  classical  Greek  of  the  touch  upon  harp- 
strings,  or  the  grip  of  a  wrestler.  Not  quite  the  same  slb  joints 
in  the  sense  of  the  parts  in  contact^  but  the  relations  between 
the  adjacent  parts.  The  actual  connection  is  expressed  by 
hands  *  or  ligaments. 

Ministered  ((hrixppnyovfUvop).  See  on  addj  2  Pet  i.  5. 
Rev.,  svpplied. 

Knit  together.  See  on  ver.  2.  '^  The  discoveries  of  mod- 
em physiology  have  invested  the  apostle's  language  with  far 
greater  distinctness  and  force  than  it  can  have  worn  to  his  own 
contemporaries.  Any  exposition  of  the  nervous  system  more 
especially  reads  like  a  commentary  on  the  image  of  the  relations 
between  the  body  and  the  head.  At  every  turn  we  meet  with 
some  fresh  illustration  which  kindles  it  with  a  flood  of  light. 
The  volition  communicated  from  the  brain  to  the  limbs,  the 
sensations  of  the  extremities  telegraphed  back  to  the  brain,  the 
absolute  mutual  sympathy  between  the  head  and  the  members, 
the  instantaneous  paralysis  ensuing  on  the  interruption  of  con- 
tinuity, all  these  add  to  the  completeness  and  life  of  the  image '* 
(Lightfoot). 

20.  Ye  be  dead  {aw^^avere).  Be  v.,  more  correctly,  ye  died  ; 
the  aorist  tense  indicating  a  definite  event.  Paul  uses  the  word 
died  in  many  different  relations,  expressing  that  with  which 


*  See  the  rerj  interesting  iUnftnttions  from  Aristotle  in  Lightfoot 
Vol.  m.— 82 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NKW  TESTAMENT. 


TliuB,  died  unto  sin,  niito  e^f, 


death  dissolves  the  conaection. 

unto  the  law,  unto  the  world. 

Rudiments  of  the  world.  Elementarj  teachings  atid  prac- 
tices the  peculiar  sphere  of  which  is  the  world.  World  {mafLov) 
has  its  ethical  eenee,  the  aiun-total  of  human  life  in  the  ordered 
world,  considered  apart  from,  alienated  from,  and  hostile  to 
God,  and  of  the  earthly  things  which  seduce  from  God.  See 
on  John  i.  9. 

Are  ye  subject  to  ordinances  {SvyftaTl^ea^).  Only  here 
in  the  New  Testament.  Uev.,  subject  yoursel/vee.  Better  pas- 
sive, as  emphaeiziug  spiritual  bondage.  Why  do  ye  submit  to 
be  dictated  to  ?  See  on  1  Cor,  i.  22,  where  the  imperious  atti- 
tude of  the  Jews  appears  in  their  demanding  credentials  of  tiio 
Gospel  as  sole  jiOBseesora  of  the  truth.  Tlie  ordinances  include 
both  those  of  the  law  and  of  philoBophy. 

21.  Touch— taste— handle  (S-fi? — ytixT^ — ^^yp*)-  "Attto- 
fiai,  A.  v.,  touch,  is  properly  to  fasten,  owe's  self  to  or  ding  to. 
So  John  XX.  17  (note).  Frequently  rendered  touch  in  the  New 
Testament,  and  used  in  most  cases  of  Christ's  touching  or  being 
touched  by  the  diseased.  To  get  hands  on  so  as  to  injure,  1 
John  V.  18,  To  have  intercourse  with,  1  Cor.  vii.  1 ;  2  Cor.  vi, 
17.  Thus,  in  every  case,  the  contact  described  exerts  a  modify- 
ing influence,  and  a  more  permanent  contact  or  effect  of  contact 
is  often  implied  than  is  expressed  by  touch.  "  The  idea  of  h 
voluntary  or  conscious  effort  is  often  involved."  No  ein^le 
English  word  will  express  all  these  phases  of  meaning.  IJunUU' 
comes,  perhaps,  as  near  as  any  other,  especially  in  its  sense  of 
treatment,  as  when  we  say  that  a  speaker  or  writer  handles  a 
subject ;  or  that  a  man  is  roughly  handled  by  his  enemies. 
This  wider  and  stronger  sense  does  not  attach  to  Svftdvem, 
A.  v.,  handle,  though  the  two  words  are  sometimes  used  inter- 
changeably, as  Exod.  xix.  12,  and  though  Siyydveiv  also  implies 
s  modifying  contact,  unlike  ^Xatpato,  which  signifies  to  touch 
with  a  view  of  ascertaining  the  ifualUi/  of  the  object ;  to  feel 
aHer,  to  grope.  See  Luke  xxiv.  39;  Acts  xvii.  27.  Thus 
•^\a^lvZa  is  blind-man^ sbiiff.     The  contact  implied  by  Svyytl- 


Gh.  IL]  THB  EPISTLB  to  the  COLOSSIANa  499 

P€ip  is  more  Bnperficial  and  transitory.  It  lies  between  iirrofuu 
and  y^XtufniM.  Thus  we  have  here  a  climax  which  is  lost  in 
the  A.  Y.  Handle  noty  taste  not^  do  not  even  touch.  Rev., 
handle  not,  nor  taste,  nor  touch. 

22.  Which  things.    Meats,  drinks,  etc 

Are  to  perish  {iartv  ek  ^Sop^i/).  Lit,  are  for  corruption; 
destined  for  {ek).  Corruption^  in  the  physical  sense  of  decom- 
position. 

With  the  using  (r^  airoxpii<r€i).  Only  here  in  the  New 
Testament.  Bather,  tuing  up,  consumption.  Their  very  using 
destroys  theni.    Which  things — using  form  a  parenthesis. 

After  the  commandments  and  doctrines  {xarii  r^  ivraX- 
fiara  tcaX  BiBaaKoXla^).  Connect  with  vv.  20,  21.  ^EvrdKfMra 
are  specific  injunctions.  Bev.,  better,  precepts  :  Siiaa-KoXla^^ 
more  general,  doctrinal  instructions.  Both  answer  to  the  rudi- 
ments of  the  world  {yer.  20).  Compare  Matt.  xv.  1-20  ;  Mark 
vii.  1-23. 

23.  Which  things  (2rii/a).  The  double  relative  classifies,  put- 
ting these  precepts  and  teachings,  and  all  that  are  like  them,  in 
one  category:  a  dass  of  things  which.  For  similar  usage,  see 
Gal.  iv.  24 ;  v.  19 ;  Philip,  iv.  3. 

Have  a  show  of  wisdom  {iariv  Xoyov  ixpvra  tro^loi).  Lit., 
are  hamvng  a  reputation  for  wisdom.  The  finite  verb  ar«,  with 
the  participle  hamvng,  denotes  what  is  habitual,  and  marks  the 
permanent  quality  of  these  precepts,  etc.  Aiiyou,  A.  V.,  show, 
is  rather  plausible  reason,  a  show  of  reason,  and  hence  a  rep- 
utation.    They  pass  popularly  for  wisdom. 

Will-worship  (iSeXol^prfirKsif).  Only  here  in  the  New  Test- 
ament. Worship  self-imposed  or  volunteered.  Similar  com- 
pounds of  iSiXoD  to  wiU  sometimes  carry  the  meaning  oi pre- 
tence, tmreaZity  /  as  iBOJucto^xy;  pretending  deafness  /  i§€ko- 
prfTfop  a  pretentious  orator.  Augustine  makes  hybrid  Latin 
compounds,  as  thelodives,  one  who  takes  on  the  airs  of  a  rich 
man  /  thelosapiens,  one  who  effects  wisdom.  More  commonly, 
however,  the  sense  is  that  of  vohmtariness  or  officiousness. 


600 


WORD  8TDDIBS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch,  IL 


Tlius  TfaucjdideB  saje  that  Pitbias  acted  as  eSeXoTrpo^evo^  vni- 
v/titanj  ageiU  or  repreeentative  of  the  Athenians  (iii.,  70).  .E^e- 
Xoicivhwo^  is  rmming  volurUarily  into  <langer,  foolltardy : 
^eXoSovXcui  is  ifolujitary  alaiiery.  The  idea  of  pretence  seems 
to  be  involved  here  along  with  that  of  adf-ckoaen  worship. 

Humility.     Voluntary  and  affected. 

And  neglecting;  {koI  tu^tSi^).  Only  here  in  the  !N'ew  Test- 
ament. From  a  not  and  (f>tiBofiat  io  spare.  Hence  unsparing 
treatment  or  severity.  Also  iieed  for  laviahneas,  extravagance 
of  means  and  of  life.  So  Thucydides  :  "  The  running  aground 
of  theBhipa  wa8  7'ecX-/eM(ai^(S^?,"  iv.,26),  A^&rtiwy  is  wrong. 
Rev.,  correctly,  severity.  The  xal  and  before  severity  is  doubt- 
ful. If  omitted,  seventy  to  the  body  defines  have  a  rejnUatieni. 
for  wisdom,  the  outward  austerity  being  that  which  makes  the 
populitr  impression  of  a  higher  wisdom. 

In  any  honor  (en  Ti/t§  tihI).  Rev.,  better,  of  any  value. 
The  real  value  of  these  ascetic  practices  contrasted  with  their 
popular  estimation.  Price  or  value  is  the  original  meaning  of 
Tifi^,  and  its  use  in  this  sense  is  frequent  in  classical  Greek.  So 
in  the  New  Testament,  as  Matt,  xxvii.  9,  ''the  price  of  Iliiii 
who  was  priced  (Tert/^j^TOu)."  In  Paul,  1  Cor.  vi,  20 ;  vii,  23, 
The  idea  of  value  appears  in  1  Pet,  i.  19.  "  Ye  were  redeemed 
— with  the  j>recioMj*  (rt^/p)  blood  of  Christ ; "  something  of  real 
and  adequate  value.  So  1  Pet.  ii.  4,  of  Christ  as  the  living 
iXoi\.&,  precious  {limfwp),  of  recognized  value. 

To  the  satisfying  {vpoK  TrXriafiovr^v).  To  means  a»  a  rem- 
edy against.  nKfja-fiovrfv  denotes  repletion,  surfeiting.  Paul 
says  that  these  ascetic  observances,  while  they  appeal  to  men 
as  indications  of  Gii)^>erior  wisdom  and  piety,  have  do  value  as 
remedies  against  sensual  indulgence. 


Ch.  UL]  the  epistle  to  the  COLOSSIAN&  501 


CHAPTER   in. 

1.  Be  risen  (avmiyipSfp'e).  Rev.,  correctly,  v>ere  raised. 
See  ch.  ii.  12.  In  their  baptism  in  which  thej  €lied  (ch.  ii.  20). 
Compare  Rom.  vi.  2  sqq. 

Sitteth  {ioTiv  /caSiifievosi).  According  to  the  A.  V.  the  lit- 
eral rendering  woold  be  is  sitting.  Is^  however,  must  be  taken 
separately ;  where  Christ  is^  sealed.  Sealed  is  a  secondary  pred- 
icate, as  hidden  in  ch.  ii.  3.  Compare  Eph.  ii.  4-6;  Apoc. 
iii.  21. 

2.  Set  your  affection  {<f>pov€lT€).  Lit.,  he  minded,  think.  As 
Rev.,  set  your  mind.  Seek  marks  the  practical  striving  ;  set 
your  mindy  the  inward  impulse  and  disposition.  Both  must 
be  directed  at  things  above.  "  Yon  must  not  only  seek  heaven, 
you  must  think  heaven"  (Lightfoot).  Compare  Philip,  iii. 
19,  20. 

3.  Ye  are  dead  {irTeSdvere).  Rev.,  correctly,  ye  died,  as  ch. 
ii.  20. 

Is  hid  {tcitcpuTTTOi).  Your  new  spiritual  life  is  no  longer  in 
the  sphere  of  the  earthly  and  sensual,  but  is  with  the  life  of 
the  risen  Christ,  who  is  unseen  with  God.  Compare  Philip, 
iii.  20. 

4.  Who  is  our  life  (Sbi^).  See  on  John  i.  4.  The  life  is  not 
only  loith  Christ,  it  is  Christ.  Compare  John  xiv.  6;  2  Cor.  iv. 
10,  11 ;  1  John  v.  11,  12.  For  the  change  of  person,  our  for 
your,  see  on  ch.  ii.  13. 

Shall  appear  {<f)ap€p»3^).  Rev.,  correctly,  shM  he  m^ani- 
fested.     Compare  1  John  iii.  2,  note.     See  on  Rom  iii.  21. 

In  glory.     Compare  Rom.  viii.  17. 

5.  Mortify  (vc/c/xoo-are).  Only  here,  Rom.  iv.  19;  Heb. 
xi.  12.  Mortify  is  used  in  its  literal  sense  of  jnd  to  death. 


502  WOttD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Cu.  UL 

So  Erasmus :  "  Christ  was  mortified  and  killed."     And  Shak- 
speare: 

' ' hii  wildnam  mortified  in  him, 

Seemed  to  die  too." 

"1  HenrjV.,  I.  28 '■ 

Members  (piK'rj).  See  on  Rom.  vi.  13.  Tliej)%«Mw/ mem- 
bers, so  far  aa  as  they  are  employed  in  the  service  of  sin.  The 
word  falls  in  with  the  alluBions  to  bodily  austerities  in  ch.  ii. 

Which  are  upon  the  earth.     Compare  ver.  2.     The  or^ns 

of  the  earthly  and  sensuous  life. 

Fornication,  etc.  In  apposition  with  ■membera,  denoting 
the  modes  in  which  the  members  sinfully  exert  themselves. 

Inordinate  affection,  evil  concupiscence  {-rrdSo^,  eirt- 
Su/iiav  /eoKrip).     See  on  Rom.  i.  26. 

And  covetousness  {koI  vXeove^Cav).  And  has  a  climactic 
force ;  and  e^xxially  y  see  on  Rom.  i.  29. 

Which  is  {^11  etmv).  The  compound  relative,  explanatory 
and  classifying.  Seeing  ii  stands  in  the  oaAegory  of.  Compare 
Eph.  V.  5. 

Idolatry.     See  on  1  Cor.  v.  10. 

6.  Wrath — comath.  Compare  Rom.  i.  18.  The  present 
tense  denotes  the  certainty  of  the  future  event,  as  Matt.  xvii. 
II ;  John  iv.  31.    The  beat  texts  omit  upon  the  children  ofdit- 


7.  In  the  which  (en  oU).  The  omission  of  upon  the  chil- 
dren, etc.,  necessitates  the  reference  to  which  things  (ver.  6) 
Otherwise  we  might  render  aviong  whom. 

Walked— lived.  Walked,  reierrln^  to  their  practice,  Www/, 
to  their  condition.  Their  conduct  and  their  condition  agreed. 
Compare  Gal.  v.  25. 

8,  Put  off  (raTro5«<r3e).  Compare  Rom.  xiii.  12 ;  Eph.  iv. 
22,  25  ;  Heb.  xii.  1  ;  Jas.  i.  21 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  1. 


Anger,  wrath  (opyijv,  Svfiov).     See  on  John  iii.  36. 


m 


ch.  iil]  thb  bpistlb  to  thb  colossianb.  503 

Malice  {tceuclav).    See  on  naugktvneaa^  Jas.  i.  21. 

Blasphemy  {pKour^idaii).  See  on  Mark  vii.  22.  Com- 
pare Rom.  iiL  8 ;  xiv.  16  ;  1  Cor.  iv.  13  ;  Eph.  iv.  31.  Rev. 
raili/ng. 

Filthy  communication  {altrxpoKorflav).    Only  here  in  the 
New  Testament.    Not  merely  fiUhy  talking^  as  A.  V.,   but 
fovl-mouthed  abuse.     Rev.,  shameful  speaking. 

Out  of  your  mouth.  Construe  with  the  preceding  word. 
As  ch.  ii.  20-22  suggests  Christ's  words  in  Matt  xv.  1-20,  this 
phrase  suggests  Matt.  xv.  11, 18. 

9.  Seeing  that  ye  have  put  off  {oireKBvadfAevoi).  See  on 
ch.  ii.  15. 

The  old  man.    See  on  Rom.  vi.  6. 

10.  New  {viov).  See  on  Matt  xxvi.  29.  Compare  Eph.  v. 
24. 

Is  renewed  {avascaivovtAevov).  Rev.,  better,  giving  the  force 
of  tlie  present  participle,  ie  being  renewed  :  in  process  of  con- 
tinuous renewal.  The  word  /caivo^  iiew^  which  enters  into  the 
composition  of  the  verb,  gives  the  idea  of  qtudity.  Compare 
2  Cor.  iv.  16,  and  the  contrast  in  Eph.  iv.  22. 

In  knowledge  {ek  hriyvwrw).  Rev.,  correctly,  unto  know- 
ledge, the  end  to  which  Uie  renewal  tended.  Compare  Eph. 
iv.  13. 

After  the  image.  Construe  with  renewed.  Compare  Eph. 
iv.  24,  and  see  Gen.  i.  26,  27. 

Where  there  is  (Arot;  &t).  Where^  in  the  renewed  condi- 
tion ;  there  is,  better,  as  Rev.,  can  he  :  hn  strengthened  from  h 
in  signifies  not  merely  the  fact  hut  the  impassibility :  there  is 
no  roam  for. 

Greek,  Jew,  etc.  Compare  Oal.  iii.  28.  National,  ritual, 
intellectual,  and  social  diversities  are  specified.  The  reference 
is  probably  shaped  by  the  conditions  of  the  Colossian  church, 
where  the  form  of  error  was  partly  Judaistic  and  ceremonial, 


WORD   STUDIES  lit  THE   NEW  TESTAMENT. 


iuaistiugon  circmacisioij ;  where  tlie  pretence  of  snperior  kimii 
ledge  affected  cunterupt  for  the  rude  barburian,  and  where  tlm 
dietiiiction  of  master  and  slave  had  place  as  elsewhere. 

Circumcision.     For  tha   circumcised.     So    Rom.    iv,    12; 

Eph.  ii.  11;  Philip,  iii.  3. 

Barbarian,  Scythian.  See  on  1  Cor.  xiv.  11.  The  dis- 
tinction is  from  the  Greek  and  Koinau  point  of  view,  where  the 
line  is  drawn  hy  cuitnre,  as  between  the  Jew  and  the  Greek  it 
was  drawn  by  religious  privilege.  Froni  the  former  stand-point 
the  Jew  ranked  as  a  barbarian.  Scythiun.  "  More  barbarous 
than  the  barbarians"  (Bengel).  Hippocrates  describes  them  aa 
widely  different  from  the  rest  of  mankind,  and  like  to  nothing 
but  themselves, and  gives  an  absurd  description  of  their  physic- 
al peculiarities.  Ilerodotus  describes  them  as  living  in  wagons, 
offering  hnman  sacrifices,  scalping  and  sometimes  flaj^ing  slain 
enemies,  drinking  their  blood,  and  using  their  skulls  for  drink- 
ing-cupa.  When  a  king  dice,  one  of  his  concubines  is  strangled 
and  buried  with  him,  and,  at  the  close  of  a  year,  fifty  of  his 
attendants  are  strangled,  disembowelled,  mounted  on  dead 
horses,  and  left  in  a  circle  ronnd  his  tomb.*  The  Scythians 
passed  through  Palestine  on  tiieir  road  to  Egj'pt,  e.c.  600,  and 
a  trace  of  their  invasion  is  supposed  to  liave  existed  in  tlie  name 
ScytkojtoUa,  by  which  Beth  Shean\  was  known  in  Christ's  time. 
Ezekiel  apparently  refers  to  them  (xxxviii.,  xxxix.)  under  the 
name  Gog,  which  reappears  in  the  Apocalypse.  See  on  Apoc 
XX.  84 


Bowels  of 
I ;  2  Cor.  i.  3 


BfCies  (iTjrkArfyya  oucrtpfiov).    See  on  1  Pet.  i 
Kev.,  a  heart  of  compassion. 

Kindness  {j(pi}tTTiyn]Ta),     See  on  Rom.  iii.  12. 

Meekness  (irpatSnjToi).     See  on  Matt.  v.  5. 


*  Sefl  Book  {t.  ,  uid  RHwIiuaon'B  inMreMiiig  notes. 
f  In  tha  Jordui  Title;,  about  tvelve  miles  Bouth  ot  ths  Se&  of  Qalile*,  uid 
four  miles   west  of  llie   Jordan.     Ste  1  Chron.  vii.  2B  ;  Jadg.  i.  37 ;  1  8 

xxx\.  10,  12 

X  Sea  Rawllnson'B  "  Herodotna,"  vol.  i.,  Eaaaj  III. 


Ch.  IIL}  THB  BPISTIiB  TO  THfl  COLOSS1AN8.  505 

Long-sufFering  (juiKpoSvfAicaf).    See  on  Jas.  y.  7. 

13.  One  another — one  another  (oXXi^Xoi^ — eavroU).  Lit., 
one  another — yourselves.  For  a  similar  variation  of  the  pro- 
noun see  Eph.  iv.  32 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  8-10.  The  latter  prononn 
emphasizes  the  fact  that  they  are  aU  members  of  Christ's  body 
— everyone  members  one  of  another — so  that,  in  forgiving  each 
other  they  forgive  themsehes. 

Quarrel  (jiofi^v).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  Caitse 
of  hhime.  Key.,  oom^plaint.  The  A.  Y.  nses  quarrel  in  its 
earlier  sense  of  cause  ofcomplairU,    So  Shakspeare : 

"  The  ladj  Beatrioe  hitth  *  guarrd  to  yoa. " 

♦*  Much  Ado,"  IL,  1. 

'*  Agftinit  whom  comeit  thou,  and  what's  thj  quarrdf  '* 

««BichtfdIL.**L,8,  88. 

Holinshed :  ^^He  thought  he  had  a  good  jtiorr^  to  attack  him." 
It  was  nsed  of  a  plaintiff's  action  at  law,  like  the  Latin  querela. 

14.  Above  all  (M  ircUriv).  According  to  the  metaphor  of 
the  garment     Over  aJl,  like  an  upper  garment,  jtm^  cm,  etc. 

Charity.     See  on  1  Cor.  xiii.  1. 

Bond  of  perfectness  (0wS6a/iO9  r^  rtKsumfrwi).  Love 
embraces  and  knits  together  all  the  virtues.  TeKsUmfs perfect- 
ness is  a  collective  idea,  a  result  of  combination^  to  which  bond 
is  appropriate.  Compare  Plato:  ^^But  two  things  cannot  be 
held  together  without  a  third ;  they  must  have  some  bond  of 
union.  And  the  fairest  bond  is  that  which  most  completely 
fuses  and  is  fused  into  the  things  which  are  bound "  (**  Titn- 
aeus,"  31). 

15.  Peace  of  Christ.  Which  comes  from  Christ.  See  John 
xiv.  27  ;  Eph.  ii.  14. 

Rule  (fipafieverm).  Lit,  he  umpire.  Only  here  in  the  New 
Testament  See  on  ch.  ii.  18.  The  previous  references  to  oc- 
casions for  meekness,  long-suffering,  forbearance,  forgiveness, 
etc.,  indicate  a  conflict  of  passions  and  motives  in  the  heart 


606  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW  TBSTAMKST.  [Ch.  in 

Cliriet  is  the  one  who  adjuBts  all  these,  so  that  the  metapilo^ 
ical  BenBo  is  appropriate,  as  in  ch.  ii.  18. 

Called  in  one  body.     See  Epb.  iv.  i.      So  that  ^e  are  in 

one  body  according  to  your  call. 

16.  The  word  of  Christ.  The  only  occarrence  of  the 
phrase.     The  word  spoken  by  Christ. 

Richly.     See  oa  Rom.  ii.  4,  and  compare  ch.  i.  27. 

In  all  wisdom.  Some  connect  with  the  preceding  worde, 
others  with  the  following — in  all  wisdom,  teaching,  etc.  The 
latter  eeema  preferable,  especially  in  view  of  ch.  i.  28,  where 
tlie  phrase  occurs  teaching  and  admoni^USug  in  all  toisdom; 
because  tlie  adverb  t-ic/Uy  forms  an  emphatic  qualification  of 
dweU  in,  and  so  appropriately  terminates  the  clause;  aud  be- 
cause the  whole  passage  is  thus  more  symmetrical.  "  Dwell  m 
has  its  single  adverb  richly,  and  is  supported  and  expanded  by 
two  coordinate  participial  clauses,  each  of  which  has  its  spirit- 
aal  manner  or  element  of  action  {in  all  wisdom,  in  ffrace)  rnore 
exactly  defined  "  (Ellicott). 

Admonishing;.  See  on  ch.  i.  26.  The  participles  teaching 
and  admonishing  are  used  as  imperatives,  as  Rom.  xir.  1>-13, 
16-19  ;  Eph.  iv.  2,  3  ;  Ileb.  xiii.  5  ;  1  Pet.  iii.  1,  7,  9,  16. 

One  another  (eauToiJ?).     Yourselves.     See  on  ver.  13. 

Psalms.  See  the  parallel  passage,  Eph.  v.  19.  A  pealm 
was  originally  a  song  accompanied  by  a  stringed  instniment. 
See  on  1  Cor.  xiv.  15.  The  idea  of  accompanin)ent  passed 
away  in  nsage,  and  the  psalm,  in  New-Testament  pliraBeolog;^-, 
is  an  Old-Testament  psalm,  or  a  composition  having  that  char- 
acter. A  hymn  is  a  song  of  praise,  and  a  song  (^^  ode)  is  the 
general  term  for  a  song  of  any  kind.  Jlymns  would  prohablv 
be  distinctively  Christian.  It  is  supposed  by  some  that  Paul 
embodies  fragments  of  hymns  in  his  epistles,  as  1  Cor.  xiii. ; 
Eph.  V.  14;  1  Tim.  iii.  16;  2  Tim.  ii.  11-U.  Jaa.  i.  17,  and 
Apoc.  i.  5,  6 ;  xv.  3,  are  also  supposed  to  be  of  this  character. 
In  both  instances  of  his  use  of  ^-q  song,  Paul  adds  the  term 
spiritual.     The  term  may,  ae  Trench  suggests,  denote  sacred 


A 


Ch.  lU]  THE  BPISTLB  TO  THE  GOLOSSIANa  507 

poems  which  are  neither  psalms  nor  hjmns,  as  Herbert's 
"Temple,"  or  Keble's  "Christian  Year."*  This  is  the  more 
likely,  as  the  use  of  these  different  compositions  is  not  restricted 
to  singing  nor  to  public  worship.  Thej  are  to  be  used  in  mu- 
tual christian  teaching  and  admonition. 

With  grace  {h  t§  ;^<^tTi).  Lit.,  the  grace.  The  article 
limits  the  meaning  to  the  grace  of  Ood.  WUA  grace  b^ns  the 
second  participial  clause. 

17.  In  the  name.    See  on  Matt,  xxviii.  19. 

Giving  thanks.  Notice  the  emphasis  on  the  duty  of  thanks- 
giving placed  at  the  close  of  the  exhortations.  S^  ch.  i.  12 ; 
ii.  7 ;  iii.  15  ;  iv.  2. 

18.  WiveSy  etc.  Compare  the  parallel  passages,  Eph.  y.  22- 
vi.  9.     See  also  1  Pet  ii.  18-iii.  7 ;  Tit.  ii.  1-6. 

Is  fit  (oi^/cey).  See  on  Philem.  8.  The  imperfect  tense, 
woB  fitting^  or  became  fiUing^  points  to  tlie  time  of  their  en- 
trance upon  the  christian  life.  Not  necessarily  presupposing 
that  the  duty  remained  unperformed.  Lightfoot  illustrates  by 
ottg/Uj  the  past  tense  of  owecL,  and  says,  "  the  past  tense  perhaps 
implies  an  eeserUial  dj^riori  obligation." 

In  the  Lord.  Connect  with  is  fiUingj  bj\A  compare  weJl- 
jjleaaing  in  the  Lardy  ver.  20. 

19.  Be  not  bitter  (jiii  irucpaivea^).  Lit,  he  not  embittered. 
Used  only  here  by  Paul.  Elsewhere  only  in  the  Apocalypse. 
The  compounds  ircLpairucpcUvm  to  exasperate^  and  Trapawucpaa- 
liM  provocationy  occur  only  in  Heb.  iii.  16  ;  iii.  8 ,15.  Compare 
Eph.  iv.  31. 

20.  This  is  well  pleasing.  Expanded  in  Eph.  vi.  2,  3. 
Uiito  the  Lord  should  be  in  the  Lord. 

21.  Provoke  to  anger  {ipeBC^ere).  Only  here  and  2  Cor. 
ix.  2,  where  it  is  used  of  stirring  up  to  good  works.  To  anger 
is  added  by  A.  V. 

*  And  too  manj  of  whioh  are  embodied  in  modem  Hjnuuda 


608  WORD   eTCDlE3   IN   THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IlL 

Be  discouraged  (a3vfj.anTiv).  Only  here  in  the  \ew  Test» 
ment.     Lose  heart,  or  become  dispirited. 

22.  Masters  (Kvpioit).  See  on  Lord,  2  Pet.  ii.  1,  and  Malt, 
xxi.  3.  Kvpio<i  Lord  jiiid  Be<rtr6Tt}<i  master  came  to  be  used  in- 
terchangeably in  the  New  Testament,  though  originally  the 
latter  involved  such  authority  as  is  implied  in  otir  use  of  daa- 
pot,  or  in  the  relation  of  a  master  to  s  slave.  The  Greeks  ap- 
plied 5e<nroTfjs  only  to  the  gods. 


With  eye-service  [h 
Cph.  vi.  6.     The  word  s* 


oi^aXfMhovKeiat'i).     Only  here  and 

ims  to  have  been  coined  by  I*aiil. 


Men  pleasers  {av^pnyjTdpeaimt).  Only  Iiere  aud  Eph.  vi. 
6.  Compare  Plato;  "Aud  this  art  he  will  not  attain  with- 
out a  great  deal  of  trouble,  which  a  good  man  ought  to  under- 
go, not  for  the  sake  of  speaking  and  acting  before  men,  but  in 
order  that  he  may  be  able  to  say  what  is  acceptable  to  God,  and 
always  to  act  acceptably  to  Ilira  as  far  as  in  him  lies.  For 
there  is  a  saying  of  wiser  men  than  ourselves,  that  a  man  of 
sense  should  not  try  to  please  hts  fellow- servants  (at  least  this 
should  not  be  his  first  object),  but  hia  good  and  noble  masterB" 
"  Phaedrus,"  273). 

Singleness  {atrKon^i).  See  on  Kom.  xii.  8.  Without  du- 
plicity or  doiihleness. 

Fearing  the  Lord  (rof  Kvpwv).  The  one  Master  contrasted 
with  tlie  masters  (xvpioK)  according  to  the  jUsh.  The  parallel 
in  Eph,,  vi.  5,  has  as  unto  Christ. 

23.  Ye  do — do  it  (Troi^re — epyd^effSt).  Rev,,  correctly,  y« 
do—toork ;  the  latter  being  the  stronger  term  as  opposed  to 
idleness.  See  on  Jas  ii.  9.  Ad  idle  man  may  do.  Compare 
ipyatria  dUigetice,  Luke  xii.  68, 

Heartily  («  "^^x^)-  Lit.,  from  the  soul.  With  a  personal 
interest.  Note  that  the  apostle  uses  both  heart  {napSiat,  ver. 
32)  and  soul  t-^vx^v) ;  and  in  Eph.  vi.  7,  adds  fier  evvoiivt  totiA 
good  disposition  (A.  V,,  good  wU£).  See  on  Rom.  xi.  3 ;  vii.  23 ; 
i.  21.   Compare  iru/i^i;)(oi  of  ont  aocord,  Philip,  ii.  2 ;  iair^v^ov 


Ch.  IV.]  THE  EPIBTLB  TO  THE  COLOSSIANB.  509 

like-mindedj  Philip,  ii.  20 ;  fuf  '^^trxS  ^^  ^'**  mind^  Philip, 
i.  27. 

24.  Of  the  inheritance.  Which  consists  or  is  in  the  inher- 
itance. Compare  the  similar  construction,  ch  i.  12.  See  Matt, 
xxi.  35-38,  where  the  &>0Xo9  hond^ervcmt  and  the  fcX/i^pavofio^ 
heir  are  contrasted ;  and  Rom.  viii.  15-17 ;  Gal.  iv.  1-7. 

For  ye  serve  (7^  Soi/XctWe).  Omit  for.  Some  take  the 
verb  as  imperative,  senie  ye ;  bnt  the  indicative  is  better  as  ex- 
plaining from,  the  Lord. 

25.  He  that  doeth  wrong  (o  H^ucSiv).  Compare  Philem. 
18.  The  reference  is  primarily  to  the  slave ;  bnt  the  following 
clanse  extends  it  to  the  master.  If  the  slave  do  wrong,  he  shall 
be  punished ;  but  the  master  who  does  wrong  will  not  be  ex- 
cused, for  there  is  no  respect  of  persons.  Tjchicns,  who  carried 
this  letter  to  Colossae,  carried  at  the  same  time  the  letter  to 
Philemon,  and  escorted  Onesimns  to  his  master. 

Shall  receive  {KOfUaercu).  See  on  1  Pet.  i.  8.  Compare 
Eph.  vi.  8. 

Respect  of  persons.  See  on  Jas.  ii.  1.  In  the  Old  Testa- 
ment it  has,  more  commonly,  a  good  sense,  of  hmdly  reception^ 
favorable  regard.  In  the  New  Testament  always  a  bad  sense, 
which  came  to  it  through  the  meaning  of  mctsk  which  attached 
to  irpoawirov  faoe. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

1.  Masters,  etc.  The  best  texts  attach  this  verse  to  the  pre- 
ceding chapter. 

Render  {irapexecSe),    The  Oreek  implies  on  yov/rpart. 

Equal  (ji)v  itrimfrd).  Lit.,  the  eguality.  Not  equality  of 
eonditi&iiy  but  the  brotherly  equality  growing  out  of  the  Christ- 
ian relation  in  which  there  is  neither  bond  nor  free.  See  on 
Philem.  16. 


510  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IV 

2.  Continue  {irpoa-KapTeptiTe).  See  un  Acta  i.  14.  Compare 
AcU  ii.  42,46;  vi.  4;  Rom.  xii.  12;  xiii.  6;  1  Thees.  v.  17. 
Kev.,  correctly,  coniinue  sisai/fasUy. 

Watching  (7pif7opouirr«).  See  on  Mark  xiii.  35;  1  Pet,  v. 
8.  In  Eph.  vi.  18,  arypirnvovvTei  watching  is  UBed,  on  which  eee 
Mark  xiii.  33. 

Therein  {en  avrg).  In  prayer.  Compare  thereunto,  Eph. 
vi.  18. 

3.  Door  of  utterance  {Svpav  toO  \6yov).  Rev,,  better,  a 
door /or  the  word.  Compare  1  Cor.  xvi.  9;  2  Cor.  ii.  12; 
Apoc.  iii,  8.  See  also  entering  in,  1  ThesB.  i.  9;  ii.  1.  And 
the  parallel  passage,  Eph.  vi.  19.  There  may  be  an  allaaion  to 
a  reieaae  from  imprisonment, 

4.  That  I  may  make  it  manifest  (Tva  <fiavfpaiffa).  Com- 
pare speak  boldly,  Eph.  vi.  20.  ThfU  connects  with  the  clause 
tliat  God — Christ. 

5.  In  wisdom  {ev  ao<f>ia).     Compare  Eph.  v.  15,  aa  leiee. 

Those  that  are  without  (tou?  efw).  As  1  Cor.  v.  12,  13; 
1  Thess.  iv.  12.     Compare  tov^  e<rw  those  within,  1  Cor.  v.  12. 

Redeeming  the  time  (toi*  lempov  e^a/yopa^ofievoi).  Com- 
pare Eph.  V.  1(5,  and  Dan.  ii.  8,  Sept.  The  word  ie  used  in  the 
Kew  Testament  only  by  Paul,  Gal.  iii.  13 ;  iv.  5 ;  Eph.  v.  16. 
The  cotnponnded  prepoeition  ^f  has  the  meaning  out  of,  as  Gal. 
iii.  13,  "Christ  redeemed  iis  out  o/'tho  cnrse,"  etc.,  and  out  and 
out,fuUy.  So  here  and  Eph.  v.  16,  buy  up.  Rev.,  in  margin, 
huijing  up  the  c^portunity.  The  favorable  opportunity  be- 
comes ours  at  the  price  of  duty. 

6.  Seasoned  with  salt  {oKari.  ^pTVfj.ivo<;).  Both  words  only 
here  in  Panl.  The  metaphor  is  fi'om  the  office  of  salt  in  ren- 
dering palatable.  Both  in  Greek  and  Latin  authors,  salt  was 
need  to  express  the  pungency  nnd  wittiness  of  speech.  Horace 
Bpeaks  of  having  praised  a  poet  for  robbing  the  city  iviih  abund- 
ant salt,  i.e.,  for  having  wittily  satirized  certain  parties  bo  as 
to  make  them  smart  as  if  rubbed  with  salt,  and  bo  as  to  excite 


Cb.  IV.]  THB  BPI8TLB  TO  THE  OOLOSSIANa  511 

the  laughter  of  those  who  are  not  bit  (''  Satirea,"  i.,  x.,  3). 
Liglitfoot  gives  some  interesting  citations  from  Plntarch,  in 
which,  as  here,  grace  and  salt  are  combined.  Thus :  ^^  The 
many  call  salt  ^^a/Dtra^  graces^  because,  mingled  with  most 
things,  it  makes  them  agreeable  and  pleasant  to  the  taste." 
Seasoned  is,  literally,  ^pr^^r^.  It  is  not  likely  that  the  fact 
has  any  connection  with  this  expression,  but  it  is  interesting  to 
recall  Herodotns'  story  of  a  salt  lake  in  the  neighborhood  of 
Colossae,  which  has  been  identified,  and  which  still  supplies 
the  whole  surrounding  country  with  salt  (vii.,  30).  The  ex- 
hortation to  well-seasoned  and  becoming  speech  is  expanded 
in  £ph.  iv.  29 ;  y.  4,  m  a  warning  against  corrupt  communica- 
tion. 

7.  Tychicus.  Mentioned  Acts  xx.  4;  Eph.  vi.  21 ;  2  Tim. 
iv.  12;  Titiii.  12. 

Minister  (SuLcoyo9).  Probably  to  Paul  himself.  Compare 
Acts  xix.  22 ;  xx.  4.     Scarcely  in  the  ofiicial  sense  of  deacon. 

Fellow-servant  ((rvvSot/Xo^).  Used  by  Paul  only  here  and 
ch.  i.  7,  of  Epaphras.  By  this  term  he  designates  Tychicus  as, 
in  common  with  himself,  a  servant  of  Jesus  Christ.  Probably 
not  with  a  strict,  but  with  a  quasi  official  reference. 

8.  I  have  sent.  Epistolary  aorist  Tychicus  carried  the 
letter. 

He  might  know  your  estate  (71^  rh  irepl  v^Ap).  The 
correct  reading  is  yp&re  r^  irepl  ^fi&v  ye  miff/U  know  the  thmge 
about  uSy  or  our  estate.    Compare  Eph.  vi.  21. 

9.  Onesimus.    See  on  Philem.  10. 

The  feithful  and  beloved  brother.  Whom  the  Colossians 
had  known  only  as  the  worthless,  runaway  slave.  See  Philenu 
11,  16. 

10.  Aristarchus,  my  fellow-prisoner.  See  on  Philem.  23, 
24.  Unnecessary  difficulty  is  made  over  the  fact  that  the  term 
feUow-prisoner  is  applied  to  Epaphras  in  Philem.  23,  and  not 
to  Aristarchus ;  while  here  the  case  is  reversed.  It  is  not  ne- 
cessary to  suppose  that  the  two  had  changed  places,  or  that  the 


612 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT. 


(Cn. 


captivity  was  voluntary,  if  a  literal  captivity  was  meaut. 
the  tliree  t£Tn\%—^eUow-2>risone)',fdlmti-servant,fiUow-iDori-M 
^iniglit  be  applied  to  both ;  and,  aa  Dwight  remarks,  "  Keasou 
unknown  to  us  may  easily  have  determined  the  use  uf  oiu 
word  or  the  other,  independently  of  the  question  ae  to  the  pu 
ticular  time  when  they  were  in  imprisonment" 

Mark.     See  on  Philem,  24. 

Sister's  son  {ive^ws).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament, 
liev.,  correctly,  cousin.  The  sense  of  vepAew  did  not  attach  to 
tlie  word  until  very  late.  Lightfoot  remarks  that  this  incident- 
al notice  explains  why  iJarnabas  should  have  taken  a  more 
favorable  view  of  Mark's  defection  than  Paul,  Acts  xv,  37,  39. 

11.  Jesus  Justus.  Not  mentioned  elsewhere.  The  onl^ 
one  of  these  names  not  mentioned  in  the  salutations  of  the. 
Epistle  to  Philemon. 

Have  been  a  comfort  {h/ev^^aav  trapTjyopla).  HapTjyopla. 
comfort,  only  liere  in  the  New  Testament.  Pi-operly,  an  ad-'. 
dress,  an  exhortation:  an  exhortation  for  the  purpose  of  en- 
couraging: \\eace a  comfort.  Plutarch,  in  his  "Life  of  Clmon,** 
uses  it  with  irev^ow  grief ;  a  comfort  for  grief ;  and  in  bia 
"Life  of  Pericles,"  of  consolation  for  a  dead  eon.  Aretaeus,  a 
medical  writer,  of  the  assuaging  of  a  paroxysm.  This  word, 
and  the  kindred  adjectives  TraprjyopiKo^  and  TapTfyoprfrueoi 
soothing,  are  common  in  medical  writings.  So  Galen,  of 
soothing  fictions,  pretences  to  quiet  the  diseased.  Have  been 
is,  more  strictly,  have  proved. 


12.  Laboring  fervently  («7(i>wfo/iCTOs).  Kev., 
on  ch.  i.  29;  ii.  1.     Compare  Rom.  xv.  30. 

Perfect  {reKeuit).     See  on  1  Cor.  ii.  6,  7;  ch.  ; 

Complete  (TreirXifpoipoprifievoi).  See  on  tnost  «i 
Luke  1.  1 ;  and  compare  full  aaauranoe,  ch.  ii.  2. 
aasmsd. 

In  all  the  will    (iv  travTi   5eXiJ/MiT().     Lit.,  in   every    will. 
Will  Ttieans  ths  thing  willed,  as  Luke  xii.  47;  Jas.  v.  30;   1 


Sea 


rely  helieved^ 
Rev.,  /(*% 


^ 


Ch.  IV.]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OOLOSSIAN&  513 

Tbess.  V.  18.  Hence  used  sometimes  in  the  plural,  as  Acts  xiii. 
22,  sliaU  do  aU  my  will  {Seki^fiaTa),  i.e.j  perform  all  the  Mngs 
willed  bj  me.  Eph.  ii.  3,  desires^  strictly  wUU/ngs.  So  1161*6 
the  sense  is,  everything  willed  by  God.  The  connection  is  ap- 
parently with  oToSrjre  ye  may  stcmd.  For  a  similar  construct- 
ion see  John  viii.  44 ;  Rom.  v.  2  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  1 ;  xvi.  13.  As 
Meyer  observes,  this  connection  gives  stand  both  a  modal  defini- 
tion (perfect  and  fully  assured)  and  a  local  definition  (in  all  the 
will). 

13.  Zeal  ((^\oy).  Bead  mvop  labor^  which  occurs  elsewhere 
only  in  Apoc.  xvi.  10,  11 ;  xxi.  4,  in  the  sense  otjHiin.  IIovo^ 
labor  is  from  the  root  of  irivofjLai  to  work  for  one^s  daily  breads 
and  thence  to  be  poor,  IToyo?  toU^  irkinfi  one  who  works  for  his 
daily  breadj  and  irovtfpi^  wicked^  have  a  common  root.  See  on 
wickedness^  Mark  vii.  22.  In  their  original  conceptions,  Kinro<; 
labor  (1  Cor.  xv.  58 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  5)  emphasizes  the  fatigue  of 
labor :  yJry^o^  hard  labor  (2  Cor.  xi.  27 ;  1  Thess.  ii.  9),  the 
hardship:  iraiwi  the  effort^  but  irovo^  has  passed,  in  the  New 
Testament,  in  every  instance  but  this,  into  the  meaning  of 
yain. 

Hierapolisa  The  cities  are  named  in  geographical  order. 
Laodicaea  and  Hierapolis  faced  each  other  on  the  north  and 
south  sides  of  the  Lycus  valley,  about  six  miles  apart.  Colossae 
was  ten  or  twelve  miles  farther  up  the  stream.  Hierapolis  owed 
its  celebrity  to  its  warm  mineral  springs,  its  baths,  and  its  trade 
in  dyed  wools.  It  was  a  centre  of  the  worship  of  the  Phrygian 
goddess  Cybele,*  whose  rites  were  administered  by  mutilated 
priests  known  as  Galli,  and  of  other  rites  representing  different 
oriental  cults.     Hence  the  name  Hierapolis  or  sobered  city. 

*  The  Phrygiftn  mother  of  the  gods,  known  elsewhere  as  Bhea.  Her 
worship  in  Phrjrgia  was  so  general  that  there  is  scarcely  a  town  on  the  coins 
of  which  she  does  not  appear.  She  was  known  also  as  th^  great  Mother^  Cybebe, 
Agdwtis^  BereeynUa,  Brimo^  the  Oreat  Idiiean  Mother  of  (he  ffods,  and  Dindy- 
mene.  Her  worship  wai)  orgiastic,  oelehrated  with  drums,  oymhals,  horns,  and 
wild  dances  in  the  forests  and  on  the  mountains.  The  lion  was  saored  to  her. 
and  she  was  generally  represented,  either  seated  on  a  throne  flanked  hj  lions, 
or  riding  in  a  chariot  drawn  hj  lions.  See  on  reteUing§t  1  Pet.  iv.  8.  See 
DoUinger,  **  The  GentUe  and  the  Jew,**  i,  102,  176,  874. 
Vol.  m.-^ 


614  WOBD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  fCH.  IV 

14.  Luke— Demas.     See  on  Philem.  24. 

The  beloved  physician.     See  Introduction  to  Luke. 

15.  Nytnphas.  Probably  contracted  fi-om  Nym/pKodo/nt*^ 
as  Artxmxi  fi-om  ATtemidorus  (Tit.  iii.  13) ;  Zenas  from  Zeno- 
(foz-fta^Tit.  iii.  13);  Olymjxu  from  Olympiodanis  (Rom.  xvi.  15). 

The  Church.     Compare  Philem.  2;  Itom.  xn.5;  1  Cor. 

xvi.  19 ;  Acts  xii.  12. 

His  house  (aw-oO).  Others  read  airrSi' (A«tr  (bo  Rev.,  Light- 
foot,  Meyer).  Others,  as  Westcott  and  Hort,  avTrji  her,  regard- 
ing the  name  as  female,  I^Tympha.  It  is  difBcult,  however, 
to  know  to  whom  the  piural  can  refer.  Some  explain,  Nym- 
phas  and  hig  family.  Meyer  refers  it  to  the  brethren  at  Lao- 
dicaea  and  Nymphas,  and  thinks  that  the  allusion  is  to  a  foreign 
chinch  in  filial  association  with  the  church  at  Laodicaea,  and 
holding  its  meetings  in  the  same  place. 

16.  The  epistle  from  Laodicaea  (T171'  ex  Aax^uceiad).  That 
is,  the  letter  left  at  Laodicaea,  and  to  be  obtained  by  yon  from 
the  chnrch  there.  This  letter  cannot  be  positively  identified. 
Tiie  composition  known  as  the  EpisUe  to  the  Laodicaeans  is  a 
late  and  clumsy  forgery,  existing  only  in  Latin  MSS.,  and  made 
up  chiefly  of  disconnected  passages  from  Pbilippisns,  with  a 
few  from  other  epistles.* 

18.  With  mine  own  hand.  The  letter  was  written  by  an 
amanuensis,  Paul  adding  his  autograph. 

Grace  be  with  you.  On  the  benedictions,  see  on  2  Cor. 
xiii,  14.  This  short  form  occurs  only  here,  1  Tim.  vi.  21 ;  2 
Tim.  iv.  22. 


■  Bishop  Lightfoot  dtsonsBeB  the  Bobjeot,  eErpeoiftlly  tbe  evideuoe  (or  the 

EpUtle  to  the  Laodiooeane.  in  sa  elaborate  note.     He  pvee  &  table  DODtaining 
orer  a  dozen  different  attempiH  to  idetitif/  the  epUtla  referred  to  here.     He 


thiuki  it  wu  the  epistle  to  the  Epheeitu 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON. 


1.  A  prisoner  of  Jeans  Christ  {Sicfuo^).  A  prisoner  for 
Christ's  sake.  This  is  the  only  salutation  in  which  Paul  so 
styles  himself.  The  word  is  appropriate  to  his  confinement  at 
Rome.  Apostle  would  not  have  suited  a  private  letter,  and  one 
in  which  Paul  takes  the  ground  of  personal  friendship  and  not 
of  apostolic  authority.  A  similar  omission  of  the  official  title 
occurs  in  the  Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians  and  Philippians, 
and  is  accounted  for  on  the  similar  ground  of  his  afFectionate 
relations  with  the  Macedonian  churches.  Contrast  the  saluta- 
tion to  the  Oalatians. 

Tinfiothy,  our  brother.  lit,  the  brother.  Timothy  could 
not  be  called  an  apostle.  He  is  distinctly  excluded  from  this 
office  in  2  Cor.  i.  1 ;  Col.  i.  1 ;  compare  Philip,  i.  1.  In  Philip- 
pians  and  Philemon,  after  the  mention  of  Timothy  the  plural 
is  dropped.  In  Colossians  it  is  maintained  throughout  the 
thanksgiving  only.  The  title  brother  is  used  of  Quartus,  Bom. 
xvi.  23 ;  Sosthenes,  1  Cor.  i.  1 ;  ApoUos,  1  Cor.  xvi.  12. 

Philenfion.  An  inhabitant,  and  possibly  a  native  of  Colossae 
in  Phrygia.  The  name  figured  in  the  beautiful  Phrygian  legend 
of  Baucis  and  Philemon,  related  by  Ovid  (^^  Metamorphoses," 
viii.,  (526  sqq.  See  note  on  Acts  xiv.  11).  He  was  one  of 
Paul's  converts  (ver.  19),  and  his  labors  in  the  Gospel  at  Colos- 
sae are  attested  by  the  t\t\e  fellow-laborer^  and  illustrated  by 
his  placing  his  house  at  the  disposal  of  the  Colossian  Christians 
lor  their  meetings  (ver.  2).  The  statements  that  he  subse- 
quently became  bishop  of  Colossae  and  suffered  martyrdom  are 
legendary. 


516  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT 

2.  Our  beloved  Apphia  {'Air(f)la  r^  ayainjT^).  Read  t^ 
a£e\i^  t/ie  (our)  sister.  Commonly  supposed  to  have  been 
Pliileinoii'B  wife.  Tbe  word  is  not  the  common  Roman  name 
Ajipia,  but  is  a  Phrygian  name,  oecurring  frequently  in  Phrvg- 
ian  inBCriptioQB.  It  is  aleo  written  AjihpAia,  and  8oinetinie§ 
Ap/iia. 

Archippus.  Possibly  the  son  of  Philemon  and  Appliia. 
From  Col.  iv.  17  lie  would  appear  to  have  held  some  important 
office  in  the  church,  either  at  CoJoesae  or  at  Laodicaea,  which 
lay  very  near.  In  Coloseians  bis  name  occurs  immediatelv 
after  the  salutation  to  the  Laodicaeane. 

Fellow-soldier.  In  cliristian  warfare.  Perhapa  at  Eplies- 
OB.     Applied  also  to  Epapliroditus,  Philip,  ii.  25. 

The  church  in  thy  house.     See  on  Rom.  xvi.  5. 

4.  Thank — always.  Construe  with  thank.  For  Bimilar  in- 
troductory thanksgiviTigs  compare  Rom.  i.  8;  1  Cor.  i,  4;  Eph. 
i.  16 ;  Philip,  i.  3  ;  Col.  i.  3  ;  1  These,  i.  2  ;  2  Theea.  i.  3. 

Making  mention  (fipeiav  Trotov/Mwn).  Mveia  primarilr 
means  remanhrance,  so  that  tlie  phrase  expresBes  the  two  ideas, 
meniionituj  thee  when  I  caU  thee  to  mind. 

In  my  prayers  (eVt').     On  the  occasionB  of. 

Thy  love  and  faith — toward  (trpK)  the  Lord  Jesus  and 
toward  {eh)  all  saints.  The  claueeB  are  arranged  crosBwise.'* 
love  referring  to  saints,  faith  to  Christ.  Toward.  Two  dif- 
ferent prepoeitions  are  time  translated.  Practically  the  differ- 
ence is  not  material,  but  irpo^  toward,  with  ttIotk  faiih  is 
unusual.  See  1  Thess.  i.  8.  £t?  is  the  prepoBition  of  eon- 
tact ;  to,  unto  ;  faith  exerted  upon. 

6.  That  (STTaw).     Connect  with  making  mention. 

The  communication  of  thy  taith  {f)  Koivavia  t^  7r^~reoK 
ffov).     Kotvoivia  feUowship  is  often  need  in  the  active  Benee  of 


*  The  rbetorical  Sgare  calUd  ch\ 


THE  EPIBTLB  TO  PHILEHON.  517 

impa/rtcUianj  as  oamrnunicatum^  cantributionj  almsgwmg.  So 
Rom.  XV.  26 ;  2  Cor.  ix.  13 ;  Heb.  xiii.  16.  This  is  the  sense 
liere :  the  active  sympathy  and  charity  growing  out  of  your 
faith. 

May  become  effectual  (evefyy^).  See  on  Jas.  v.  16.  Tliis 
adjective,  and  the  kindred  ivefyyito  to  worky  he  effectual^  ivip- 
yrifjui  working y  operation^  and  ivefyyeut  energy^  power  in  eocer- 
cisey  are  used  in  the  New  Testament  only  of  superhuman  power, 
good  or  evil.  Compare  Eph.  i.  19 ;  Matt  xiv.  2 ;  Philip,  ii. 
13 ;  1  Cor.  xii.  10 ;  Heb.  iv.  12. 

In  the  knowledge  {h  hrvfvwT€C).  In  denotes  the  sphere 
or  element  in  which  Philemon's  charity  will  become  effective. 
Ilis  liberality  and  love  will  result  in  perfect  knowledge  of  God's 
good  gifts.  In  the  sphere  of  christian  charity  he  will  be  helped 
to  a  full  experience  and  appropriation  of  these.  He  that  gives 
for  Christ's  sake  becomes  enriched  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ. 
Knowledge  \%  fuU^ perfect  knowledge;  an  element  of  Paul's 
prayer  for  his  readers  in  all  the  four  epistles  of  the  captivity. 

In  you.     Read  intu. 

In  Christ  Jesus  (6t9  Xpioroy 'Ii/o'oSy).  Connect  with  may 
become  effectual^  and  render,  as  ISj&w.junto  Christy  that  is,  unto 
Christ's  glory. 

7.  For  we  have  (7^  ^XPf^-  'ResA  iirxpv  I  had.  Connect 
with  /  thank  in  ver.  4,  giving  the  reason  for  thankfulness  as  it 
lay  in  his  own  heart ;  as,  in  ver.  5,  he  had  given  the  reason 
which  lay  in  outward  circumstances. 

Bowels  {(nrXiirfxya).    Eev.,  hearts.     See  on  1  Pet  iii.  8. 

Are  refreshed  {avam-hravrai).  See  on  Matt.  xL  28.  Com- 
pare 1  Cor.  xvi.  18;  2  Cor.  vii.  13. 

Brother.  Closing  the  sentence  with  a  word  of  afFectioa 
Compare  Gal.  iii.  15;  vi.  1. 

8.  Wherefore.  Seeing  that  I  have  these  proofs  of  thy  leva 
Connect  with  /  rather  beseech  (ver.  9). 


•518 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


I  miKht  be  much  bold  {woW^v  irapprftriav  exiov).  Better, 
as  Rev.,  I  have  all  boldness.  Ilappjjtria  boldness  ie  opposed  to 
fear,  JoIid  vii.  13;  to  ainhi^itij  or  reserve,  John  xi,  14,  The 
idea  o£  j/idtUoity  may  attach  to  it  as  subsidiary,  John  vii.  4. 

In  Christ.     As  holding  apostolic  authority  from  Christ. 

That  which  is  convenient  {to  a,vT}Kov).  Rev.,  hejittiny. 
Convenient  is  used  in  A.  V,,  in  the  earlier  and  stricter  seDse  of 
suUable.  Compare  Eph.  V. 4.  Thua  Latimer;  "Works  which 
are  good  and  convenient  to  be  done."  Applied  to  perBons,  as 
Hooper:  "Apt  and  cotivenient  persons."  The  modern  senee 
merges  the  idea  of  essential  fitness.  The  verb  avi)ica  originally 
means  io  came  up  to  /  hence  of  that  wliich  comes  up  to  the  mark; 
Jitting.  Compare  Col.  iii.  18;  Eph.  v.  4.  It  conveys  here  a 
delicate  hint  that  the  kindly  reception  of  Onesimus  will  be  a 
hecwning  thing. 

9.  Being  such  an  one  as  Paul  the  aged  (rotoDro?  wk  c>>9 
HavKo';  irpecrfftrnfi).  Beiiig  such  an  one,  connect  willi  tile  pre- 
vious /  rather  beseech,  and  with  Paul  tlie  aged.  Not,  heing 
such  an  one  (armed  with  snch  autliority),  as  Paid  Vie  aged  1 
beseech  (the  second  beseech  in  ver.  10) ;  but,  as  Rev.,  for  love's 
sake  I  rather  beseech,  being  such  an  one  as  Paul  the  aged.  Tlie 
beseech  in  ver.  10  is  resnmptive.  Aged;  or  ambassador  (so 
Rev.,  in  margin).  The  latter  rendering  is  supported  by  irpttr- 
^evtD  I  am  an  amhaasador,  Eph.  vi,  10.*  There  ie  no  objection 
to  aged  on  the  ground  of  fact.  Paul  waa  about  sixty  years  old, 
besides  being  prematurely  aged  from  labor  and  hardship.  For 
aged  see  Lnke  i.  18 ;  TiL  ii  2. 

10.  I  beseech.  Reenoiiiig  the  beseech  of  ver.  9.  /  beseech, 
I  rej)eat. 

Onesimus  ('Oi/^o-j/iov).  The  name  is  withheld  nntil  Paul  has 
favorably  disposed  Philemon  to  his  request.     The  word  means 

*  Lightfoot  thinkn  tlip  resdiim;  tany  bit  vjif  o-fituW)!,  thoagh  lie  denmn  the 
cliaiiga  unnBoesaar)',  BinoB,  in  the  cnmrann  dialect,  the  two  maj  h«Te  been  writ- 
ten inditferently  He  citcn  paso&gen  frnm  the  Apocrypha  in  illDstrBlion  of  thla 
Interchange  tn  vrhloh  Thayer  ("Letioon")  adds  some  inscriptlona  from  tli« 
theatre  at  EphsBna. 


THE  EPISTLB  TO  PHILBMON.  519 

hdpfvlj  and  it  was  a  common  name  for  slaves.  The  same  idea 
was  expressed  by  other  names,  as  Chresimvs^  ChreHus  {useful) ; 
Onesyphorvs  {jn'oJU-irmgerj  2  Tim.  i.  16) ;  Symphorvs  {suU- 
able).  Onesimos  was  a  runaway  Phrygian  slave,  who  had  com- 
mitted some  crime  and  therefore  had  fled  from  his  master  and 
hidden  himself  in  Bome.  Under  Koman  law  the  slave  was  a 
chattel.  Yarro  classified  slaves  among  imptementSy  which  he 
classifies  as  vocaliay  artiotdate  speaking  implements,  as  slaves  / 
semwocaliaj  having  a  voice  but  not  articiUatingj  as  oxen  /  tnutaj 
dumhj  as  wagons.  The  attitude  of  the  law  toward  the  slave  was 
expressed  in  the  formula  servile  cajmt  nvJlumjus  hdbeA;  the 
slave  has  no  right.  The  master's  power  was  unlimited.  He 
might  mutilate,  torture,  or  kill  the  slave  at  his  pleasure.  PoUio, 
in  the  time  of  Augustus,  ordered  a  slave  to  be  thrown  into  a 
pond  of  voracious  lampreys.  Augustus  interfered,  but  after- 
ward ordered  a  slave  of  his  own  to  be  crucified  on  the  mast  of  a 
ship  for  eating  a  favorite  quail.  Juvenal  describes  a  profligate 
woman  ordering  a  slave  to  be  crucified.  Some  one  remonstrates. 
She  replies :  ^'  So  then  a  slave  is  a  man,  is  he  I  ^  He  has  done 
nothing,'  yon  say.  Granted.  I  command  it.  Let  my  pleasure 
stand  for  a  reason  "  (vi.,  219).  Martial  i^ecords  an  instance  of  a 
master  cutting  out  a  slave's  tongue.  The  old  Roman  legislation 
imposed  death  for  killing  a  plough-ox ;  but  the  murderer  of  a 
slave  was  not  called  to  account.  Tracking  fugitive  slaves  was 
a  trade.  Recovered  slaves  were  branded  on  the  forehead,  con- 
demned to  double  labor,  and  sometimes  thrown  to  the  beasts  in 
the  amphitheatre.  The  slave  population  was  enormous.  Some 
proprietors  had  as  many  as  twenty  thousand.* 

Have  begotten  in  my  bonds.    Made  a  convert  while  I 
was  a  prisoner. 

11.  Unprofitable  (cixpV<^^)'    A  play  on  the  word  Onesu 

wus profitable.  Compare  tmprofitable  (a^P^^)  ^ervanty  Matt 
XXV.  30.     These  plays  upon  proper  names  are  common  both  in 


•  See  Leoky,  '*  Hiatorj  of  European  Morals,"  I.,  277,  802;  iL,  86,  W,  7?^ 
Brace,  ''Gesta  Christ!,"  oh.  y.     DoUinger,  <*The  Gentile  and  the  Jew,"  ii 
259  tiqq.     Becker,  *<Galla8,*'  excorsaa  iii  Farrar's  **Paal,"  ii.,  468  aqq. 


520  WORD  8TDD1ES   IN   THE   NEW  TESTAMENT, 

Greek  and  Komaii  iiterature.  Tims  Aescbylus  on  the  name  of 
Helen  o£  Troy,  the  play  or  pun  tniiiing  on  the  root  eX,  kel,  de- 
etroy :  Helene,  heUnaus,  heltmdras,  /u-leptolU :  Helen,  ship-de- 
stroyer,  mwn-de«ti-oyer,  oUy-destroyer  ("Agamemnon,"  671). 
Or,  as  Robert  Browning:  "Helen,  shipVliell,  man 'e-liell,  city "e- 
bell."  &o  oa  Prometheus  {forethougJu):  "Falsely  do  the  gods 
call  thee  Prometheus,  for  tliou  thyself  hast  need  of  j>roniei/iens, 
i.e.,  oiybreihought "  ("  Promethens  Bound,"  85, 86).  Or  Sopho- 
cles on  j4/(Kr.  Aiaa {AJAx)  cries  ai,  at/  and  says,  "Who  would 
have  thought  that  my  name  would  thus  be  the  appropriate  ex- 
pression for  my  woes  ?  "  {"  Ajax,"  430).  In  the  New  Testament, 
a  familiar  example  is  Matt,  xvi,  18 ;  "  thou  art  Petros,  and  on 
this^iro  will  I  build  my  church."  See  on  £^enetu8,  2  Cor. 
viii.  18.* 

Now  profitable.  "  Christianity  knows  notliing  of  hopeless 
cases.  It  professes  its  ability  to  take  the  mottt  crooked  stick 
and  briug  it  straight,  to  flash  a  new  power  into  llio  blackest 
carbon,  which  will  turn  it  into  a  diamond"  (Maclnren,  "Phile- 
mon," in  "  Expositor's  Bible"). 

And  to  me.  The  words  are  ingeniously  thrown  in  as  an 
afterthought.  Compare  Philip,  ii.  27;  Kom.  xvi.  13;  1  Cor. 
xvi.  18.  A  strong  appeal  to  Philemon  lies  in  the  fact  that 
Paul  is  to  reap  benefit  from  Onesimus  in  liis  new  attitude  ae  a 
christian  brother. 

12.  I  have  sent  again  (ac^€^i(ra).  Rev.,  sen^  hack.  The 
epistolary  aorist,  see  on  1  Pet.  v.  12.  Our  idiom  would  be  / 
send  hack.  That  Onesimus  accompanied  the  letter  appears 
from  Col.  iv.  7-9. 

Thou  therefore  receive.  Omit,  and  render  aMv  him  ae 
Rev.,  in  his  own  person;  hie  very  self. 

13.  I  would  {k^ovkofi^v).  Rev,,  /  would  fain.  See  on 
Matt.  i.  19,  The  imperfect  tense  denotes  the  desire  awakened 
but  arrested.     See  on  Iioould,  ver.  14. 

*The  ttndeitt  ahoald  retul  AzohdeacoD  Futbt'b  oh^pter  on  the  me  ot 
proper  names  by  Jews,  Graeks,  and  Romans,  "  Langaage  and  Languages,'' 
oh.  xslf. 


THB  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.  521 

With  me  {irpo^  iftaurov).  The  preposition  expresses  more 
than  near  or  beside.  It  implies  intercourse.  See  on  with  Gody 
John  i.  1. 

In  thy  stead  {yirkp  am).  Bev.,  correctly,  in  thy  behalf.  A 
beautiful  specimen  of  christian  courtesy  and  tact;  assuming 
that  Philemon  would  have  desired  to  render  these  services  in 
person. 

In  the  bonds  of  the  Gospel.  Connect  with  me.  Bonds 
with  which  he  is  bound  for  the  sake  of  the  Gospel:  with  which 
Christ  has  invested  him.  A  delicate  hint  at  his  sufferings  is 
blended  with  an  intimation  of  the  authority  which  attaches  to 
his  appeal  as  a  prisoner  of  Christ.  This  language  of  Paul  is 
imitated  by  Ignatius.  ^^My  bonds  exhort  you"  (Tralles,  xii.). 
'^  He  (Jesus  Christ)  is  my  witness,  in  whom  I  am  bound " 
(Philadelphia,  vii.).  ^^In  whom  I  bear  about  my  bonds  as 
spiritual  pearls"  (Ephesians,  xi.).  ''In  the  bonds  which  I  bear 
about,  I  sing  the  praises  of  the  churches  "  (Magnesians,  i.). 

14.  I  would  (ri^iKfiaa).  Compare  Iwovld^  ver.  13.  Here 
the  aorist  tense  and  the  verb  meaning  to  will  denote  a  single, 
decisive  resolution. 

As  it  were  of  necessity  {m  icarii  avarficfiv).  '!!<:  as  it  were^ 
Rev.,  a«,  marks  the  appearance  oi  necessity.  Philemon's  kindly 
reception  of  Onesimus  must  not  even  seem  to  be  constrained. 

15.  For  perhaps.  I  sent  him  back,y{>r,  if  I  had  kept  him, 
I  might  have  defeated  the  purpose  for  which  he  was  allowed 
to  be  separated  from  you  for  a  time.  ^^  We  are  not  to  be  too 
sure  of  what  God  means  by  such  and  such  a  thing,  as  some  of 
us  are  wont  to  be,  as  if  we  had  been  sworn  of  God's  privy- 
council.  ...  A  humble  ^perhaps'  often  grows  into  a 
*  verily,  verily' — and  a  hasty,  over-confident  Werily,  verily' 
often  dwindles  to  a  hesitating  'perhaps.'  Let  us  not  be  in 
too  great  a  hurry  to  make  sure  that  we  have  the  key  of  the 
cabinet  where  God  keeps  his  purposes,  but  content  ourselves 
with  'perhaps'  when  we  are  interpreting  the  often  questionable 
ways  of  His  providence,  each  of  which  has  many  meanings 
and  many  ends  "  (Maclaren). 


522 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  SEW  TB8TAMENT. 


He  therefore  departed  (Sti  tovto  extapiaBri).  The  A.  "V". 
misses  the  ingeoious  sbadlDg  of  Paul's  expression.  Not  only 
does  he  avoid  the  word  ran  away,  wliich  might  have  irritated 
Philemon,  bat  he  also  uses  the  passtve  voice,  not  the  middle,  sep- 
arated hiiiuielf,  as  an  intimation  that  Onesinioa'  Hight  was  di- 
vinely ordered  for  good.  Hence  Rev.,  correctly,  he  wasjpaTted. 
Compare  Gen.  xlv.  5. 

For  a  season  {vpm  &pav).  A  irie^ season.  See  2  Cor.  vii. 
8;  Gal.  ii.  5. 

Thou  shouldst  receive  (arrijcffi).  The  compounded  pi-ep- 
osition  a-TTo  may  mean  back  again,  after  tlie  temporary  separa- 
tion, or  in  full,  vjfwUy.  The  former  is  suggested  by  WJa» 
parted,  and  would fam  home  kejit :  but  the  latter  by  ver,  16,  no 
longer  as  a  servant,  hut  more.  Tlie  latter  is  preferable.  Com- 
pare the  use  of  atrium  in  Matt.  vi.  2,  tliey  ho/oe  received-  (see 
note);  Matt.  vi.  16;  Luke  vi.  24;  Philip,  iv.  18  ;  and  iiiroKafi- 
fidva  receive,  Gal.  iv.  5. 

16.  Not  now  {oi/teeri).  Rev.,  more  correctly,  no  longer.  The 
negative  adverb  ovKeri  states  the  fact  absolutely,  not  as  it  may 
be  conceived  by  Philemon  (jitiKeri).  However  Philemon  may 
regard  Onoaimiis,  as  a  fact  he  is  now  no  longer  as  a  slave. 

Above  {uirip).  Rev.,  more  than.  More  than  a  elave — a 
whole  man. 

Especially  (/toXurra).  Connect  with  ieloved.  Especially  to 
me  as  compared  with  other  Christians. 

How  much  more  {Trotrtp  fioXXop).  Beloved  tnosi  to  Paul, 
how  much  more  than  moat  to  Philemon,  since  he  belonged  to 
him  ia  a  double  sense,  as  a  slave  and  as  a  Christian  brother :  «'n 
the  jUsh  and  in  the  Lord.  "  In  the  flesh  Paul  had  the  brother 
for  a  slave :  in  the  Lord  ho  had  the  slave  for  a  brother  *' 
(Meyer), 

17.  Then  (o3n).     Resumptive  from  ver.  12. 

Thou  count  (^£k).  Lit.,  hold,  which  is  often  used  in  this 
sense.  Compare  Luke  xiv.  18,  hold  me  or  count  me  as  excused. 
Philip,  ii.  29,  hold  siich  in  r^niiatton. 


THE  BPISTLB  TO  PHILEMON.  523 

Partner.  More  than  an  intimate  friend.  One  in  Christian 
fellowship.* 

18.  If  he  hath  wronged  {el  ^Utfo-ev).  The  indicative  mood 
with  the  conditional  particle  may  imply  that  what  is  pnt  hypo- 
thetically  is  really  a  fact :  if  he  wronged  thee  (is  he  did. 

Oweth.  Perhaps  indicating  that  Onesimns  had  been  goilty 
of  theft.  Notice  the  general  word  wronged  instead  of  the 
more  exact  specification  of  the  crime. 

Put  that  on  my  account  {nAro  iftol  iXXoya).  For  the  verb, 
compare  Bom.  v.  13  (note). 

19.  I  Paul  have  written,  etc.  Eev.,  vniie.  A  promissory 
note.  The  mention  of  his  autograph  here,  rather  than  at  the 
end  of  the  letter,  may  indicate  that  he  wrote  the  whole  epistle 
with  his  own  hand,  contrary  to  his  usual  custom  of  employing 
an  amanuensis. 

Albeit  I  do  not  say  (&a  ft/ff  Xiyco).  Lit.,  th(U  I  may  not  say. 
Connect  with  /  ivrite.  I  thus  give  my  note  of  hand  that  I  may 
avoid  saying  that  thou  owest,  etc.  "ELey.y  that  I  say  not  tmto 
thee. 

Thou  owest  {irpoa-o^etKen^).  Lit.,  owest  in  addition.  I 
have  laid  you  under  obligation,  not  only  for  an  amount  equal 
to  that  due  from  Onesimus,  but  for  yotirselfsB  made  a  Christ- 
ian through  my  ministry. 

20.  Yea  (vai).  A  confirmatory  particle,  gathering  up  the 
whole  previous  intercession  for  Onesimus.  So  Matt  xL  26^ 
even  so;  Rev.,  yea.  Luke  xi.  51,  verily;  Bev.,  yea.  Luke  xiL 
bjyea. 

Let  me  have  joy  (wafyi/fpf).  Or  help.  Lit,  may  I  profit. 
Again  a  play  upon  the  name  Onesi/mus.  The  verb  is  frequently 
used  with  reference  to  filial  duties.    Ignatius  employs  it,  in  one 

*  Dean  Plnmptre  thinks  thai  there  maj  be  an  allnsion  to  bturineas  relations 
between  Paul  and  Philemon :  possibly  that  Philemon  or  Arohippos  took  the 
place  of  Aqoila  and  Priscilla  in  the  tent-making  firm.  **  St  Paul  as  a  Man  of 
Business/'  "  Bzpositor,"  first  series,  L,  262.  This,  howsTsr,  is  mere  con- 
jecture. 


62-1  WORD  STUDIES  IS  THE  NKW  TESTAMKNT. 

instance,  directly  after  an  allusion  to  another  Oneeimna  (Ephes- 
Una,  ii.). 

21.  More  than  I  say  (vvep).     Beyorui.     PoBsibly  hintiDg   at 

manuniiRsion. 

22.  Withal  {ifia).  Simultaneously  with  the  folfilmeut  of 
my  reqiiest, 

A  lodging.  Paul  is  expecting  a  speedy  liberation.  Hia 
original  plan  of  going  from  Kome  to  Spain  has  apparently  been 
altered.  LiglUfoot  observes  that  "  there  is  a  gentle  compulsion 
in  this  mention  of  a  personal  visit  to  Coloaeae,  The  apostle 
would  thus  be  able  to  see  for  himself  that  Philemon  had  not 
disappointed  his  expectations," 

1  shall  be  given  (j(apuT^aofiaC).  A  beautiful  assumption 
of  his  correspondent's  affection  for  him,  in  that  his  visit  to  tliem 
will  be  a  grcudous  gift  {yapi';).  The  word  is  also  used  of  grant- 
ing for  deatructioii,  Acts  xxv.  11;  or  tor  jfreeervation.  Acts 
iii.  14, 

23.  Epaphras  my  fellow-prisoner  (Ewa^pw  6  wvcuyjiaK- 
a>To;  iK>v).  Epaphras  is  mentioned  Col.  i.  7;  iv.  12.  Some 
identify  him  with  Epaphroditns,  but  without  sufficient  reason. 
Epaphroditns  appears  to  have  been  a  nativeof  Philippi  (Philip, 
ii.  25),  and  Epaphras  of  Colossae  {Col.  iv.  12).  Epaphroditns 
is  always  used  of  the  Philippian,  and  Epaphras  of  the  Coloe- 
sian.  The  names,  however,  are  the  same,  Epaphras  being  a 
contraction. 

It  is  disputed  whether  feUow-prUoner  is  to  be  taken  in  a  lit- 
eral or  in  a  spiritual  sense.  For  the  latter  see  Horn.  vii.  23; 
2  Oor.  X.  5  ;  Eph.  iv,  8.  Compare  feUoio-goldisr,  ver.  2,  and 
Philip,  ii,  25,  In  liom.  xvi.  7.  the  word  used  here  is  applied 
to  Andronicua  and  Juin'a,  Paul  was  not  strictly  an  ai^^Xaitoc 
prisoner  of  war  (see  on  Luke  iv,  18).  The  probabilities  seem 
to  favor  the  spiritual  sense,  Liglitfoot  suggests  that  Epaphras' 
relations  with  Paul  at  Rome  may  have  excited  euspicion  and 
ted  to  his  temporary  continement ;  or  that  he  may  voluntarily 
have  shared  Paul's  imprisonment. 


THB  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.  525 

24.  Mark.  Probably  John  Mark  the  evangelist.  He  appears 
as  the  companion  of  Paal,  Acts  xii.  25 ;  Col.  iv.  10 ;  2  Tim. 
iv.  11. 

Aristarchus.  A  Thessalonian.  Alluded  to  Acts  xix.  29; 
XX.  4 ;  xxvii.  2.  He  was  Paul's  companion  for  a  part  of  the 
way  on  the  journey  to  Home. 

Demas.     See  Col.  iv.  14 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  10. 

Luke.  The  physician  and  evangelist  See  Introdnction  to 
Luke's  Gospel. 

25.  Grace — with  your  spirit.  As  in  Gal.  vL  18,  with  the 
omission  here  of  brother.    See  on  2  Cor.  xiii.  14. 

Out  of  many  private  letters  which  must  have  been  written  by 
Paul,  this  alone  has  been  preserved.  Its  place  in  the  New  Test- 
ament canon  is  vindicated,  so  far  as  its  internal  character  is  con- 
cerned, by  its  picture  of  Paul  as  a  christian  gentleman,  and  by 
its  exhibition  of  Paul's  method  of  dealing  with  a  great  social 
evil. 

Paul's  dealing  with  the  institution  of  slavery  displayed  the 
profouudest  christian  sagacity.  To  have  attacked  the  institu- 
tion as  such  would  have  been  worse  than  useless.  To  one  who 
reads  between  the  lines,  Paul's  silence  means  more  than  any 
amount  of  denunciation ;  for  with  his  silence  goes  his  faith  in 
the  power  of  christian  sentiment  to  settle  Anally  the  whole  ques- 
tion. He  knows  that  to  bring  slavery  into  contact  with  living 
Christianity  is  to  kill  slavery.  He  accepts  the  social  condition 
as  a  fact,  and  even  as  a  law.  He  sends  Onesimus  back  to  his 
legal  owner.  He  does  not  bid  Philemon  emancipate  him,  but 
he  puts  the  christian  slave  on  his  true  footing  of  a  christian 
brother  beside  his  master.  As  to  the  institution,  he  knows  that 
the  recognition  of  the  slave  as  free  in  Christ  will  carry  with  it, 
ultimately,  the  recognition  of  his  civil  freedom. 

History  vindicated  him  in  the  Roman  empire  itself.  Under 
Constantine  the  effects  of  christian  sentiment  began  to  appear 
in  the  Church  and  in  legislation  concerning  slaves.  Official 
freeing  of  slaves  became  common  as  an  act  of  pious  gratitude, 
and  burial  tablets  often  represent  masters  standing  before  the 


526  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT. 

Good  Shepherd,  with  a  band  of  slaves  liberated  at  death,  and 
pleading  for  theiu  at  judgment.  Id  a.d.  312  a  law  was  passed 
declariog  as  homicide  the  poisoning  or  branding  of  slaves,  and 
giving  them  to  be  torn  hy  beaeta.  The  advance  of  a  healthier 
eentiment  may  be  seen  by  compariug  the  law  of  Angnetiis, 
which  forbade  a  master  to  emancipate  more  than  one-fifth  of 
hifi  slaves,  and  which  fixed  one  hundred  males  as  a  maximum 
for  one  time^ — ^and  the  unlimited  permission  to  emancipate  con- 
ceded by  Constantino.  Each  new  rnler  enacted  eome  measure 
which  facilitated  emancipation.  Every  obstacle  was  thrown  by 
the  law  in  the  way  of  separating  families.  Under  Justinian  all 
presumptions  were  in  favor  of  liberty.  If  a  slave  had  several 
owners,  one  conld  emancipate  him,  and  the  others  must  accept 
compensation  at  a  reduced  valuation.  The  mutilated,  and 
those  who  had  served  in  the  army  with  their  masters'  knowl- 
edge and  consent,  were  liberated.  All  the  old  laws  which  lim- 
ited the  age  at  which  a  slave  could  be  freed,  and  the  number 
which  could  be  emancipated,  were  aUolislied.  A  master's  mar- 
riage with  a  slave  freed  all  the  children.  Sick  and  uselesa 
slaves  must  be  sent  by  their  masters  to  the  hospital. 

Great  and  deserved  praise  has  been  bestowed  on  this  letter. 
Bengel  says :  "  A  familiar  and  exceedingly  courteous  epistle 
concerning  a  private  afFair  is  inserted  among  the  New  Testa- 
ment books,  intended  to  affoi-d  a  specimen  of  the  highest  wis- 
dom as  to  how  Christians  should  arrange  civil  affairs  on  loftier 
principles."  Franke,  quoted  by  Bengel,  says :  "  The  single 
epistle  to  Philemon  very  far  surpasses  all  the  wisdom  of  the 
world."  Renan  :  "  A  true  little  cJief-^Voeuvre  of  the  art  of  let- 
ter-writing."  Sabatier  :  "  This  short  epistle  gleams  like  a  pearl 
of  the  most  exquisite  purity  in  the  rich  treasure  of  the  Kew 
Testament."  * 

*  other  testimanieB  maybe  found  collected  hj  Ligbtfoot,  "CotaiamUiy 
on  Plillemoo,"  iDtroduclion,  and  Farror,  "  PauV'  ii.,  ohs.  1.,  11.  flee  alao 
Dr.  Httokett's  artiolB  on  Hie  epiBtle  in  Smith'*  "Dictionary  at  the  Bible."  Th» 
letter  of  Pliny  the  Toonger  to  SabinianuB,  vhich  Is  oflen  compared  with 
PaDl'a,  Is  given  In  full  hy  Farm,  vol.  11.,  excanni  v.  AUo  by  Ligbttoot, 
Introduetlon. 


i 


INDEX  OF  ENGUSH  WORDS. 


^fyure$  r^&r  to  the  pages,) 


Ababdxo,  846 

Abba,  91 

Abhor,  158 

Abhorrest,  29 

Abide,  425 

Abideth,  267 

Able,  56,  128,  168,  808,  884,  454 

Abolished,  807,  878 

Abound,  65,  814 

Abounded,  866 

Abraham,  849 

Absent,  819 

Abundance,  888,  854 

Abundant,  814 

Abuse,  288 

Abusing,  222 

Acceptable,  154,  899 

Accepted,  822,  865 

Access,  58,  879 

Accursed,  100,  255 

Achaia,  179,  289 

Acknowledge,  292 

Acknowledgment,  488 

Adam,  284 

Add,  422 

Administration,  -s,  255 

Admonish,  -ing,  178,  506 

Admonition,  241,  404 

Adoption,  91,  100,  865 

Adultery,  165 

Advantage,  81,  297 


Afar,  879 

Affection,  501 

Affectioned,  159 

Affections,  19 

Affliction,  422 

AfflictiouH,  477 

Afore  prepared,  108 

After  the  manner  of  men,  277 

Aged,  518 

Ages,  886,  479 

Agreement,  826 

Air,  874 

Albeit,  528 

Aliens,  877 

AUTe,  78 

All,  180,  418,  441,  446,  447» 

470 
Allow,  -eth,  80,  172 
Almighty,  826 
Alone,  120 
AlUr,  282 
Altars,  120 
Altogether,  281 
Always,  411 
Ambassador,  411 
Ambassadors,  821 
Amen,  270,  298 
Amplias,  180 
Andronious,  179 
Angels,  248,  262 
Anger  {verb),  118 


528 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WOBDB. 


Anger,  897,  602 
Angiy,  d96 
Anguish,  26,  295 
Another,  165,  200,  846 
Answer  {noun),  122,  228 
Apelles,  180 
ApoUos,  189 
Apostles,  889 
Apostleship,  5 
Appear,  819,  501 
Apphia,  516 

Appointed  to  death,  206 
Apprehend,  -ed,  449 
Approve,  288,  418 
Approved,  860 
Aqnila,  178 
Archippos,  516 
Aretas,  858 
Aristarchos,  511,  525 
Aristobnlos,  180 
As  a  man,  88,  280 
Ascended,  888,  889 
Ashamed,  58,  111,  428 
Assist,  177 
At  home,  818 
Atonement,  62 
Attain,  448 

Attained,  110,  449,  451 
Attend,  223 
Attending,  164 
Avoid,  181 
Avoiding,  338 
Authority,  276 
Awake,  279,  400 

Baal,  123 
Babes,  29,  200 
Bad,  319 
Bands,  497 
Baptism,  387,  489 
Baptized,  190,  191,  276 
Barbarian,  8,  268,  504 


Bare  (cuf;.),  280 

Barnabas,  229 

Base  (ae{;.),  194,  887 

Basket,  858 

Be  first,  882 

Be  Lord,  168 

Be  under  bondage,  219 

Bear  {verb),  242,  285,  346,  846 

Bear  record.  111 

Bear  witness,  28,  92,  98 

Beareth,  164,  265 

Bearing,  818 

Beasts,  18 

Beateth,  286 

Beautiful,  116 

Became,  266 

Become  uncircumoised,  219 

Begin,  801 

Beginning  {noun),  471 

Begotten,  519 

Beguile,  488,  495 

Begun,  881,  417 

Behave  uncomely,  828 

Behold,  820 

Beholding,  809 

Being  {participle),  480 

Belial,  825 

Believe,  82,  70 

Believeth,  49,  51,  115,  167 

Belly,  181,  215,  452 

Beloved,  366,  511,  516 

Benefit,  293 

Benjamin,  445 

Beseech,  153,  188,  888,  455 

Beside  ourselves,  319 

Best,  261 

Bestow,  269,  263 

Betrayed,  250 

Better,  34,  425 

Bewail,  358 

Beware,  443,  485 

Birds,  18 


INDHZ  OF  ENGLISH  WORDa 


529 


Bishops,  414 

Bitter,  607 

Bitterness,  397 

Blamed,  322 

Blameless,  187,  446 

Blasphemy,  503 

Bless,  160,  208 

Blessed,  101,  363,  864 

Blessedness,  53 

Blessing,  242 

Blinded,  123,  307 

Blindness,  129 

Blotting,  490 

Boasters,  24 

Boasting,  49,  334 

Body,  67,  84,  90, 248,  258,  279,  280, 
282,  283, 373,  387, 453, 454, 471, 
475,  478,  488,  494,  506 

Bodies,  153,  281 

BodUy,  486 

Bodily  presence,  342 

Bold,  118,  339,  421,  518 

Boldly,  173 

Bond,  386,  505 

Bondage,  91 

Bonds,  411,  419,  519,  521 

Book  of  life,  457 

Both,  378 

Bonntifally,  384 

Bonnty,  334 

Bow  down,  124 

Bowels,  324,  417,  429,  504,  517 

Brake,  251 

Bi-ancbes,  126,  128 

Brass,  262 

Breadth,  385 

Breastplate,  408 

Brethren,  73,  111,  420 

Bring  into  bondage,  348 

Bring  into  subjection,  237 

Bring  to  nothing,  192 

Broken  down,  878 


Broken  o£f,  126 

Brother,  511,  517 

Brought  nnder  the  power,  215 

Braise  {verb),  182 

Buffet,  355 

Build,  202 

Builded,380 

Building,  201,  816^  880 

Built,  484 

Burden,  357 

Burdened,  318 

Buried,  66,  489 

Bum,  218,  852 

Burned,  20,  263 

Business,  159 

By  course,  272 

By  two,  272 


OAsaAB,  460 

Gall  for  a  record,  294 

Gall  upon,  116 

Galled,  2,  5,  28,  74,  102,  184, 187, 

377,506 
Galleth,  55,  103 

Galling  (noun),  198,  219,  387,  450 
Game,  291 
Gan,  198 

Okptivity,  88,  340,  388 
Gare  (noun),  829,  459 
Gareful,  457,  459 
Garefulness,  829 
Gamal,  80,  200,  340 
Gamally,  90 
Garry  away,  255 
Gast  away,  119 
Gastaway,  238 
Gast  down,  313,  327,  840 
Gast  off,  166 
Gasting  away,  125 
G^ught,  353 
Gelestial,  281 
Genchrea,  177 


DIDBZ  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


Oephu,189 

Chamberlun,  182 

Chance  (varb),  280 

Chuig«  (Derb),  45S 

Changed,  19,  309 

Chargeable,  Si7 

Charges,  229 

Oharitablj,  170 

Charity  262 

Chastened,  32i 

Cheertal,  334 

CheerfulneBS.  168 

CheriHheth    402 

Chietest,  346 

Chiefly   31 

Children,  271,  376,  891 

Chloe,  189 

Ohoose,  424 

Chose,  3M 

Cboaen,  194 

Christ,  180,  419, 128,  479, 484,  4 

In  ChiTBt,  98 

Charch,  249,  478 

CircnmciHed,  445 

CircnmciBion,    54,    178,   877,    4 


400 


488,  504 
Circnmspectlv 
Clamor   337 
Clay,  144,  145 
fJIeanse,  402 
Clearing,  329 
Cleave,  158 
Clement,  456 
Clothed,  317 
Clothed  npon,  317 
Clond,  238 
Coals,  163 
Collection,  287 
Colosaae,  461 
Come,  344,  flftO,  464 
Come  behind,  187 


Oome  short,  41 
Gome  to  nought,  195 


Cometh  upon,  863 

Comfort  (noun),  267,  290,  327,  488, 

512 
Comforted,  291,  829,  482 
Coming,  426 
GonunandmeDt,  79 
Oommondmenta,  378,  499 
Commend,  -ed,  -«tJi,   38,   60,  176, 

227 
Commit,  24 

Commit  fomioation,  240 
Committed,  283 
Common  to  nun,  241 
Oommonlj,  210 
Communication,  -b,  278,  616 
Communion,  242 
Compacted,  -392 
Company  (««■&),  211 
Complete,  488,  612 
Comprehend,  884 
Comprehended,  16S 
Conceits,  161 
Concision,  444 
Concluded,  130 
Concord,  325 
Condemned,  86,  264 
Condemn,  -eth.  171 
Condemnation,  63,  85,  801 
Condescend.  160 
Confesa,  169,  ITS,  436 
Confession,  115 
Confidence,  330,  446 
Confirm,  296 
Confirmation,  417 
Oonfiict,  428,  482 
Oonformablp,  448 
Conformed,  i>ii,  164 
Confusion,  L'72 
ConqneroiB,  98 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WOR£M9. 


531 


Ck)nfloienoe,  227 

Ck>nsent  (verb),  81 

Gonsidered,  56 

Gonsist,  471 

Ck>n8olation,  428 

Ck>nstrain,  -eth,  820 

Ck>ntain,  218 

Contemptible,  842 

Content,  459 

Contention,  421 

Contentions,  189 

Contentions,  26 

Continue,  65,  476,  510 

Contrary,  490 

Contribntion,  176 

Convenient,  518 

Conversation,  292,  875,  426,  452 

Convinced,  271 

Corinth,  184 

Corinthians,  824 

Comer-stone,  380 

Corrupt  (ac[;.),  395,  896 

Corrupt  (verb),  800 

Corruptible,  286 

Covenants,  100,  877 

Covenantbreakem,  24 

Covered,  246 

Covetousness,  22,  898 

Count  {verb)y  522 

Counted,  51,  52,  447 

Course,  374 

Craftiness,  310,  391 

Created,  376,  469,  470 

Creature,  92,  320,  468,  476 

Creeping,  18 

Crieth,  109 

Crooked,  439 

Cross,  191,  435,  491 

Crown,  236,  454 

Crucified,  190,  193,  195 

Cry  (verb),  91 

Curse  (verb),  160 


Custom,  165,  248 
Cut  off,  128,  847 
Cut  short,  110 
Cymbal,  268 

Daily,  277 

Damage,  328 

Damnation,  164,  252 

Dare,  212 

Darkly,  267 

Darkness,  406 

Darts,  409 

David,  124 

Day  by  day,  815 

Day  of  Christ,  440 

Deacons,  415 

Dead,  56,  69,  74, 225, 874,  448,  472, 

489,  497,  501 
Dear,  397,  467 
Death,  71,  73,  800 
Deaths,  351 
Debate,  -b,  28 
Debt,  51 
Debtor,  -s,  8 
Deceit,  36,  485 
Deceitful,  895 
Deceive,  181,  892 
Deceived,  79 
Deceivers,  828 
Declare,  47,  249,  278 
Declared,  4,  105,  188,  464 
Declaring,  195 
Deeds,  91 

Deep,  113,  380,  851 
Defamed,  208 
Defence,  417 
Defile,  204 
Defiled,  227 
Defraud,  -ed,  214,  826 
DeUght  (ver^),  82 
DeUver,  210,  292 
Delivered,  56,  72,  77,  246 


532 


INDEX  OF  BNGUSH  WOBDa 


Deliverer,  130 

Demas,  625 

Demonstration,  195 

Depart,  425 

Departed,  522 

Depth,  130 

Descended,  389 

Desire,  -s,  111,  375,  425 

Desire  (verb),  465 

Desiring,  817 

Despair,  312 

Despaired,  292 

Despise,  167 

Despised,  194 

Destroy,  171,  191,  216 

Destroyed,  313 

Destroyer,  240 

Destmction,  36 

Devices,  297 

Devil,  406 

Devils,  243,  244 

Devour,  349 

Die,  91,  277,  280 

Difference,  -s,  41,  115,  222 

Digged,  120 

Diligence,  158 

Diminishing,  124 

Discerned,  -ing,  199,  253,  256 

Discouraged,  508 

Dishonesty,  310 

Dishonor,  107 

Disobedience,  63,  341,  375 

Disobedient,  118 

Dispensation,  233,  367,  381,  478 

Disi)ersed,  335 

Disputations,  167 

Disputer,  192 

Dispu tings,  438 

Dissimulation,  158 

Dissolved,  3ir» 

Distinction,  268 

Distress,  220 


Distressed,  312 
Distresses,  323 
Distributing,  159 
Distribution,  337 
Diversities,  255 
Divided,  190 
Divisions,  181,  188 
Do,  80,  251,  438,  508 
Do  to  wit,  330 
Do  wrong,  509 
Doctrine,  71 
Doctrines,  499 
Dogs,  443 
Dominions,  469 
Done  away,  305 
Door,  289,  510 
Doubtful,  167 
Doubtless,  446 
Drank,  239 
Drink,  170,  23^,  493 
Drunk  (adj.),  401 
Drunkenness,  166 
Dumb,  255 
Dung,  447 
Dwell,  383,  474 
Dwelling-place,  207 
Dying,  313 

Earnest  (noun),  294,  318 
Earnest  (acfj.),  9:2 
Earthen,  312 
Earthly,  315,  452 
Earthy,  284 
Eat,  278 
Edification,  267 
Edifying,  390,  396 
Effectual,  289,  291,  517 
Effeminate,  215 
Eighth  day,  445 
Elder  (ac(j.),  103 
Election,  103,  1*23,  187 
Elias,  119 


Emboldened,  227 
End,  112,  306 
EndeaToriiig,  386 
Ends,  241 
Endnreth,  266 
EneniieB,  60 
Engnren,  804 
EnUrged,  324,  3U 
Enlighteneil,  371 
EnmitT   3"y 
EnricheJ,  1811 
Entered,  64.  196 
EoUoing,  484 


INDEX  OF  BNOUBH  WOHDS. 

ExMlleut,  29,  418 
ExceM,  401 
Excluded,  4!t 
ExhortatioD,  157,  267 
Exi>e<:tatioii,  92,  428 
Experience,  68 
Experiment,  386 
Ejea,  371 
Ejeserrice,  008 


E|)aetietns,  179 
Epapbraa,  624 
Epophroditii-,  HI 
Epbeans,  363 
EpisUe,  802 
Equal,  609 
Eqnolitj,  333 
Esan,  104 
Especially,  623 
Espoaaed,  346 
EatabliBh,  112 
Established,  7 
Estate,  511 
EBtsemeth,  168 
Eternal,  315 
ETangelista,  889 
Eaodias,  456 
Eve,  345 
Every,  480 
Evil,  102 

Evil-ai>oken-of,  170,  245 
Exalted,  486 
Exaltetb,  340,  849 
Examine,  228,  360 
Examples,  240 
Exceeding,  79,  316,  371 
Exceeding  abundantly,  38 
Gxcellenoy,  194,  312 


Facx,  311 

Faileth,  266 

Faint  (verb),  382 

Faith,  6,  14,  32,  60,  167,  172,  266, 

263,  360,  369,  384.  887,  409, 

426,  447,  476,  489 
Faitlifiil,  18T  368,  462,  511 
Falsehomi.  3% 
Family,  383 
Far,  425 
Fat  above.  878 
Far  spent,  166 
Farewell,  3GI 
FasliioD,  4;!1 
FasKioneil,  453 
Fastin^H,  11^ 'I 
Father,  290,  462,  473 
Fault,  218 
Fear  (noun),  487 
Fed,  200 
Feed,  163 
Feedeth,  229 
Feet,  116 

Fcllowpridoner,  -■,  180,  611,  524 
FeUowserMiiil,  464,  511 
Fellowship,  1S7,  325,  416,  429,  448 
FellowRoldier,  616 
Fen-.!iit,  ]-,!' 
Fiery.  409 
Fight  (verb).  236 
Figure,  62,  206 
Fill  (verb),  477 


534 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


FiUed,  176 

Filleth,  373 

Filth,  208 

Filthiness,  326,  896 

Filthy  commnnioation,  608 

Finally,  361,  442 

Find,  81 

Finish,  110 

Fire,  203 

First,  6,  9,  117 

Firstborn,  97,  468,  472 

Firstfroit,  -s,  126,  275 

First  given,  132 

Fit,  507 

Fitted,  107 

Flee,  216 

Flesh,  37,  74,  86, 166,  216, 228, 280, 

320,  339,  402,  444,  475,   488, 

489 
Fleshly,  496 
Fleshy,  803 
Flourished,  459 
Follow,  449 

Followers,  246,  897,  451 
Folly,  345 
Fool,  350 
Foolish,  16 
Foolish  talking,  398 
Foolishness,  191,  193 
Forbearance,  25,  48 
Forbearing,  405 
Foreigners,  379 
Foreknow,  95 
Foretell,  359 
Forgive,  296 
Forgiven,  489 
Forgiveness,  366,  467 
Form,  -8,  29,  71,  430,  438 
Fornication,  502 
Fornicator,  -s,  215 
Forsaken,  313 
Fought  with  beasts,  277 


Found,  50,  79,  848,  484,  447 

Foundation,  175»  202 

Framed,  380 

Free,  72 

Freed,  69 

Freely,  42,  846 

Freeman,  220 

Fruit,  8,  74,  176,  418,  424 

Bringeth  fruit,  464 

Fruits,  335 

Fulfil,  429,  478 

Fulfilling,  375 

Full,  23,  205,  460 

Full  assurance,  488 

Fully  persuaded,  168 

Fully  preached,  176 

Fulness,   124,  867,  878,  886,  891 

472 
Furtherance,  419 

Gain  (noun),  428,  447 

Gain  (verb),  238 

Gkdnsaying,  119 

Gains,  182 

Garrison,  868 

Gatherings,  288 

Gave,  373,  388,  397 

Gave  up,  18 

Generations,  479 

Gift,  7.  73,  187,  218,  331 

Gifts,  254 

Girt,  407 

Give  increase,  200 

Give  one's  self  to,  217 

Give  over,  394 

Give  place,  162 

Give  thanks,  250,  507 

Given,  123,  160,  321,  427,  435,  524 

Giveth,  157,  286 

Giving  of  the  law,  101 

Glass,  266,  309 

Glorified,  16 


INDEX  OF  EHGLISH  WORDS. 


QloriooB,  94,  S04,  306,  4fi4 
Qlorj,  66,  100,  108,  196,  2i7,  281, 

800,  866,  370,  871,  118,  461, 

160,  466,  479,  480 
Oloiy  (wrft),  174 
Glory  of  God,  41 
Glorying,  211 
Go  a  mrfaro,  239 
Go  to  Uw,  318,  214 
God.  310,  340 
God  forbid,  32 
Oodhwd,  16,  486 
Gods,  227 

Good  (noun),  36,  96,  170 
Good  {a4j.),  60,  79,  81,  217 
Good  pleasure,  866 
Good  «-]>ort,  459 
Good  will,  405,  421 
Good  worda,  181 
Goodness,  128, 178 
Gospel,  464 
Govermaents,  260 
Governor,  353 
QTMe,  5,  61,  68,  186,  302,  246,  ^1, 

333,  862,  868,  866,  888,  416, 

417,  607,  626 
Graffed,  137 
GrkTO  (noim),  286 
Great,  389 
Greediness,  894 
Greek,  -s,  8, 116, 198,  608 
Grieved,  169 
GrierooH,  442 
Groaneth,  94 
Oroimded,  384,  476 
Orndgingly,  334 
OiiUe,367 
Guilty,  86,  263 

Habitation,  380 

Handle,  498  > 

Handling  dooeitfolly,  810 


Hands,  488 

Handnriting,  490 

Happened,  241 

Happier,  226 

Hardeneth,  106 

Hardening,  398 

Harlot,  216 

Hnt-mleBS,  439 

Hatftd,  104 

Hatera  of  God,  34 

Have,  67,  210,  316,  866,  460 

Hare  oompMsion,  104 

Ha?e  joy,  628 

Have  men^,  101 

Having;  324 

Head,  471,  497 

Heap  {verb),  168 

Hear,  117 

Heard,  894 

Heurd  before,  468 

Hearer,  -s,  27 

Hearing,  116 

Heart,  16, 118, 116 

Hi^artUy,  606 

Hearts,  458 

Heaven,  284,  864,  436 

Heavenly  jiioees,  864,  873 

Heavinaas,  90,  296,  111 

Hebrew,  446 

Heir,  -a,  64 

Held,  77 

Helmet,  410 

Help  {verb),  466 

Helpetb,  94 

Helps,  260 

Herbs,  167 

Heresies,  349 

Hennesi  181 

Hid,  810,  483,  601 

HierapoUs.  613 

High,  340,  460 

High  plaoM,  107 


536 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WOKD& 


Higher,  163 

Hinder,  232 

Hindered,  175 

Hold  (verb),  15 

Holden,  168 

Hold  forth,  439 

Holding,  497 

Holy,  3,  79,  365,  475 

Holyday,  494 

Holy  Ghost,  99 

Holiness,  4,  72,  396 

Honest,  458 

Honestly,  166 

Honor  (noun),  107,  159,  500 

Honor  (verb),  403 

Honorable,  207 

Honored,  260 

Hope  (noun),  94,  231, 871,  887, 462, 

480 
Hope  (verb),  331 
Hospitality,  160 
House,  178,  315,  817 
Household,  189 
How,  279 
Humbled,  435 
Humility,  495 
Husband,  73 
Husbandry,  201 

Idol,  226,  227 

Idolater,  -s,  211 

IdolatiT,  242 

Ignorance,  393 

Ignoi-ant,  8,  272,  297 

lUyricum,  174 

Image,  18,  96,  247,  310,  311,  468, 

503 
Imaginations,  16 
Impiisonments,  323 
Imputed,  62 
Incontinencv,  217 
Increasing,  464 


Indignation,  829 

Infirmities,  173,  852 

Inheritance,  368,  871,  466   609 

Iniquity,  72 

Iniquities,  53 

Ink,  308 

Instant,  159 

Instruct,  199 

Instructed,  29,  460 

Instructor,  29 

Instruments,  70 

Intercession,  95,  120 

Interpret,  269 

Intreat,  208 

Intruding,  496 

Invisible,  15,  468,  469 

Inward,  814 

Inward  man,  82,  888 

Isaac,  102,  138 

Ishmael,  138 

Israel,  111,  377,  445 

Israelite,  -s,  119,  849 

Jaoob,  104 

Jason,  182 

Jealous,  345 

Jesting,  398 

Jesus,  394,  436 

Jesus  Justus,  512 

Jew,  503 

Joined,  188,  216,  392,  402 

Joints,  497 

Joint-heirs,  92 

Joy  (nou7i),  170,  416,  454 

Joy  (verb),  61 

Joyful,  327 

Joyfulness,  466 

Judge   (verb),   167,   205,  213,   253, 

254,  272,  493 
Judjred,  27,  205,  271 
Judgest,  25 
Judgment,  24,  25,  63,  188,  205,  418 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORD& 


637 


Judgment-Mat,  169,  319 
Judgments,  212 
Junia,  179 
Just,  49,  79 
Justification,  57,  68 
Justified,  37,  215 
Justifier,  49 

Keep,  458 

Keep  the  feast,  211 

Keep  under,  237 

KUleth,  304 

Kind  (aflf;.),  264,  397 

Kindly,  159 

Kindness,  376,  504 

Kingdom,  467 

Kingdom  of  God,  170 

Kinsmen,  180 

Kiss  (noun),  181,  362 

Knew,  321,  482 

Knit,  482,  497 

Know,  80,  169,  267,  885,  899,  447 

Know  not,  66 

Knoweth,  226 

Knowledge,  21,  40,  112,  181,  187, 

226,  279,  870,  385,  390,  465, 

503,  517 
Known,  15,  77,  132,  226,  267 

Labob  (notm),  424   . 
Labor  (verb),  207,  319,  481 
Labored,  456 
Laboring,  512 
Lack  (noun),  442 
Lacking,  289,  477 
Laid  down,  178 
Laid  up,  463 
Laodicaea,  514 
Last,  206 

Law,  27,  86,   78,  82,  83,  85.  446, 
447 


Lawful,  215 

Lay  to  the  charge,  97 

Learned,  394 

Leaven,  211 

Led,  255 

Left  (hand),  828 

Less  than  the  least,  881 

Letter,  303 

Liberal,  337 

Liberality,  330,  335 

Liberty,  94 

Lie  (noun),  19,  34 

Lie  in  wait,  892 

Life,  120,  125,  393,  501 

Light  (adj.),  315 

Light  (noun),  311,  399,  400,  466 

Lightness,  293 

Lights,  439 

Like  (verb),  21 

Likeminded,  429,  440 

Likeness,  18,  433 

Line,  844 

Live  (verb),  70,  428,  424 

Live  long,  404 

Lived,  502 

Living,  153,  284 

Lodging,  524 

Loins,  407 

Longed  for,  454 

Longsuffering,  466,  505 

Look  (verb),  430, 452 

Loosed,  73 

Lord,  115,  308,  420,  508 

Lords,  227 

Loss,  446 

Love  (notm),  884,  892,  898,  897 

Love  (verb),  165 

Lovely,  459 

Low  estate,  160 

Lower,  389 

Lowliness,  430 

Lucius,  182 


538 


INDEX  OF  BNGUSH  WORDS. 


Luke,  525 
Lamp,  106,  126,  211 
Lust  (noun),  20,  78 
Lust  (verb),  240 
Lusts,  395 

Maokdonia,  460 

Made,  64,  433 

I  have,  or  haye  I  made,  54 

Made  foolish,  192 

Made  a  show,  492 

Made  of  none  effect,  191 

Magnify,  125 

Magnified,  423 

Make,  379 

Make  glorious,  305 

Make  known,  470 

Make  manifest,  400,  510 

Make  peace,  474 

Make  to  drink,  258 

Make  to  offend,  228 

Make  up  beforehand,  334 

Make  without  effect,  32 

Maketh,  392 

Malice,  271,  397,  503 

Malignity,  23 

Manifest  (a^\),  419 

Manifested,  41 

Manifold,  382 

After  the  manner  of  men,  72 

Manners,  278 

Many,  156,  175,  239,  253,  296,  420 

Maran-atha,  289 

Mark  (noun),  450 

Mark  (verb),  451 

Maik  (proper  noun),  512,  525 

Maiy,  179 

M:i.sterbuilder,  202 

Masters,  508 

Matters,  212 

Meaning,  268 

Meanwhile,  28 


Measure  (noun),  154,  392 

Meat,  169,  170,  228,  238,  493 

Meats,  215 

Meekness,  504 

Meet  (due),  20,  289,  466 

Members,  70,  216,  396,  502 

Men,  271 

Menpleasers,  508 

Mention,  370,  516 

Merdes,  153,  290,  429,  504 

Mercy,  310 

Messenger,  355,  441 

Middle-wall,  378 

Might  (noun),  383,  466 

Mighty,  371 

Mind   (noun),  82,    199,   875,    395. 

430,  455,  475,  496 
Mind  (verb),  90 
Minds,  307,  458 
Minded,  90,  451 
Minister  (noun),  174,  464,  511 
Minister  (verb),  176,  232,  335 
Ministered,  302,  441,  497 
Ministereth,  335 
Ministering,  157,  174 
Ministers,  164,  200,  205,  350 
Ministi-ation,  304,  336 
Ministiy,  322,  390 
Miracles,  260 
Moderation,  457 
Moment,  285,  315 
More,  62,  437 
Mortify,  91,  501 
Moses,  139,  141 
Motions,  77 
Mourning,  327 
Mouth,  503 
Moved,  476 
Multiply,  3^5 
Murder,  23 
Murmurings,  438 
Muzzle,  230 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORD& 


539 


Mystery,  129,  183,  196,  866,  381, 

403,  478,  479 
Mysteries,  263 

Nailino,  491 

Naked,  317 

Name,  186,  190,  878,  435,  486»  507 

Named,  373 

NaroissTis,  180 

Nations,  5 

Natural,  197,  282,  284 

NaturaUy,  441 

Nature,  248,  375 

Nay,  293 

Necessity,  224,  521 

Necessities,  323 

Necks,  178 

Neglecting,  500 

Neighbor,  165 

New,  379,  503 

New  moon,  494 

Newness,  67 

Nigh,  114,  379 

A  night  and  a  day,  351 

Noble,  193 

Nothing,  226,  429 

Notice,  334 

Number  (noun),  843 

Nurture,  404 

Nymphas,  514 

Obedisnoe,  5,  64,  71,  841 

Obeyed,  116 
Obtain,  235 
Obtained,  123 
Occasion,  78,  347 
Odor.  460 
Offence,  111,  171 
Offered,  440 
Offering  (verb),  174 
Offering,  397 
Office,  125.  155 


Offscouring,  208 

Of  note,  180 

Old,  320 

Old  man,  67,  508 

Once,  70 

One  bom  out  of  due  time,  278 

Onesimus,  518 

Only,  426 

Open  (a(fj.),  308 

Openly,  492 

Operation,  -s,  256,  489 

Oracles,  31 

Ordained,  164 

Order,  275,  484 

Ordinance,  164 

Ordinances,  246,  878,  490,  498 

Otherwise,  123 

Ought,  95 

Out  of  measure,  292 

Outward,  314 

Overcharge,  296 

Overcome,  33 

Overmuch,  296 

Overthrown,  239 

Owest,  -eth,  528 

Ox,  230 

Oxen,  231 

Palaob,  419 

Paradise,  854 

Part  (noun),  129,  292 

Partakers,  243,  417,  466 

Partakest,  127 

Particular,  260 

Partition,  378 

Partner,  523 

Pass  away,  304,  320 

Pass  the  flower  of  age,  224 

Passed  upon,  62 

Passeth,  222,  385,  457 

Passover,  211 

Past  feeling,  393 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH   WORDS. 


Past  finding  ant,  182 

Pastors,  390 

Piitiimce,  466 

Fftii).  1    413, 618 

Pay,  164 

Peace,  67,  170,  171,  IM 

lisil,  416,  4r,7,  505 
People,  109,  118,  119 
Perfect,   195,  861,  881, 

480,  S12 
Perfecting,  890 
Perfection,  361 
Perfectnesa,  506 
Perform,  81,  417 
Perhaps,  621 
Perils,  361 

Perish,  191,  227,  814,  i» 
Perplexed,  812 
Feraecnte,  IGO 
Persocuted,  :!13 
Peraeventncc,  411 
PeiBon,  297 
TerHons,  292 
Porsuwle,  3U> 
Persuaded,  fill,  169 
Pertain,  174 
Perverse,  439 
Pharaoh,  105,  140.  141 
Pharisee,  446 
Philemon,  515 
Philipiji,  414 
Philosophy,  485 
Phoebe,  176 


PlftC 


,  175,  '. 


Plainness,  306 
Planted,  (17,  200 
Play,  240 

Pleased,  218,  280,  472 
Pleasing,  465,  507 
Poor,  176,  331 
Fossesmng,  824 
Possession,  369 


Possible,  162 

Potter,  146 

Power,  4,  9,    106,  281,  248,  276 

371,  373,  874,  448,  466 
Powers,  98,  163,  164,  469,  491 
Praise  (noun),  81,  883,  366,  459 
Pray,  466 

Prayer,  411,  416,  467 
Praring,  462 
Preafli,  ll4 
Preached,  288 
Preaching,  192 
Piedestinaled,  86^ 


Prey 


I,  472 


Preferring,  159 

Preparation,  400 

Prepared,  377 

Presence,  437 

Present  {patUdplt),  81,   98,    204 

220 
Present  {verb),  153,  402,  476 
Press,  -od,  292 
Pretence,  422 

Principality,  -ies,  373,  469,  491 
Prisea,  178 
Prisoner   515 
Prisons,  851 
Prize,  236,  450 
Proclaimed,  6 
Professed,  336 
Professing,  18 
Profitable,  520 

Promis,.  [noun],  102,  369,  377.  403 
Promised,  3 
Promises,  101 
Proof.  297,  359 
Propliecy,  156.  256 
Prophets,  379,  389 
Propitiation   43 
Proportion,  156 
Frosfiercd,  288 
Prosperoos,  7 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


541 


Protest,  276 
Prove,  360 
Proved,  85 
Provide,  161 
Proving,  399 
Provision,  166 
Provoke,  117 
Provoke  to  anger,  507 
Provoke  to  jealonsj,  244 
Provoked,  265 
Prudence,  191,  366 
Psalms,  506 

Puffed  up,  205,  264,  496 
Puffeth  up,  226 
Pulling  down,  340 
Pure,  459 
Purpose,  103,  882 
Purposed,  367 
Purposeth,  834 
Put  away,  395 
Put  off,  502 
Put  on,  286 
Put  to  account,  523 
Putting  off,  488 

QUABBEL,  505 

Quickened,  376,  489 
Quickeneth,  55 
Quickening,  284 

Baob,  234 

Raise,  216 

Raised,  74,  105,  489 

Rather,  97,  419 

Reached,  344 

Reaching,  450 

Read,  292 

Reasonable,  154 

Receive,  63,  167,  319,  326, 405,  509, 

522 
Received,  167,  250,  484 
Receiveth,  198 


Reckon,  92 
Reckoned,  56 
Reckonest,  25 
Recompence,  124 
Reconcile,  379,  474 
Reconciled,  61,  321 
Reconciling,  125,  321 
Redeeming,  510 
Redemption,  42,  194,  467 
Redound,  314 
Refreshed,  176,  517 
Regarding,  441 
Reign  {verb),  70,  173 
Reigned,  63,  206 
Rejoice,  173,  440,  444 
Rejoiceth,  265 
Rejoicing,  276, 426 
Remaineth,  221 
Remembrance,  416 
Remission,  47 
Render,  509 
Renewed,  315,  503 
Repent,  327 
Repentance,  327,  328 
Repented,  328,  358 
Repliest,  106 
Report,  116 
Reproach,  349 
Reprobate,  21 
Reprobates,  360 
Reprove,  399 
Reproved,  400 
Reputation,  482 
Request,  -s,  416,  457 
Require,  193 
Required,  205 
Reserved,  123 
Resisted,  -eth,  105,  164 
Respect,  305,  494 
Respect  of  persons,  509 
Rest  {noun)y  298 
Rest  (remainder),  218 


542 


INDEX  OF  BNOUSH  WORDS. 


Best  (o«r6),  866 

Reeteat,  29 

Besarrection,  i,  271,  448 

Bevooled,  14 

Bevelatioii,  370 

Revenge,  329 

Reviled,  208 

Bevived,  79 

Biches,  25,  871 

Bicblj,  506 

Bight,  403 

Bight  (hand),  828 

BiglitGous,  fiO 

Bigliteousnes^,  9,  47,  71,   86,  112, 

170,  194,  826,  896,  406,  447 
Rioting,  166 
Rise,  178 
Biseo,  501 
Riven,  351 
Robbed,  847 
Bobbers,  351 
Bobbei7,  432 
Book,  239 
Bods,  351 

Boot  (noHn),  126,  178 
Booted,  384,  484 
Roae  (vei-l.),  273 


□U  8l..r 


,  174 


BuilimentH,  486,  498 

Rufna,  180 

Bale  {no>m),  276,  343,  344,  451 

Bule(pei-fc),G05 

Eulera,  406 

Raleth.  158 

Ran,  440 

Ranneth,  104 

Sabbath  dat,  -s,  491 

Sacrifice  (noun),  153,  397,440 

Sacrilege,  30 

Said,  356 

Saiafs,  5,  176,  288,  414,  462 


Salt,  510 

BalvatioD,  166,  410,  422, 487 

SanotiflcatioD,  194 

Sanctified,  216,  218 

Sanotiff,  402 

Batan,  210,  348, 866 

Satistjing,  500 

Bare,  192 

SaTod,  111,  191 

Saviour,  401,  4fiS 

Savor,  299,  398 

8a7,  66,  113,  189 

Saj  before,  110 

Scribe,  192 

Scriptures,  3 

Scjthian,  604 

Sea,  238 

Seal  (noun),  54,  228 

Sealed,  176,  294,  869 

Searcbetb,  196 

Season,  522 

Seasoned,  510 

Secret,  183 

See,  82,  441 

Seed,  110 

Seeketh,  86     - 

Seem,  259 

Seen  { passively),  IB,  278 

Sent,  lie,  511,  620 

Sentence,  292 

Separated,  2 

Sepulchre,  35 

Serpent,  345 

Servant,  2,  168,  176,  283,  488 

Servants,  71.220,404 

Serve,  7,  509 

Served,  19 

Service,  101,  154,  335,  440,443 

Set,  213.  259,  260,  372,  422 

Set  forth,  43,  206 

Set  in  order.  254 

Settled,  476 


mSBZ  OF  BNGUSH  WOBDB. 


Seraritj,  128 

Shadow,  IM 

Sliambles,  246 

Sbtune,  21S 

Bhome  {verb),  209 

SliiLrpnesB,  361 

ShaveD,  247 

Shed,  69 

Shew  (wrfi),  28,  262,  876 

Shewed,  245 

Shield,  409 

Shine,  311,  439 

Shipwreck,  361 

Shorn,  247 

Short,  321 

Show  (noun),  490 

SicUy,  263 

Bight,  319,  476 

Sign,  64 

8ignii,367 

Simple,  182 

Simplicity,  167,  846 

Sin,  69,  71,  66,  821 

Sincere,  418 

Sincerely,  422 

Sincerity,  211,  292,  881, 413 

Sinfol,  86 

Sing,  173,  269 

SiDgli^ness,  405,  608 

Sins,  3(16,  374 

Sister,  228 

Sister'a  son,  612 

Sit,  376 

Sittetb,  272,  601 

Sleep  (rerb),  368,  28S 

Sleight,  391 

Slothful,  159 

Slnmber  {noun),  134     ■ 

Small,  216 

Smite,  349 

Snore,  124,  228 

Sola,  80 


Son,  467 

Sons,  91,  439 

Sorrow,  99,  328,  441 

Sorrowed,  329 

Sort,  174 

Soeipater,  182 

Sool,  168,  284 

Sound  {ni„„),  117,268 

Bonnds,  2GS 

SoundiD^',  262 

Sowest,  279 

Sown,  282 

Spain,  176 

Spare,  221 

Spared,  97 

Speak,  421 

Speaketh,  118 

Speaking,  401 

Spectacle,  207 

Spent,  357 

Spirit,  4,  86,  86,  90,  91,  196,  269, 

284,  294,  810,  818,  374,  387, 

396,  410,  423,  444 
Spirits,  272 
Spiritoal,  80,  197,  288,  260,  388, 

284,3['>4,  406,466 
SpoU  {tm-b),  485 
Spoiled,  491 
%>ot,  402 

Stablisheth,  183,  294 
SUchvs,  \b" 
Stoggt^rcl   r.(J 
Stand  {verb),  108 
Stand  last,  426 
Stature,  891 
StedbBt,  287 
Steilfa^tly  Ir.ok,  806 
StedfastEies^,  484 
Stewanlfl,  205 
Sting,  286 

Stock,  ur, 
stoiR-a,  ;i5i 


544 


INDBX  OF  BN6LISH  WORDS. 


Stones,  804 
Stop,  347 
Stopped,  36 
Store  (noun),  288 
Strait,  424 
Straitened,  324 
Strength,  356 
Strengthened,  466 
Strengtheneth,  460 
Stretch,  344 
Strife,  421,  429 
Strifes,  357 
Stripes,  350 
Strive  together,  176 
Strived,  -eth,  175,  236 
Striving,  426,  481 
Strong,  56,  405 
Strongholds,  340 
Stubble,  203 
Stumbled,  111 
Stnmblingblock,  169,  227 
Snbdue,  454 
^nbject,  90,  272,  498 
Subjected,  93 
Subjection,  336 
Succorer,  178 
Such,  518 

Suffer,  208,  231,  259,  427 
Sufferings,  291,  448,  477 
Suffer  loss,  203,  446 
Sufficiency,  335 
Sum  up,  367 
Supper,  249 
Supplication,  411,  457 
Supply  {noun),  423 
Supplied,  -eth,  335 
Sure,  54 

Swallowed,  286,  318 
Sweetsmelling,  398 
Swellinp^s,  357 
Sword,  164,  410 
Syntyche,  455 


Tabsbnaolb,  315 

Table,  124,  244 

Tables,  303 

Take,  349,  407 

Take  leave,  298 

Take  none  effect,  102 

Take  thought,  333 

Taken  away,  308 

Taketh,  204 

Taketh  before  other,  249 

Tany,  254 

Taste  (verb),  498 

Teach,  271 

Teachers,  390 

Teaching,  157 

Temperate,  236 

Tempered,  259 

Temple,  203,  217,  380 

Tempt,  240 

Terrestrial,  281 

Terrified,  427 

Terror,  319 

Tertius,  182 

Testament,  251,  303 

Testify,  898 

Thank  (verb),  186 

Thanks,  337 

Thanksgiving,  314,  485 

Thanksgivings,  336 

Thereunto,  411 

Things  that  pertain  to  this   life, 

212 
Think,  154 
Thinketh,  265,  445 
Thorn,  354 
Threatening,  405 
Thresheth,  231 
Thrones,  469 
Time,  102,  165,  221,  510 
Times,  367 

Timothy,  290,  413,  515 
Tinkling,  263 


fNDBX  OF  OMGLISH  Wb3D8. 


Token,  427 
Toid,  369 
Tongues,  256,  303 
Took  airB<r,  491 
Tossed,  391 
Touch,  498 
Tradition,  486 
Transferred,  20S 
Trans  formed.  154 
Trans  form  inp,  348 
L,80 


rronalated,  467 
Trap,  124 
Travaileth,  94 
Treodeth,  230 
Treasure,  812 
Treasnreat,  26 
Trembling,  437 
TrSBpaaaes,  874 
Trial,  330 
Tribulation,  290 
Tribulationa,68 
Tribute,  164,  166 
Triumph  (t>er6),  296 
'rrlum))hing,  492 
Troaa,  '297 
Trouble,  290 
Troubled,  313 
True,  293,  466 
Tnimp<?t,  268 
Trust  (r«-i),  446 
TrasteJ,  368,  369 
Truth,  15,    10,  360,   I 

408,464 
Trjpbaena,  180 
Trjphoaa,  18D 
Tumnlta,  333 
Turn  (vm-b),  422 
TntoiB,  209 
Twain,  379 
Twinkling,  285 
Tfchicns,  511 


Uncertainly,  236 
Vac 


877,489 

rnclesn,  169 
Unclothed,  318 
Uncomely,  259 
Uncovered,  246 
tJnderatanding,  84,  271,  871,  I 

467  465,483 
Understanding  {pxriicipk),  401 
tJnder^lood,  266 
Under  the  law,  231 
Unequally  yoked,  824 
Unfruitful,  269,  399 
Ungodly  60 
Ungodliness,  16 
Unlearned,  270 
CnmoTable,  287 
Unprofltatle,  86,  B19 
Unreprornble,  475 
Un  righteous  oess,  16 
Unsearchable,  881 
Unseemly  20 
UnMvenkat)l<>,  837,  864 
UntftkPii,307 
Unworthily   262 
Urbane,  ISO 
Use  [noun),  396 
Use  (t>«rb),  219 
Using,  499 
Utterance,  187,  610 
Uttered,  95 

Vint,  16,  276,  822,  899,  486 
Vainglory,  480 
Vainly,  496 
Vanity,  93,  898 
Vannteth,  264 
Veil,  307 

Vengeanee,83, 162 
Vessel,  107 
VesMls,  107,  313 


546 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDa 


Victory,  286 
VUe,  19,  463 
Virgin,  224 
Virgins,  220 
Virtue,  459 
Visible,  469 
Voice,  -8,  268 
Volnntaiy,  495 

Wages,  78 

Wait  (verb),  282 

Waiteth,  93 

Waiting,  187 

Walk  (verb),  54,  67, 897,  461,  465 

Walked,  502 

Wantonness,  166 

War  {verb),  339 

Warning,  480 

Warring,  82 

Washed,  215 

Watching,  411,  510 

Watchings,  323 

Watered,  200 

Way,  261 

Way  to  escape,  241 

Weak,  56,  167,  227,  234,  841,  859, 

361 
Weakness,  282 
Wealth,  245 
Week,  288 
Weighty,  341 
Well  (adv.),  128 
Whisperings,  357 
Whole  armor,  405,  407 
Wicked,  212,  475 
Wickedness,  406 
Wife,  228 

Wild  olive  tree,  126 
Wiles,  406 

Will  {noun),  224,  512 
Will  {verb),  105,  438 
Will-worship,  499 


WiUeth,  104 

Willing,  107,  819,  831,  88S 

WilUngly,  232,  233 

Win,  447 

Wind,  391 

Window,  353 

Wisdom,  131,  191,  194,  195,  197, 

366,  370,  882,  465,  480,  499, 

506,510 
Wise,  129,  202,  242 
Wish  (verb),  99 
Without,  217,  352,  610 
Without  blame,  365 
Without  carefulness,  222 
Without  distraction,  228 
Without  God,  377 
Without  law,  234 
Without  measure,  343 
Without  offence,  418 
Without  rebuke,  439 
Without  repentance,  180 
Without  signification,  268 
Withstand,  407 
Witness,  187 
Witnessed,  41 
Wives,  507 
Women,  20 
Word,  114,  402,  464 
Word  of  Christ,  506 
Word  of  faith,  114 
Word  of  God,  117 
Work  (noun),  110,  171,441 
Work  (verb),  77,  95,  394,  437 
Workers,  322 

Worketh,  256,  315,  328,  438,  482 
Working,  229,  371,  381,  454,  481 
Workmanship,  376 
Works,  51 
World,  7,  117,  192,  196,  207,  439, 

464,  498 
Worship  (noun) ,  495 
Worship  (verb),  444 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


547 


Worshipped,  19 

Worthy,  466 

Wot,  119, 424 

Would,  80,  82,  482,  520,  521 

Wrath,  15,  60,  107,  162,  875,  896, 

897,502 
Wraths,  857 
Wrestle,  406 
Wretched,  84 
Wrinkle,  402 
Write,  211 


Written,  205,  804,  528 

Wronged,  528 

Wrote,  182 

Wrought,  78,  818,  357,  872,  882 

YsA,  293,  528 
Yield,  70,  71 
Yokefellow,  455 
Younger,  108 

Zbal,  112,  447,  518 


■.  I 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WOKDS. 


(f^pwwrVW 

to  lliepitget.) 

riflsa.ai 

d(J,T,'«,  192 

Jyoflit,  60,  170 

d  V'-.  608 

iya&i^Crft,  178 

Qi«y^.  267 

iya^i^n-''',  329 

o^fMo^.,  424 

a^o'«,  219 

riyri^,  170,  262,  46T 

a;<Td>;o.v,  418 

dyamrOE,  397,  616 

uiV^poXiT-io,  50S 

SyytXot,  355 

a.'.r;,p^.,  398 

<iy.«},,  194 

attrxirr},  310 

dy^f-,  218,  402 

(U(rjt;vn>f«u,  428 

V^pit,  72 

olr.'.,  193,  466 

Ayiot,  3,  176,  365,  413,  «7K 

alT,^467 

dy™«,  66,  272,  297 

«Ix.«a-rif«,  88,  840 

Jy«i,,  459 

olar.  192,  374.  381,  38 

<Vy».[,422 

&<»o<,  182 

Jy^wr^  279 

Atapnot,  2liii,  899 

■iyp..'>a,oi.  126 

itava-molo,  272,  823 

»ypv»W-,  411,  610 

d«oi,H6 

*y^,  255 

d«,«,,  117.  394 

<iv«»,  428,  482 

<iy«>H:o^,  236.  481,  612 

d*p<fli(,400 

»a^X»(,  236 

dic/ionnir,  27 

daflH'w-.  «i 

V*,.,  286 

&<.>,  233 

dSicu,  609,  523 

AaC~i',  U 

»a.>.'a,  16 

UaXa(«,  2i;'s 

<;Sd«.^t,  21,  238,  860 

dXAtrnx.  95 

i»p6r7,t,  333 

Aoc,  610 

dBi^nroc,  85 

<a5(l,u^  394.  996,  408 

«.of,877 

d;k,d.^892 

IHDBX  OF  G&SKK  WOBDB. 


JXAqX^*,  171,  SOB 
SXXoc,3iB 


S^B2i 

ifLofnia,  S21,  871 
afupifmv,  222 
ofwrafuX^DC,  180,  838 
Sfmpott  84S 

inlf>6npot,  378 

4u.i»t,  860,  489,  475 
dnaiSiiivw,  196 
luoyyAXag,  6 
dMiyiMMrKv,  292 
•Iwyn],  220,  221,  828 
dM^d.,  79 
dwAiXXtf,  469 
dy.,«,^,  100   255 
,;^Hu>^,  315,  S08 
dHucnXiWw,  307,  806 
Jvcxt^idXa.!^,  165, 867 
jM(p.W   199,  228,  271 

dyaXapad-^.  407 
JmXoy...,  IGG 

.i^C~,  425 
dM£<'»t,  262 

■irarrat:.,,  517 
dmnipva,  620 
iirair«Aoyijiin,  16 
dxiirrciirtc,  4,  448 

.WnTfH'^,  292,  37B 
.JWy.X7ri>i.  187,  475 
itrMiiTyijTot,  337 


d»>^.u,  20&,  346,  946 

n..(^.dt,  612 
dr^iru,  507,  618 

•i<^t,m,p,,  106,  164 
ai^lHflrdfMirEoc,  606 


d>4f>wiw(,  72,  241 
.dpwTDc,  277,  438,  4U 
nV,  406 
dm'yw,  36 
dtofun,  63,  72 
JxofuK,  234 
iKtfiui,  27 
an>xn,  25,  48 

irX^pdo),  477 
i3»^i,  124 

duTiX.y.,  119 

■^Tifi^n,  260 

avrio-rpaT-fbofiEii,  82 


!,  156 


.,460 


Jlfioc.  289 
a^Ci,  466 

adparot,  466 
iliniyytXXa,  6 
awdym,  256 
dvoX-y^'a,  398 
dfroXXor/HiMi,  877 
airapjfri,  275 

dcdT7,  395,  485 
diroAui,  375 

rid.u,  119,  176 

F>X^,  405 

i(ft.'x<'M<"<  ^.  167,  463 

r(fti;o^h  491,  60S 
dfrffcAvcTir,  488 
diriXfuApoT,  220 
ompiinrdaTuc,  223 
Mtixm,  460,  622 
dntoT'cu,  32 

d«XdT,(,  167,  330,  886,  887,  ( 
15,  427 
nc-™,  422 
!™SoX,j,  125 

inroArijvnrfjf,  206 

iwi6ti(K,  195 


IHDKZ  OF  OBEEE  W0KD8. 

iTOT^-.,  228 

a(r;(7^off<;^i,  20 

inoKOTiMdaaa,,  8TO,  474 

aajf^limv,  25d 

i<r.i-;a,  401 

4irm'C-,  804 

<«o«p.^t,  483 

ir.^  19,  349 

mnSUufu,  191,  227.  818 

fc.^t.285 

«r<A»y^  228,  329 

-iydf-,  311 

<k»Xtfrp«ric,  42,  467 

ot6a:p,rm,  83l 

JtiDp^tipu,  812 

a^f  J»,,  21)0.  464 

<i.r«rT.-U.,  lie 

<f>r«7T*fV<»,  214 

afrr«p«,..469 

<i>r<{<7raA«,  441 

aSrrit,  471,  492,  MO,  6U 

iinanyim,  1S8 

ci^taid,  600 

dn«t6a<ro^m,  298 

St^at,,  866,  467 

ArOT.'AjMi,  166,  602 

d^,  392,  497 

aTOroX^a.^,  118 

d«AvHrf-,412 

d«.'««,  441 

rilTOTd^t.  861 

d^p.-f^2 

--Afi"-.  499 

<J*<WM,  78.  847 

d-r^™«r.  418 

i^lfHHruH,,  349 

«>n-D;.0,,  488 

50««t,  268 

^»eio^a.,  119 

d;i((mdo/ioi,  35 

ofnV*(la,  46S 

5}(prf<mt,  619 

d,HT,j,  459 

Jf^.,  846 

B.iaX.128 

V»ayf«f«.  482 

*ife,880 

V-»f-.  353 

j3mfT,'f-,  276 

d^puAl-,  294 

j9dnT.crp^  489 

V^or,  354 

*V.«.  292,  318 

V"~.  sio 

^d^,841 

dpX"-««,  820 

Jp,^,  98,  276,469,471,4M 

ft'|3a«»,64 

io^;S.u.,  15 

5.fla«J«,294 

dc-Ay.w,  166,  894 

i3.3<>.W»,  417 

d<r&'Mui,  362 

B.X^,  825 

d^e^^m,  55,  227 

^Aot,  409 

S5p<H  169,  819 

d^rror.'.,  207 

^..Tudr,  212 

INDEX  OF  OBBEK  WOBDS. 


SAuir^fua,  397,  603 
^^»,  83,  MO,  US,  485 


ioC\o^ 


,520 


fipaffiiof.  235,  460 
|3fMt3nl«,  606 
AxfXO',  223 
ffpi.^,  169,  ITO,  221 
fipiiTK,  493 


,.«<!,  479 
ycnipi,  335 

r^»c,44e 

yia,  498 

■/(ipyn,..,  201 

ylro^i,  83,  67,  128,  195,  266,  S74, 
293,  804,  397,  8%  486,  439, 
448,  468,  472,  SliP^ 

rir^ir..,  77,  80,  226,  821,  886,  399, 

447 

yr^^m,  331,  466 

yriliil,  188 

Vno^'(».  273,  330,  424,  479 

ywinru,  131,  187 
ytwrrrdt,  15 

»,T7.-t.,  240 

■yoyyinrfidt,  438 

YpoM^,  303,  304 

yfya^ifiaTttSSf  192 
yfmi^^,  3,  61 
ypaifMi,  112,  182 
yptryopiu.  510 
yv).wJt.  280,  317 

dnt^nok',   243 

8.',  110,  321 
S<V.[,  111,411,416 
dtl,  20,  95 
a.iy,«j-.'f„,,  492 
Hoiuu,  331,  338 


0>irfiiof,  516 

httr^t,  419 

dfinran)!,  608 

HX"!^,  198,  410 

ftiXJv,  188,  464 

a*ii,  60, 132.  303,  319,  876,  382,  88 

887,  411,  446,  447,  462,  470 
iufioKot,  406 

iurfpiXm,  106 
itaeqa,,  100,  261,  808 
S«up<a-(t,  265 
SuWOMH,  802 

auaoWa,  125,  167,  255,  836,  890 
d«£n»o(,  303,  416,  464,  611 
au»p.'iw,  66,  213,  263 
SuMffxrit,  167 
a«>iayt<rM<it,  16,  167,  438 
imrata,  376,  893,  476 
am<TTaXi7,  268 
S.«aT-p.'^.j,  439 


ray.). 


1G4 

1,254 


J.a0/pu,  29.  418 

iiia^Stipti^  oil 
«^a(urrfj,,  197 
aiaatnaXid,  499 

a:a»^<,  123 

Si(piiiT"uw,  269 
bifpx^l"*'-!  62 

a:«]u>t,  10,  13,  49,  60,  403 
ittau,Tvvr,,  9,  Ha,  170,  825, 

447 
BuHu^,  37,  49,  69,  216 
ttimmna,  24,  63,  86 
iiXoaraaiOf  181 

.,  160.  313,  449 

tiy^a,  378,  490 
«oyt«T.'fi,.,  498 

aM.^f.n,  21.  172,  360,  418 
h,  58,  297.  330,  336,  358 

I  aoXcrio.,  36 

S(>X<i»,  310 


INDEX  OF  GRBEK  WORD& 


553 


n6(a,  41,  66,  94,  247,  281,  804,  806, 

370,  454,  480 
do(dCia,  125,  260,  805 

dovXayaryf  o»,  237 
dovXcuctf,  509 

doi>\os,  2,  71,  404,  483 
dovXdo),  219,  238 
dpdaa-ofxaif  204 
dvvafuUj  454 

dvuofut,  4,  9, 268,  276,  383, 448,  466 

dvyafUMu,  466 
dt/Kircotf,  168 
dvMirof,  56 
duo,  425 
iva<f»ffU6»,  208 
htiptaVf  42,  846 

c'ovrov,  60,  161,  897,  401,  402,  505, 

506 
'£/3paior,  445 
/yci>a>,  273,  872 
cyicaiccca,  882 
cyffoXcca,  97 
ry«earaXff  tVo),  813 
9yK€rrpi(<Of  127 
ryKtmri,  232 
fyffoirrca,  175 
€yKpaT€vofiaif  218,  236 
(yicpiM»,  843 
fyo»,  81 
idpaioSf  476 
tBfXoBpffaKfiaf  499 
<*^Aa>,  280,  479,  521 

i6¥apxt^%  858 
;^f,  5,  118 
<;  «a^i,  320 
fiirtpf  92 
f ^f,  319 
cidttXcToir,  227 
fidwXo^^vroi',  225 
fiduXoXorpi^t,  211 
cfdoXoy,  226,  227 


ctit^,  496 

ciVttir,  18,  96,  247,  310,  468 

ftXuepiiKCia,  211,  292 

€ikucpunitf  418 

c/  M^>  219 

c/fu',  374 

cZiroy,  276 

t^njKOf  356 

f/p^wy,  57,  170,  878 

c/pi7K>froccca,  474 

c^,  52,  66,  182,  190,  216,  288,  251, 
806,  370,  879,  385,  886,  890, 
403,  417,  418,  440,  441,  470, 
478,  508,  516,  517 

ffc,  156 

fV,  f'f ,  49,  50,  51,  71,  101,  103,  182, 
284,  300,  812,  359,  882,  425, 
445,  447,  448,  450,  472,  514 

tKturrotf  888 

tftcfiaaiSf  241 

cffdairoMio),  857 

tMxofJUUf  254 

cVdi/fiCoa,  819 

iKdiiaja-iSf  162,  329 

cVdutt,  318 

tKUPOSf  170 

fK(riri^f  35 
tmeaiofuUf  20 
^lueXdCc^,  126 
cjcicXf  tea,  49 
iiULknaia,  178,  2^ 
iicicktp^y  181 
«Vie<$irr«,  128,  847 
tickiyofuu,  364 
c'lcXoyi],  103,  128 
iKvri<t>9»,  279 
iKir(ipd(tif  240 
€Kfrinr9»f  102,  265 
ff«rdf,  217 
tKTpMfUlf  278 
tK^vPta^  59 

^icuii',  283 


554 


INDBX  OF  GBBBK  WOBD& 


cXdero'wv,  108 
€ka(f>pia,  298 
€Xa<t>p6t,  815 
tXdxitrroSf  205 
§ka\iarT6T€poif   881 

€\€yx<^,  271,  899,  400 

CXCCQ),    104 

(Xcu^cpiu,  94 
iXtvBfpoSf  72 
'EXXi/i',  193 
cXXoycM,  62,  523 
A9rt(c0,  331 

Air/f,  94,  231,  387,  462,  480 
tfjLavroVf  -r^  -tov^  295 
c/i/SaTfuo),  496 
c/io(,  447 
€fin\fj3<Of  175 

cV,  65,  219,  290,  859,  386,  387,  394, 
425,  426,  436,  468,  471,  475, 
485,  502, 517 
ivapxofUUf  417 

Vdciicin^fu,  28,  376 

i/d«ff,  47,  427 

vbrjfjiiu)f  318,  319 

Vd<>fov,  207 

VSui/a^tJoj,  56,  405,  460 

i/dt'O),  286 

u€py€ia,  371,  381,  454,  481 

Wpy/u;,  77,  372,  438,  482 

v€pyf}tf  517 

viy  503 

..iVrr/^i,  98,  204,  220 

VVOfXOSj   234 

i/o;^of,  252 

WaX/xa,  499 

WoXiJ,  378 
Vr/jfTTO),  209 
VTpoirrif  213 
Wvy;((ii'a),  120 
i'7n;»rda),  304 
f  .yoprifo),  401,  610 

fiXfiV^o),  490 


i(loawrra<nt,  448 
cfnraraw,  79,  181 
*(mrop€Ofiai,  292,  812 
ffcyctpo),  105 
a^(c(m,  215 
t(iarrjfxtf  319 
f(i<rxv(^9  384 
i^o/iokoyfopaif  169,  486 
/(ov^Woi,  167, 194,  342 
ffn^rta,  106,  231,  248,  276, 874,  466^ 
469,  491 

c(overtu^Q>,  215 

;£«,  510 

^oprd^o),  211 
fOpTTJf  494 
^irayycXta,  377,  408 
firaufot,  459 

fVatpctf,  340,  849 

«Vawifrat;o/Aai,  29 
*E7ra<^par,  524 
cVc/,  123 

(YTfcd^,    192 

tntienivw,  450 

tntvdvofiaif  317 

firtpxofMif  376 

(ntx<^t  439 

cVi,  290,  330,  358,   387,   409,  44Q, 

441,  447,  450,  505,  516 
»7ri3ap€'cD,  296 
cVcycior,  281,  315,  452 
tmyiv^a-KQiy  267,  292 
€TTiyu<o(Ti^,  40,    112,  370.  890,  46S^ 

466,  483,  517 
iiritiKfjs.  457 
cVi^acfiriOf,  206 
(niBvpriTr}tt  240 

tni6vp.la,  19,  78,  395 

tiriKoXfopaif  116,  186,  294 

fVipfVo),  65,  425,  476 

firvtroBifOy  317 
iirmo&riTOff  454 
firia-Tjpoff  180 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORD& 


555 


(ViO'iajMko,  S56 
4ifiaKonoi^  414 
iirumdofuuy  219 
ciri<rroXi7,  302 
ffHcrvraiTiS,  352 
cfTircXco),  331,  417 
(7rirvy;^ayi0,  123 
iniff>€p»,  33,  422 
iirixopriyf^f  335,  497 
tnixopriyiaf  892,  423 
(7roiicodo/Mo>,  484 
fnovofAa^ofuUf  28 
fVovpanor,  281,  364,  372,  407 
cpydCoMOi,  229,  282,  508 
fpymriof  894 
<>c^iC«»,  507 

9ft€vva»,  196 

^pi^^,  26,  357,  421, 429 
ipit,  23,  189 

tpovfifv,  50 
^aotrrpov,  266 
«W«,  249,  471 

ftrxaroSf  206 
?(fa>,  82,  383 
crffpoftrycu,  324 

^rcpoc,  82,  165,  200,  245,  346,  881 
?n,  261 

iroifiaaiaf  409 
€vdp9ffroSf  154,  899 
fvy«i^(,  193 
«vdo«c/a>,  319,  472 
nfdoKiOf  111,  365 

cAoyfo),  160,  208,  864 

€v\oyrfT6sf  101,  363 
€l\oyla,  242,  334 
tvobolpnij  7,  288 
(vnaptfipovj  223 
cvfTpoo-drrrof,  322 

c^rpiVicM,  81,  434,  447 
€V(rxrffi6umSf  166 
rvaxffAoavinj^  259 
ci^poirfXta,  398 


ti^flfiost  459 
cv^paiMtf,  173 
rv;^apurrco»,  186,  250 
tv}(apiariay  814,  485 
fUxoiuu^  99 
cuudui,  299,  398 
Evtiddio,  455 

f<^fra(,  70 

?X^^,  378 

<X^p<Jr>  60 

?X»,  57,  72,  210,  824,  882,  445^  522 

Ca«»  78,  423,  424 

;^Xo£,  112,  166,  518 

Cik6^,  345 

fi;/ua,  446 

fyiu6i»,  203,  828,  446 

Ci7r<»>  193,  205 

C^,  85,  393,  501 

£<M<OTOC«a>,  284 

^,119 

rfytofJMif  446 

^7,  213 

f ^f,  278 

'Kkias,  119 

i^Xcffui,  391 

i^Xtffof,  482 

i^ficpa,  26,  205,  315,  440 

fJTTTjfia,  124,  213 

i;;(f  o),  262 

AiXfra>,  402 
^ovoror,  304 
Aivordo),  74,  91 

0app€(Of  830,  339 

Bforpov,  207 
^cion^f,  16 

^cXiy^,  224,  375,  512 

e^Xio,  80,  82,  105,  107,  488,  482,  490 

BtyiiXioi,  175 

^M«Xcr^>,  384, 476 


277 


r,  502 


556 

0,St,  310,  SW 

fifoirrvyiir,  24 
Stanjt,  486 
AJXfu,  20 

^pa,  124 

6^,Tavpl(»,  26, 388 

dtyyam,  498 
Ai^»,  312 

A;^»,  422,  477 

diniania,  495 

dpufid*^  298,  M2 

fipiros.  469 

^)ujf,  367,  3! 

S6pa,  510 

dup..^,  409 

^l>.'c,  863 

6i»rU,  153,  397,  440 

6imu,<TT^pu>r,  120,  282,  248 

d»p<i(,  406 

Tiun,  97. 401 
fSianrf,  270 
UpowXii,  30 
Upoiipyim,  174 
'IqirouE,  394 
fmrac,  175 
i.cii^,  303,  466 
IKapiis,  334 
lAupunjr,  158 
iAao-T,)„.D^,  43 
r«n,  313,  523 
iVnTijc,  332,  509 
tffo^ujifoc,  440 


INDKX  OF  OaSKK  WORDa 


i<rx\» 


371 
.,460 


unOalfMait,  3 
■aAitp.'*,  34( 

»..flup,-:«,  40i 

criAjfUIl,  601 


mA'Cot  213,  372 

KnAianifu,  64 


n>A^,  864,  SM,  417,  461 


■oi^,  102,  221,  867,  411,  610 

nuB,  268 

mtia,  271,  897,  608 

taicor,dtta,  23 

iEoXd^,  203 

■oXf'u,  65,  102,  108 

vAit,  81,  217 

Kokufi/ia,  307 

JToXviTTH,  810 

mXm,  128 
Hi.^*,  343,  844 
unnfXtia,  300 

.apa/c,  16,  116,  308,  871.  468,  606 
n^mdr,  8,  418 

imrd,  369,  460 

utri  iApvmw,  83,  230 

«ira/3(MVU,  389 

«aT,j3"I>Xu.,  313 
«uTo3^<^..;^,  43.' 
laToyyAXu,  ti,  195,  252 
mra^ouX.So,  348 
iuir(u.rxJK.>,  68 
JTuriUfn^ ,  63,  85 
KaTOKph,^,  254 

■araXa^M^,  110,  236,  384,  449 
mraXii'irw,  123 
MTflXXtty^,  62,  125 
«ar,iXAd<rB-<..,  61,  321 
..mak.'m,  ITl,  316 
I),  347 


iM.'«,  66 
un-uu,  241,  390 
linific,  124 


INDBX  OF  GREEK  WORD& 


557 


iearapy(a»,  92,   78,  77,  195,  216,  804, 

806,  807,  878 
KorapriC^^f  107,  188,  861 
KorapTiais,  861 
KaTapria'fi6ff  890 
Konuricanrmf  120 
KoraarpwtnnffUf  289 
Kararofi^,  444 
ieara<^povco»,  25 
Koraxpoofuu,  222,  288 
mrf  Woirtoy,  475 
KaTtpyd(ofUU,   78,   80,  81,  815,  818, 

828,  867,  487 

Korcer^ictf,  849 
icar(;(tt),  16,  824 
KaTri)(€»f  29,  271 

icaroMf «,  888,  472, 474 

KarouajTripioVf  880 
Kororrrpi^ofuu,  809 
KortBTtpotf  889 
ffav;(ao/Mii,  61,  444 
<cavxi7/ia,  211,  426^  440 
Kavx7(rtr,  49,  174,  276 
Kfifuu,  422 
jcci^,  247 
KtPodo(ia,  480 
iccK^r,  276,  822,  485 
Kcvdoo,  191,  482 
iccVrpoy,  286 
icfpdoivtt,  288,  447 
«cfpdo(,  446 
icf0aXi7,  246,  497 
K^pvyfiOf  192 
KTfpvairta,  114,  288 
«cAipa,  268 
leXador,  126 

lckflpOv6fJLOSj  54 

Kkijp6opai,  868 

leX^por,  466 

ieX$<rir,  198,  219,  887,  460 

irXTrdf ,  2,  6 

JcXvdMM^OfUM,  891 


ffocfuiofum  225,  258|  285 

KOiv6tf  169 

ffoiM»Wfl»,  169 

icoiiTttir^,  187,  242,  881,  887,  416, 516 

KOiPWVOSf   248 

icoXa<^'C«>  366 
«oXXaa>,  168,  216 

ico/iiCo),  819,  406,  609 
«oiria«,  179,  207,  481 
jKojrof,  618 
Kop€inntfUj  205 

KO<rfJLOKpaT»Pt  406 

icd<r^f,  196,  207,  496 
KpdC«,  91,  109 

ffporcM,  497 

icporor,  871,  466 

Kpavyri,  897 

Kpffar,  228 

Kpciercrwy,  KpfimtPy  261,  425 

icpiVo,  26,  68,  164,  214,  262 

icpcW,  26,  27,  88,  167,  168, 171,  206 

218,254,498 
Kpirripiop,  212 
Kpvwrti,  601 

icr/C»,  876,  879,  896,  469,  470 
KTiVif ,  92,  820,  468,  476 

KVptiOf  891 
Kv^ptnfo-itf  260 
jcvicXy,  174 
KvpffaXoVf  268 

Kvpuuc6tf  249 
Kvpif^f  168 
Kjipiof,  115,  808, 508 

KVpiArrjt,  469 
KvpSm,  296 

KitfAOt,  166 

XaXc«,  86,  401,  421 
Xa^i3aM»,  68,  849,  449 
XdfMrw,  811 
Xadf,  109,  119 
Xorpcta,  101,  154 


INDBX  OF  QRKEE  WORDS. 


XoTfMIW,  7,  19,  4 


Xayo 


;  167 


X^,  S6,  113, 189 

Xnrov/Tytv,  176 

X4irwf»yfa,  885,  440,  442 

XoTovpydi,  164,  174,  441 

XfAic,  304 

Xoyu,  287 

Xoy^of^.  35,  61,  62,  92,  266 

\cyu6t,  154 

\Afu,r,  31 

XiSyoc,  110,  187,  499,  610 

\ot6opim,  we 

»  Xourd*,  \«ir(l>,  221,  361,  443 

X«.rilr,  37S,  420,  467 

Xavrpd>,  402 

Xwr<«,  169,  329 

XiW.  ^.  295,  826,  384 

Xi^a,  378 

luudputt,  22fi 

J.nrafl«t, 


»XXo> 


246 


^...po^^;..,  46C,  COS 
/.dXucic,  216 

^uiAurra,  622 

^Wnt,  97,  419,  426,  ( 

^av66y^,  394 

/mprOptox,  18V,  195 
^prvpw.  111 
^r,ii6oi^i,  16 

^»<»(.  276 
fiaraiiynjtj  93,  393 
^axoipa,  164,  410 

f»y<iXu>'<u,  344 

^<'A;,  16C 
IAt0iirT jj^i,  467 

,.ffl,8..-a,  392,  406 
^,eC<T„o^a;  401 


^■'Cov,  108 

fuXu,  803 

fuXXa,  66, 91 

fuXoc,  70,  609 

/iSr,  213 

ft/M>,  108 

/ufMftviiii,  457 

/upt'Co,  190 

lupitt  466 

f/pot,  129,  17i  260,  272,  292,  4 

fMirot,  491 

fi«rdrM;i;in^  378 

fumrft,  23 

fwniUftai^,  167 

fAfrmtifiat^  476 

^roXXiWc.,  19 

fUTYIflDfl^flOpRl,    164,  800 

fHni»ui,  827,  828 

/UT1l{u,  28 

fMTao-xifuri'Ca.  206,  848,  4C8 

M«^'X-.  243 

fifra;[4,  326 

fUTfior,  164, 891 

fu'^x.  890, 486 

m4  y."»«.i-<.,  82 

^•fitU,  429 

fi^Tiyf,  212 

,!.,».,  245 
lu^T^t,  246,  897 
/u<r.'u,  104 
fini'o,  416,  516 
futXOtv,  227 
fioKviffiitf  326 
fiDii^.  506 
MMiwt.  120 
pi^^,  430,  483 
It6p^ai{,  29 
ruiX^ac,  513 
^dw,  460 
Itvtrr^piop,  129,  2S8 


INDEX  OF  GREBK  WORDS. 


559 


fi€»patvw,  192 
fnapiof  191 
fKapokayia,  896 
fitipo^^  193 

pai,  293,  523 
pa6i,  203,  217,  830 
P€Kp6,,  4,  276,  472,  489 
t^€Kp6<Of  56,  501 
piKptoaitf  313 
i^of,  211,  503 
mi,  276 

i'i;irca(ib),  271 

v^iot,  29.  200,  891 

vriartia,  323 

i^cieaflA,  33 

i>cicof,  286 

p^fjfia,  297,  307,  458 

pofxoOta-iof  101 

vfi/AOf,  27,  85,  447 

pov6€<rta,  241,  404 

vovBtrionj  173,  480 

vuvfiiyyiti,  494 

yovf ,  82,  199,  269,  895,  457,  496 

iruKi',  41,  81,  267 

yv\Brni€poVi  351 
^vp<ift),  247 
^vvi;,  99 

odvfjfioSf  327 

oZda,  80,  119,  169,  482 

oiKirrjif  168 
otiofn^pioVy  317 
olKutf  315 

OCKodo/iCO),  227 

olKo^firi,  201,  267,  316,  380,  390, 396 
o^oM>M«a>  233,  367,  381,  478 

OlKOVOfJiOS,   182 

oticof,  178 
oiKOVfiitnjj  117 
otitrfipWf  104 


oiWcp/idr,  153,  290,  429,  504 

ol^,  101 

3icM7pds,  159,  442 

6icra^fifpos,  445 

Skoeptvrijt,  240 

oXttf ,  210 

6fuXui,  278 

6iAol€ifia,  18,  438 

6fu>Xoy<cu,  115 

6yuo\ayiay  336 

dvimifu,  523 

6pofAa,  436 

^Xa,  70 

OfTOV,   503 

jpirrofuu,  273 

apyi7.  15,  33,  60, 107, 162,  375,  502 

6pyi{<^uUf  396 

^p«(if ,  20 

6pi(i»f  3 

6erton7r,  396 

o^r/i^,  398 

o<rof,  66,  482 

Ztrra,  19,  100,  178,  204,  373,  398. 

427,  441,  446,  456,  499,  502 
oarpaiuwof^  312 
wrilivtf  407 
^ojr,  27,  288 
^i,  94,  115,  242,  449 
ovdcif ,  226 
o^icm,  81,  522 
o^v,  446,  522 
ovpavoif  284 
ovraK,  113,  451 

6<f>tiktTfjtf  8 

6<f>tikfjfiay  51 
oipSaXfAodovkiia,  508 

6<f>6aiXfwtf  371 

6xvpiafia,  340 

3ifr«»Mov,  73,  229 

tray  Iff,  124 
frdOrjfjui,  77 


660 

wi0ot,  19 

<r<uS;o*,  271 
waii«,  MO 

jruXonii  liua/imn-gt,  67 

iroAi],  406 

vawfmXla,  405 
wvfovpyia,  810,  891 


INDHZ  OV  GRBBK  WOBDB. 


nap^ltu^i,  18, 66,  72, 246, 260, 394, 
897 

KOftaioais,  246 

in>f>uaX<'>o,  153,  188,  208,  4fi5, 482 
irapiiicdfwii,  81 
irap<ijcXq<7tc,  267,  290,  428 
mpaxofj,  63 
napoXa^i'.u,  250,  484 
ira/hzXoyJfo^ai,  463 
napanvBia,  267 


ropciin 


.,374 


napavrlta,  315 
wapaippoviui,  350 
)rap<SpiiJu>,  232 
(rii/»i/u,  464 
iraptiaip)(Ofiaif  64 


n^cmifu,  177,  227,  403,  i7B 

lUDE,  379 
iropofuvofiiu,  265 

n-opo^.'foi,  118 

Topoutr^,  426 

■-iipP7<r<d,  806,  492,  616 

,  36(^  899,  411,  418,  416,  441. 
447,  469,  470,  476,  480.  612 

waaxa,  211 
Kaax",  427 
irorpid,  868 
Uavkoc,  1 

ro'Au,  itiVdiAi,  169,  819,  445 
vftpiiCtt,  360 
tnnjE,  613 
tnr^'u,  858 
xAi,  417 
tr(pt,  86, 611 

mptoipite,  306 
rtpifiiwufii,  407 
rtpucaSapfuif  208 
■rd^Qi'n,  410 
w»piiror«iJ,  67,  400,  466 
rrfpHToi^a-it,  369 

■-.p«7<7<i^,  291,  314,  366 


ntjHTOfiii,  445,  488 
f..-^7,.Q,  208 


tiapijfai,  509 
natiTfyopiiif  512 

mvd.Vo<,  221),  224 
lajMffTduM,  70,  71 


ir..fTi)[,  127 

irumuo,  61,  70,  115,  167,  274 

iri'imt,  5,  14,  112, 154, 166,  263,  ! 

409,  426.  476 
irurrit,  187,  298 


DTDBZ  OP  OBBKK  WOBDS. 


vXan),  892 
n\d(.  303 
itXarunt,  .124 
n\ti-^r,  Mi,  296,  430 

irx<oHf<»,  e&,  3U 

^X«in>cT.u,  297,  826 
tXfot^iU..  22,  394 

nXi}!',  422 

iT\iip<xt>oi>{m,  66,  16S,  612 

irXqfm^Mpi'a,  488 

wX^ipSm,  175,  873,  429,  478,  488 

nXqp.^  124,  367,  886,  472 

6  irXqiriof,  166 

vXi)<r|is*^,  600 

rrXot/r/C^,  ISfi 

irXovrof,  26 

(TxCfu,  86,  86,  91,  196,  269,   284. 

310,  366,  896,  410,  444 
v-v,iaTix6t,  80,  197,  283,  Sfti,  4011, 


>,S63 


466 


,  261,  276,  861,  S75,  38i, 


troXuiroiiiXiK,  882 
iroXiic,  618 
mvtipia,  406 
irartipot,  212,  613 
aSm,  613 
rropHj,  216 
nivit,  170,  493 
rorqfiuw,  242 
worii^,  200 
frpoirai^fni',  419 

vp^i,  91,  154 
npdaat,,  24,  80 
trpavrrit,  604 
irpfcrgfiiv,  321,  411 
wpta&vrift,  618 


irpoiMoiiui,  463 
1ipoyi«iiT<!M,  95 

•tfMMXiri'C*,  368 

npoctirut-,  110 
frpofupxn^uit,  881 
irpofiTiiyy^XXai,  3,  884 
n'pori/n^Ta,  359 

frp«Tni^^f«,,  108,  377 
irpMxoruu,  34 
npo^ix^ai,  15!* 
rp.(0«rtc,  103,  382 


L,  1S8 
irfKwaTqprifBj,  834 

^poW^.,3a2 
ffpo.«„i,  419 

ffp».anTa,,  165 

v,MX;yM,  369 

vpowotmf  161,  388 
irpifKiu,  166 
npaopi^m,  866 
.rpoT.W«,  176 

ir/xfi,  67,   111,   803,   368,  381, 
467,  616,  621 

Tipoaayvy!),  58,  879 
jrp<,iTo»intXi7()(!oi ,  886 
npoafuxhi  "in 

iipoatwj^Aiuu,  269,  46B 

npoin/Xoia,  491 
«paaiiafiTi(u<a.  160,  610 
irprHTJKajjTi'iili''".  411 
vpixricaXXiiii,  402 
rpixriro^fu,  169,  171,  227 
irfHxricJUTi*,  111 
ir^KHrXiTfjtAind,  167 
trpHTM^fXw,  523 
itpoimirii,  178 
ttpoa^Afft,  469 


562 


INDEX  OF  GRBBK  WORDS. 


rr^o<T<l)*tf}d,  174,  397 
nf}o(T<o7To\rjyl^iti,  26 
npoauTTov,  292,  297 
irp6rfpop,  293 
irpoTi&rjfMif  43,  367 
npiOTtvitif  472 
frpcorov,  6,  31 
nporrosy  403 

irpoiToroicos,  97,  468,  472 
nrvpo),  427 
irT<ii)(€vu}y  331 
irvrrcvu),  236 
nvfioot,  409 
ir»pd(ii),  123,  307 
ntipia<n^,  129,  398 
ir»(,  279,  448 

p5/ia,  117,  402,  411 
pif^Of  127 
pi((i<u,  384,  484 
ptTTi],  285 
pvTis  402 
pCofxai,  130 

(rd/3/3orov,  (rti/S/Sara,  288,  494 

(rdXTTiy^,  268 
canpoi,  396 
aapyuvrjf  363 
o-ap«c(«cdr,  200 
cr«>icti/off,  80,  200,  303 

crripf  37,  74,  90,  320,  425,  478, 488, 
496 

Saruf,  355 
(r€^(i^op.ai,  19 
a(pf(hj  458 
aHp.flovj  54,  357 
<nyda>,  183 
(rKavdaX  1^0),  228 
ff-icdvdaXoi/,  111,  181 
rriccOoff,  107 
crx^i'oj',  315 
(TKkrjpvvtaf  105 


<rieoXiuf,  439 

aK^koy^^  354 

aKoniw,  430,  451 

(rffofl-off,  450 

<r«opiri(a>,  335 

<r«oror,  399,  406 

aKv^XoVf  447 

(rcK^ui,  131,  191,  866,  882,  465, 480 

(ro<t>6%f  202 

antiptOf  279 

fmfvhopMLf  440 

(TfrlXoff,  402 

cnrXayx*^'  S^>  ^^7,  429,  504,  517 

(Tfrovddfco,  386 

oirovdi^,  158,  159,  329 

oradcov,  234 

OTovpdr,  191,  491 

oravpdtt,  193 

(rrcy»,  231,  265 

(TTfXXo/iai,  388 

ffTtyox^piopaif  812 
<rrtvo)(mpictf  26,  828 
OTCp/o)^,  484 

aT€(f>avoVf  236,  454 
(m7iea>,  426 

OTT/pi'^O),  7 

<rrot;(€loi',  486 
oTotx^u),  54,  451 

(TTpaTtvn^ui,  229,  339 
(Txryytvr'jif  180 
axryKa6i^>*'f  376 
(TvyicdftTrro),  124 
(rvy»caTd^€0'tf,  325 
cnry»ccpdi'ia;Mt»  259 
(nry«cXf(a>,  130 
avyK\rjpov6fiOif  381 
avy«cocva>vfu>,  399 
avyjcoiMcdvos',  127,  417 
avyKpivoiy  197 
avyxaipwy  265,  440 

(TV^tio),  70 

crvfr^TT^T^ff,  192 


UTDBX  OF  GBBBK  WORDa 


563 


in){oHmoL€<Of  489 
rrvXayoyyco),  485 
irvXaoiy  847 
(TvXXa/A/Sdyctf,  456 
arvfjiffaivco^  241 

av/jL^i^dCija,  199,  392,  482 

avfifiapTvptco^  28,  92 
(rVfxfUro)^ot,  381 
(rv/A/ii^i/r^f,  451 
avfjLfjLop<f}i^a>,  448 
vvfifiopcfxis^  96,  458 

CVfltPfffU^  81 
OVfAffiVTOty  67 

o-v/A^Mtfvi/crir,  325 
avvay«avi(ofiaij  176 
<7vva^<ci>,  426,  456 
(n;yai;(fuiXa>rof,  180,  524 
avvavafiiywfJLt  y  211 
(TVvaKifrai'O/uii,  176 
fTV¥a¥TiKayL^voiuny  94 
(n/potrayo/iai,  160 
(TUvapfAoXoyiofiaif  380,  892 
avi^ftrfios,  497,  505 
(ryvdovXof,  511 
avvtyttpta,  489  501 

(TVI'Cldl/O'tC,   227 

avpfpytoHf  95,  322 
o-cvro-ir,  191,  465,  488 

aVV€V^OKtU»y  218 

avvcV  o,  320,  424 

crt'i'^f  yof,  455 
cvvridofxtUf  82 
(TwAifrrtt,  66,  489 
avvtrjfjiif  401 
avplarrjfjii,  33,  471 
avt^iKo^opitaf  380 
fTvi^;^^,  295 
trvvTfXfo),  110 

(rVUTtfltHUf   110 

irvuTpi^to,  182 
avvrpififia^  36 
2u»^»'';^i7,  455 


a-vywdivw,  94 
(rvo-crw/ia,  381 
<rvoT(XX»,  221 
(rvoTfra^o),  94 
ai;(r;(i7ftar((o/Aai,  154 
a<PpayiCcj,  294,  369 
ai>payU,  54,  228 
(Tx^/ifl,  434 
<T)(iatiaf  188 
<r;^oXaf«,  217 
(ra»C»,  191,  192 

cro^/ia,  67,  279,  281,  282,  283,  453, 

454,488 
aStpa  Saydrot;,  84 
(ra>/iariiC(D(,  486 
aotpwvto,  163 
(reoT^Pf  453 
(Twnjpitt,  111,  165,  410 

rcfy/Ad,  275 
raXat7rai/><'k,  84 
rci^if,  484 

raiTfti^'f ,  160,  327,  337 

ranfii^ofppoa'vyrj,  430,  495 
rorrcivcMtf,  435 
ranfivuxTitf  453 
ruo'O'a),  164 
ra(^f,  35 

rcVvoi^,  92,  375,  439 

rcAfios,  195,  271,  891,  451 

rcXfioT^f ,  505 

rcXftocD,  449 

rcXco),  164 

r<Xof,  112,  165,  241,306 

rrjptny  386 

r/Vt  54,  259,  260,  288,  821 

Tifirfy  500 
Wy,  84 

roX/Ad»,  339,  421 

ToKprjpnTfpoPf  173 

Totrof,  162,  175,270 

TOTf,  288 


nroax  OF  QREKK  woHua, 


rpiX",  440 
t«t;(J™,  280 

1  *o«pJ-.  41,  819,  846,  400,  601.  610 

^™«.  62.  71.  240.241           S";"02.8«. 

SA-p,  402                   ^.*.M««.  97,  221 

»Jo3(o-;o,  91,  3S5               ^iw,  344,  461 

Ms,  91,  875                 *A;p-,  204,  896 

W«<,^,  6,  64                 *Att™«,  H7,  268 

w«<..;«,  116                 *A,pd,  499 

t»<i^j(„,  259,  430,  452          I  ^^^f"'",  160 

™««^;«,,  490 

0do.ro^.'o,  485 

i-r.p.  59,  110,  190,  206,  866,  427 

438,  464,  621,  522.  524 

<M<^./«Vo*,  176,  819 

i^'pf'^o,,  224 

^tfui",  280 

W,pdw,,  873 

0*»„,  819 

iB-.pftiA\rivr„,,  850 

^Voi,  28 

inripa-iiX^,  371,  885 

•^V".  164,  286 

irr^pflo*^,  79,  292,  812,  316,  864 

M«>t,  164,  166 

vntp,M^,p,a„oi,,  386 

*P'T7«ft,878 

im,p.„,i,^,  344 

<t>pi<'<r«,  86,  847 

im<p,^riyx-i-^,   95 

*p.wr,  271 

fer.p,>»..  168,  467 

i)r.pX«.,.  346 

469.601      •   '   .«5. 

ii"P««M.98 

*prf^i«.,  90 

^'poxn,  194 

«prf^<r«,  866 

iir.p«,p,ao-.™.  66,  827 

*pd»/«..  129,  242 

i^tpvyfro^,   435 

^poi-p.'a,  353,  458 

v)n?p»'njt.  205 

^-Ao,^,  323 

wnlBiimt,  36 

«ifpoM»,  106,  210 

wro^.'nu,  265 

«..o,d„,  205,  264.  496 

wiofw^,  466                   tfii^o-K,  248  370 

"ro,rruo.t,  334                  ^ffi'wo-it,  357 

iifoToy^,  336                   ^wtffl,  200 

«rordffff«,  90,  93,  454 

*««i,268 

i^orlSti^,  178 

0it,  399.  466 

vfrawmf*.  237 

*«<n-7P,  439 

i""-.p,-«,  41 ,  187 

^»T.'f«,  371 

i.rr,>,^,  289,  442,  447 

^"^E,  3U 

^V"-M,  340 

*<i.'i™,  439 

olpT,,  361 

^'wpri^  419                    '" 

oA-crit.  262 

Jl 

■»pri,  170,  464 

INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORD& 


565 


xapiCofiai,  296,  427,  485,  489,  624 
Xdpif,  51,  245,  298,  881,  888,  888, 

417,  507 
xdpuTfuz,  7,  73,  187,  218,  255 

;(apirdo»,  865 

\€i()6ypa(f)0¥y  490 

Xkofiy  189 

XoTic6sf  284 

Xoprjyiviy  885 

Xoprrd^Qiy  460 

Xpaofiaif  861 

XP^^Oj  396 

XprjfiaTiCn,  74 

XpflfJ^oTiirfiot,  122 

Xpfl<T(vofjLaif  264 

XpfJ<rr6koyiaf  181 

Xprj(rr6sf  897 

;^f)i7(rron;ff,  85,  128,  876,  504 


Xf)icrrd(,  207,  419,  428,  440 
Xnp*a>,  826 
X^plC^f  522 

V^dXXo),  178,  269 
^f  Cdoff,  19,  896 
^vafuif  84 
yn^Xa^fli),  498 
yjtiBvpiafiotf  857 
Vrvx>7,  120,  284,  508 
VrvxMOf,  197,  282 
^a>^iCa>,  168,  268 

cSv,  90,  164,  898 
&pa,  522 
a>/ja(or,  116  - 

i>f,  402,  521     •^^** 
&<m*pf  62 


..  \^2 


