This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 

We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at  http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/| 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


► 


r 


Digitized  by  VjOO^IC 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


UC6 


Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


..« 


\  -. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


WORD   STUDIES 


neW  testament 


BY 


MARVIN  R.  VINCENT,  D.D. 

BALDWIN  PBOnSSOR  OP  SACRXD  UTBRATURB  IM  UNION  THBOLOGICAL  SBMINABY 
NBW  YORK 


VOLUME  IT. 

THE  WRITINGS  OF  JOHN 

THE  GOSPEL 

THE  EPISTLES 

THE  APOCALYPSE 


**Tbe  looftto  tbat  I  liaTe  ■poken  onto  yon  are  iplrit,  mmi  are  Itte." 

/oftn  71,68 


NEW  YORK 

CHARLES  SCRIBNER'S  SONS 
1889 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


"B^  I  33  K.zy 


•CQUIST  OF 
MTIWI  STUAKT  WAlCOlf 

MINI  t,  \m 


COPVMGHT,  1889,  BY 

CHARLES  SCRIBNER'S  SONS 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


LIST  OF  AUTHORS  MD  EDITIONS, 

ni  ADDITION  TO   THOfiB  GITKD  DC  VOLUMB  L 


Ackermann,  0. :  The  Christian  Element  in  Plato  and  the  Flatonio 
Philosophy.    Translated  by  S.  R  Asbury.     Edinburgh,  186L 

Alexander,  W. :  Commentary  on  the  Epistles  of  John.  Speaker's 
Commentary.     New  York. 

Bigg,  Charles :  The  Christian  Platonists  of  Alexandria.  Bampton 
Lectures  for  1886.     Oxford,  1886. 

Bleek,  Friedrich:  An  Introduction  to  the  New  Testament 
Translated  by  W.  Urwick.     2  vols.     Edinburgh,  1883. 

Bleek,  Friedrich :  Lectures  on  the  Apocalypse.    London,  1875. 

Crowe,  J.  A,  and  Cavalcaselle,  G.  B. :  The  Early  Flemish  Paint- 
era     2d  edition.     London,  1872. 

Curidus,  Oeorg :  Principles  of  Greek  Etymology.  5th  edition. 
Translated  by  A  S.  WiUdns  and  E.  B  England.    London,  1886. 

Cumming,  John :  Lectures  on  the  Seven  Churches  of  Asia  Minor. 
London,  1852. 

Delitzsch,  Franz :  Ein  Tag  in  Capernaum.    Leipzig,  1873. 

Duffield,  Samuel  W. :  English  Hymns,  their  Authors  and  History. 
New  York,  1886. 

DOsterdieck,  Friedrich:  Kritisch  Exegetisches  Handbuch  tiber 
die  Offenbarung  Johannis.    G^ttingen,  1859. 

Ebrard,  John  H.  A  :  Commentary  on  the  Epistles  of  John. 
Translated  by  W.  B.  Pope.    Edinburgh,  1860. 

Elliott^  R  B. :  Horee  Apocalypticse.  5th  edition.  4  Yola  Lon- 
don, 1862. 

Ewald,  Heinrich :  The  History  of  Israel  Translated  by  J.  E 
Carpenter.    6  vols.    London,  1874-78. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


IV  LIST  OP  AUTHORS  AND  EDITIONS. 

Field,  Frederick :  Otium  Norvicense.     Oxford,  1881. 

Forbiger,  Albertus :  P.  Virgilii  Maronis  Opera.  3  vols.  Leipsic, 
1852. 

Fisher,  George  P. :  Beginnings  of  Christianity.    New  York,  1877. 

Ford,  James :  The  Gk>spel  of  John  illustrated  from  Ancient  and 
Modem  Authors.     London,  1852. 

Ginsburg,  Christian  D. :  Coheleth.     London,  1861. 

Godet,  F. :  Commentary  on  the  Gbspel  of  St  John.  Translated 
by  Crombie  and  Cusin.     3  vols.     Edinburgh,  1876. 

Holtzmann,  Heinrich  Julius :  Die  Pastoralbrief e.    Leipzig,  1880. 

Huther,  John  Edward :  Kritisch  Exegetisches  Hondbuch  tlber 
die  drei  Briefe  des  Johannes.     GOttingen,  1855. 

Lee,  William :  The  Revelation  of  St  John.  Speaker's  Commen- 
tary.    New  York 

Luthardt,  Christoph  Ernst :  St.  John  the  Author  of  the  Fourth 
GbspeL  Revised  and  Translated  by  Caspar  Ben^  Gregory.  Edin- 
burgh, 1875. 

Macdonald,  James  M. :  The  Life  and  Writings  of  St  John. 
New  York,  1877. 

Milligan,  William  :  The  Revelation  of  St.  John.  Baird  Lecture 
for  1885.     London,.  1886. 

Milligan,  William :  Commentary  on  the  Revelation  of  John. 
Schaffs  Popular  Commentary.     New  York,  1883. 

Milligan,  William,  and  Moulton,  William  F. :  Commentary  on 
St  John's  Gospel.  Schaflf's  Popular  Commentary.  New  York, 
1880. 

Meyer,  Heinrich  A.  W. :  Critical  and  Exegetical  Handbook  to 
the  Gospel  of  John.  Translated  by  TJrwick  and  Crombie.  Edited 
by  A.  C.  Kendrick.    New  York,  1884. 

Milman,  Henry  Hart:  History  of  Latin  Christianity.  8  vols. 
New  York,  1860. 

Nagelsbach,  Carl  Friedrich  von :  Homerische  Theologie.  Ntlm- 
berg,  1884 

Neale,  J.  M,  and  Littledale,  R  F. :  Translations  of  the  Primitive 
Liturgies.     3d  edition.    London. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


LIST  OF  AUTHORS  AND  EDITIONS.  v 

Plmnptre,  E.  H. :  The  Epistles  to  the  Seven  Churches  of  Asia. 
Expositor.     First  Series.    Vols.  IL,  HL 

Plamptre,  R  H. :  The  Commedia  and  Canzoniere  of  Dante  Ali- 
gbierL    A  New  Translation.     2  vols.     Boston,  1887. 

Ritter,  Heinrich:  History  of  Ancient  Philosophy.  Translateil 
by  A.  J.  W.  Morrison.     4  vols.     London,  1846. 

Sears,  Edmund  H. :  The  Fourth  Gospel  the  Heart  of  Christ 
Boston,  1874. 

Sophocles,  E  A. :  Greek  Lexicon  of  the  Eoman  and  Byzantine 
Periods,  from  blc.  146  to  a.d.  1100.     Boston,  1870. 

Spiess,  Edmund  :  Logos  Spermaticos.     Leipzig,  1871. 

Trench,  Bichard  C. :  Commentary  on  the  Epistles  to  the  Seven 
Churches  in  Asia.     New  York,  1864. 

Yaughan,  Robert  Alfred:  Hours  with  the  Mystics.  London. 
2  vola     3d  edition.     1879. 

Westcott,  Brooke  Foss :  Commentary  on  the  Gospel  of  John. 
Speaker's  Commentaiy.    New  York,  1880. 

Wetstein,  John  J. :  Novum  Testamentum  GrsBCum,  with  various 
readings  and  commentary.     2  vols.    Amsterdam,  1751. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


ABBREVIATIONS. 


A.  V.     Authorized  Version. 
Apoo.     Apocalypse. 
Cii    Cited. 
=     Equivalent  to. 
Expn.     Explanation, 
lit     Literally. 

Rev.    Revised  Version  of  the  New  Testament. 
Rev.  O.  T.     Revised  Version  of  the  Old  Testament 
Sept     Septuagint  Version  of  the  Old  Testament 
Sqq.     Following. 
Synop.    Synoptista 
Tex.  Reo.    Received  Text. 

Tynd.     Tyndale  s  Version  of  the  New  Testament 
Vulg.    Vulgate  or  Latin  Translation  of  the  New  Testament 
Wye.    Wycliffe's  Version  of  the  New  Testament 
The  phrase  "only  here  in  New  Testament"  refers  to  Greek 
words  only. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


ERRATUM. 

In  John  X.  11,  page  191,  read  as  follows  for  the  words  from 
" Godet"  to  "in  this  chapter,  w.  17, 18." 

In  John  xiii.  4,  layeth  aside  His  garments  {riSffa'&  tA  Ifutrta) 
is  followed,  in  ver.  12,  hy  had  taken  Hie  garments  {Skafie  tA 
Ifidrui).  So,  in  this  chapter,  gwe^  {rlSijciv)  Sis  life  (ver.  11), 
and  /  lay  down  (rlirffii)  my  life  (vv.  17,  18),  are  followed  hy 
Xafiew  "  to  take  it  again."  The  phrases  r^v  '^^vx^jv  iSffKe  He 
laid  down  His  Ufe,  and  r^  -^xrxj^  Seanu  to  lay  down  our  IweSy 
occnr  in  1  John  iii.  16. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


WEITINGS  OF  JOHN. 


INTRODUCTION. 


The  life  of  John  covers  a  period  from  near  the  beginning  of 
the  first  century  to  the  beginning  of  the  second.  He  was  a 
native  of  Galilee,  and,  according  to  tradition,  of  the  town  of 
Bethsaida,  which  was  on  the  western  shore  of  the  Lake,  not 
far  from  Capernaum  and  Chorazin.  His  father  was  Zebedee. 
His  mother,  Salome  (Mark  xvi.  1 ;  Matt.  xx.  20),  was  among 
the  women  who  supported  the  Lord  with  their  substance  (Luke 
viii.  3),  and  attended  Him  to  His  crucifixion  (Mark  xv.  40). 
The  family  was  not  without  worldly  means.  Zebedee  was  a 
fisherman,  and  had  hired  servants  in  his  employ  (Mark  i.  20). 
Salome  ministered  to  Jesus,  and  John  seems  to  have  had  his 
own  house  (John  xix.  27).  He  was,  apparently,  one  of  the  dis- 
ciples of  John  the  Baptist ;  and  while  engaged  in  his  father's 
craft,  was  found  and  called  by  Jesus  (Matt.  iv.  21 ;  Mark  i.  19). 
Of  the  two  mentioned  in  John  i.  35,  only  one,  Andrew,  is 
named  (John  i.  40)  ;  the  other  is  commonly  supposed  to  have 
been  John,  who  suppresses  his  own  name,  as  in  other  instances 
where  he  refers  to  himself  (John  xiv.  23 ;  xviii.  15 ;  xix.  26  ; 
XX.  3,  4,  8 ;  xxi.  20).* 

As  soon  as  Jesus  was  made  known  to  him,  he  became  His 
enthusiastic  disciple.     His  peculiar  intimacy  with  our  Lord  is 

*  That  he  names  himself  in  the  Apocalypse,  and  not  in  the  Gospel,  is  suffi- 
ciently explained  by  the  fact  that  the  Gospel  is  historical,  intended  to  bring 
Christ  into  prominence  and  to  keep  the  writer  ont  of  view.  The  Apocalypse, 
on  the  other  hand,  is  prophetic,  and  the  name  of  the  author  is  required  aa  a 
Toooher  for  the  lerelationB  granted  him.    Compare  Dan.  yii.  16 ;  YiiL  27. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


2  INTRODUCTION. 

marked  by  the  phrase  "  the  disciple  whom  Jesns  loved,"  and 
also  by  the  fact  that  he  was  one  of  the  three  chosen  to  be  with 
llim  at  certain  special  and  momentous  crises.  He  was  admitted 
to  the  death-chamber  of  the  ruler's  daughter  (Mark  v.  37)  and 
witnessed  her  restoration  to  life  ;  he  was  present  at  the  Trans- 
figui-ation  (Luke  ix.  28),  and  with  Peter  and  James  was  chosen 
by  the  Master  to  bear  Him  company  during  His  agony  in  Geth- 
semane  (Mark  xiv.  33).  He  accompanied  Jesus,  after  His  ar- 
rest, into  the  palace  of  the  High  Priest,  and  secured  entrance 
for  Peter  (John  xviii.  15,  16).  He  stood  by  the  cross  with  the 
mother  of  Jesus,  and  to  his  care  Jesus  committed  her  (John 
xix.  25-27).  With  Peter  he  ran  to  the  sepulchre  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  Resurrection  at  the  summons  of  Mary  Magdalene, 
entered  the  empty  tomb,  and  saw  and  believed  (John  xx.  2-8). 
After  the  Resurrection  he  appears  engaged  in  his  former  em- 
ployment on  the  Lake  of  Galilee.  He  is  the  first  to  recognize 
the  risen  Lord  standing  upon  the  shore  (John  xxi.  7),  and  is 
the  subject  of  Peter's  inquiry,  "  Lord,  what  shall  this  man 
do  ? "  when  he  is  seen  by  Peter  to  be  following  Jesus  (John 
xxi.  20). 

His  apostolic  activity  was  in  the  first  thirty  years  after  the 
Ascension.  In  Jerusalem  his  position  among  the  apostles  was 
not  exceptionally  prominent.  At  the  time  of  the  Stephanie  per- 
secution he  remained  with  the  other  apostles  at  Jerusalem  (Acts 
viii.  1) ;  but  when  Paul,  three  years  after  his  conversion,  came 
to  that  city  (Gal.  1.  18),  he  met  there  only  Peter,  and  James 
the  Lord's  brother.  From  this,  however,  it  does  not  follow 
that  the  remaining  apostles  had  permanently  departed  from 
Jerusalem  and  settled  elsewhere.  In  Gal.  ii.  9,  Paul  alludes  to 
John  as  having  been  present  in  Jerusalem  at  the  time  of  the 
council  (Acts  xv.).  The  narrative  in  Acts  does  not  mention  him 
in  connection  with  the  council,  but  Paul,  in  the  Galatian  letter, 
refers  to  him  as  one  of  the  pillars  of  the  church  with  James 
and  Cephas. 

The  commonly  received  tradition  represents  him  as  closing 
his  apostolic  career  in  Asia  and  at  Ephesus.  An  old  tradition 
aflBrms  that  he  left  Jerusalem  twelve  years  after  the  death  of 
Christ.     In  no  case,  therefore,  did  he  go  immediately  to  Ephe- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


DrrRODUcnoN.  3 

sus.  Definite  notices  as  to  his  abode  in  the  interval  are 
wholly  wanting.  It  is  a  noteworthy  fact  that  the  lives  of  so 
many  of  the  world's  leaders  include  spaces  which  remain  a 
blank  to  the  most  careful  biographer,  and  into  which  the 
world's  curiosity  can  never  penetrate.  Snch  is  the  period  of 
Paul's  retirement  in  Arabia,  of  Dante's  exile,  and,  to  some  ex- 
tent, of  Jesus'  temptation  in  the  wilderness.  Some  later  tra- 
ditions assert  that  he  visited  Parthia,  and  Jerome  groundlessly 
conjectures  that  he  had  preached  in  Judsea.  There  is  some 
plausibility  in  the  supposition  that  he  may  have  betaken  him- 
self to  Antipch  at  the  time  of  Paul's  first  missionary  journey. 
It  is  certain  that,  much  later,  John  was  a  successor  of  Paul  at 
Ephesus.  Neither  at  the  departure  of  Paul  to  Miletus  (Acts 
XX.)  nor  during  the  composition  of  the  Ephesian  letter  is  there 
a  trace  of  John's  presence  at  Ephesus. 

Tradition  is  also  agreed  that  John  was  banished  to  the  isle 
of  Patmos  by  the  Roman  authority.  Irenseus  says  that  he 
was  banished  in  the  reign  of  Domitian :  another  tradition  as- 
signs the  exile  to  the  reign  of  Nero.  From  this  exile  he  was 
permitted  to  return,  it  is  said,  under  Nerva  (a.d.  96-98).  The 
date  of  his  death  is  unknown.  Jerome  places  it  sixty-eight 
years  after  the  death  of  Christ 

The  dominant  characteristic  of  John's  nature  is  contempla- 
tive receptivity.  Every  word  of  his  Lord  is  taken  into  his 
deepest  heart,  held  fast  and  pondered.  '*He  does  not  ask, 
*  What  shall  I  do  ? '  but '  What  does  He  do  ? ' "  Hence  it  is 
clear  why  the  finest  and  subtilest  flavor  of  Jesus'  personality 
has  been  caught  by  him.  With  this  receptiveness  goes  a  power 
of  impartation.  "  Every  man,"  says  Ebrard,  "  can  see  the  sun- 
set-glow on  an  Alp,  but  not  every  one  can  paint  it."  John, 
like  a  mirror,  not  only  received  but  reflected.  While  the  other 
Evangelists  perceived  that  element  of  Jesus'  teaching  and  work 
which  produced  the  most  immediate  and  striking  outward  re- 
sults, as  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  for  instance,  John  discerned 
the  meaning  and  the  bearing  of  less  prominent  incidents,  such 
as  the  conversation  at  Jacob's  well.  Paul,  like  John,  has  the 
quality  of  inwardness,  but  Paul  reasons  where  John  contem- 
plates.   John  is  tenacious  and  intense ;  Paul  equally  so,  but 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


4  INTRODUOnON. 

more  deft  than  John.  John  broods  over  his  thought;  Paul 
thrusts  and  parries  with  it. 

Yet  John  is  no  sentimentalist.  He  is  not  the  lovely,  effem- 
inate youth  of  picture.  His  mental  and  moral  fibre  is  strong. 
He  received  the  title  "  Son  of  Thunder  "  from  One  who  never 
misread  character.  Kot  irascible,  as  some  have  too  hastily  in- 
ferred from  Luke  ix.  54,  he  illustrates  the  peculiarity  of  many 
affectionate  and  contemplative  natures,  which  flash  into  a  start- 
ling impetuosity  on  occasions  which  appeal  to  their  more  radi- 
cal view  of  truth  and  to  their  longer  range  of  vision.  John 
was  incapable  of  half -enthusiasms  and  of  suspended  faith.  To 
whatever  he  addressed  himself,  he  was  totvs  in  illis.  In  his 
own  way,  he  is  no  less  plain-spoken  and  severe  than  Paul.  He 
is  direct  where  Paul  is  sometimes  ironical.  He  is  neither 
gentle  nor  vague  in  his  language  concerning  those  who  deny 
that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  (1  John  ii.  22),  nor  concerning  the 
lineage  of  him  that  committeth  sin  (1  John  iii.  8)  and  the  moral 
quality  of  him  that  hateth  his  brother  (1  John  iii.  15  ;  iv.  20). 
In  the  Apocalypse  he  enters  with  profoundest  sympathy  into 
the  divine  indignation  against  evil,  and  contemplates  with  un- 
feigned joy  its  wholesale  and  crushing  defeat  and  punishment. 
He  seems  to  cheer  the  progress  of  the  Conqueror  upon  the 
white  horse.  The  issues  between  truth  and  falsehood,  life  and 
death,  light  and  darkness,  love  and  hatred  are  stated  by  him 
with  a  stem  and  decisive  sharpness,  and  as  absolute  finalities. 
The  quality  of  sin  is  conceived  according  to  the  scale  of  his 
adoring  love  for  Christ.  He  deals  with  it  as  wickedness  rather 
than  as  weakness,  though  not  overlooking  the  latter.  For  him 
the  victory  of  the  Gospel  is  not  a  prophecy,  but  an  accom- 
plished fact.  Faith  ove7*cometh  the  world.  The  overcoming 
Christ  is  already  present  in  every  believer. 

Such  a  character  would  not  have  been  adapted  to  Paul's 
work.  It  was  not  suflSciently  versatile  and  many-sided.  John 
had  not  Paul's  pioneer  instinct,  his  pushing  activity,  and  his 
executive  power.  He  was  fitted  to  raise  the  superstructure 
rather  than  to  lay  foundations ;  to  be  a  teacher  rather  than  an 
evangelist.  It  was  his  to  complete  the  teaching  of  the  other 
apostles  by  unfolding  the  speculative  mystery  of  the  incama- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


INTRODUCTION.  6 

tioQ  and  the  secret  of  the  inward  union  of  the  believer  with 
Christ ;  to  purge  the  Church  from  speculative  error,  and  to 
hold  up,  over  against  the  Gnostic  caricature,  the  true  image  of 
the  Son  of  Man. 

The  writings  ascribed  to  John  ai*e  the  Grospel,  three  Epis- 
tles, and  the  Apocalypse  or  Bevelation. 

THE  GOSPEL. 

The  nearly  unanimous  tradition  of  the  Church  assigns  the 
fourth  Gospel  to  John.  It  is  unquestionably  the  work  of  a 
Jew,  an  eye-witness,  and  a  disciple  of  Jesus.  It  was  probably 
written  towai*d  the  dose  of  the  first  century,  and  thei*ef  ore  later 
than  the  other  three  Grospels.  According  to  the  earliest  evi- 
dence, it  was  composed  at  Ephesus,  at  the  request  of  John's 
intimate  friends,  who  desired  to  have  his  oral  teaching  recorded 
for  the  permanent  use  of  the  Church. 

Thei*e  are  three  theories  as  to  the  motive  of  its  composition. 
Accoi*ding  to  the  first,  known  as  the  *^  supplementary  "  theory, 
John  wrote  the  fourth  Gospel  as  a  supplement  to  its  predeces- 
sors, in  order  to  supply  what  was  wanting  in  the  synoptic 
narrative.  This  Gospel  is  indeed  supplementary  in  fact,  but 
not  in  motive.  It  is  supplementary  in  that  the  writer  con- 
stantly assumes  that  certain  facts  are  already  known  to  his 
readers,  and  adds  other  facts  from  his  own  special  information. 
But  the  Grospel  itself  expressly  disclaims  ^1  intention  to  be 
complete  (xxi.  25),  and  is  an  original  conception,  both  in  form 
and  substance,  having  a  distinct  plan  of  its  own,  and  present- 
ing a  fresh  aspect  of  tlie  person  and  teaching  of  our  Lord.  ^'  It 
is  the  picture  of  one  who  paints,  not  because  others  have  failed 
to  catch  the  ideal  he  would  represent,  but  because  his  heart  is 
full  and  he  must  speak.'' 

The  second  theory  is  that  the  Gk>spel  is  ^^ polemical"  or 
controversial,  designed  to  oppose  the  errors  of  the  Nicolaitanes 
and  of  Cerinthus.  But  the  Gospel  is  polemical  only  incident- 
ally, as  the  presentation  of  the  positive  truth  suggests  particu- 
lar points  of  error.  The  point  of  view  is  not  controversial. 
The  writer  is  moved  by  the  pressure  of  his  great  theme  to  set 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


6  INTRODUCTION. 

it  forth  in  its  positive  aspects,  and  not  with  special  reference  to 
the  errors  of  his  time. 

The  third  theory,  known  as  tlie  "irenic"  or  conciliatory, 
maintains  that  the  Gospel  was  intended  to  reconcile  divergent 
religious  views,  and  to  bring  into  their  right  relation  truths 
which  heresy  perverted.  The  Gospel  is  conciliatory  in  fact, 
not  from  detiuite  intent,  but  from  the  very  nature  of  the  sub- 
ject— the  Word  made  flesh,  in  which  all  religious  controversies 
are  reconciled.  "Just  as  it  rises  above  controversy  while  it 
condemns  error,  it  preserves  the  characteristic  truths  which 
heresy  isolated  and  misused.  The  fourth  Gospel  is  the  most 
complete  answer  to  the  manifold  forms  of  Gnosticism,  yet  it 
was  the  writing  most  used  by  the  Gnostics.  It  contains  no  for- 
mal narrative  of  the  institution  of  sacraments,  and  yet  it  pre- 
sents most  fully  the  idea  of  sacraments.  It  sets  forth  with  the 
strongest  emphasis  the  failure  of  the  ancient  people,  and  yet  it 
points  out  most  clearly  the  significance  of  the  dispensation 
which  was  committed  to  them.  It  brings  the  many  oppositions 
— antitheses — of  life  and  thought,  and  leaves  them  in  the  light 
of  the  one  supreme  fact  which  reconciles  all,  the  Word  became 
flesh  ;  and  we  feel  from  first  to  last  that  this  light  is  shining 
over  the  record  of  sorrow  and  triumph,  of  defeat  and  hope  " 
(Westcott). 

The  object  is  distinctly  stated  in  the  Gospel  itself.  "  These 
are  written  that  ye  may  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the 
Son  of  God,  and  that,  believing,  ye  may  have  life  in  His 
name"  (xxi.  30,  31).  The  last  of  these  three — life  in  Christ 
through  faith— is  the  key  to  the  two  others.  The  i-eaders  were 
already  disciples;  and  in  vindicating  the  two  propositions  that 
Jesus  is  the  Christ  and  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,  the  ob- 
ject was  not  to  lead  to  the  acknowledgment  of  His  divine  mis- 
sion, but  to  exhibit  these  as  the  ground  of  a  living  communion 
of  believers  with  God,  and  of  a  richer  spiritual  life.  The  char- 
acter of  the  Grospel  is  predominantly  historic.  Even  the  doc- 
trinal portions  have  a  historic  background  and  a  historic  em- 
bodiment. The  doctrine,  for  instance,  of  the  essential  antago- 
nism between  light  and  darkness,  it  s^t  forth  in  the  narrative 
of  the  hostile  attitude  of  the  Jews  toward  Christ ;  and  the  dis- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


INTBODUCTION.  7 

CQSsions  with  tliein  have  their  root  and  material  in  this  same 
antagonism.  The  historical  material  is  carefulij  selected  with 
a  view  to  its  bearing  on  the  particular  conception  of  Christ's 
person  and  work  which  is  announced  in  the  Prologue.  The 
history  is  the  practical  exhibition  of  the  Logos-doctrine  in  the 
person  and  earthly  life  of  the  Man  Jesus.  The  miracles  are 
invariably  termed  siffnSy  and  are  regarded  as  expressions  and 
evidences  of  the  divine  personality  of  the  worker. 

The  Gospel  is  characterized  by  the  profuse  employment  of 
symbolism.  This  accords  with  its  Hebrew  fibre,  and  also, 
lai^ly,  with  the  nature  of  its  subject.  For  not  only  was  John 
a  Jew,  familiar  with  the  symbolic  economy  and  prophecy  of 
the  Old  Testament,  but  Jesus,  the  central  figure  of  his  Gospel 
was,  pre-eminently  the  f  ulfiUer  of  the  Law  and  of  the  Prophe- 
cies. Christ's  own  teaching,  too,  was  largely  symbolic ;  and 
John's  peculiar,  profound  spiritual  insight  detected  in  His  or- 
dinary acts  that  larger  meaning  which  belonged  to  them  in  vir- 
tue of  Jesus'  position  as  the  representative  of  humanity ;  and 
that  unity  of  the  natural  and  spiritual  worlds  which  was  as- 
sumed in  the  utterances  of  our  Loi*d  in  which  tlie  visible  was 
used  as  the  type  of  the  invisible.  "John,"  says  Lange,  "gives 
ns  not  only  a  symbolism  of  the  Old  Testament  word,  of  Old 
Testament  institutions,  histories,  and  persons ;  he  gives  also  the 
symbolism  of  nature,  of  antiquity,  of  history  and  of  personal 
life ;  hence  the  absolute  symbolism,  or  the  ideal  import  of  all 
real  existence,  in  significant  outlines." 

The  relation  of  the  Gh>spel  to  the  Old  Testament  is  pro- 
nounced. The  centre  of  the  Old  Testament  system  is  the  man- 
ifestation of  the  glory  of  God — the  Shekinah.  John  declares 
that  this  glory  appears  essentially  in  Christ.  He  recognizes  the 
divine  preparation  among  the  nations  for  Christ's  coming, 
and  the  special  discipline  of  Israel  with  a  view  to  the  advent 
of  the  Messiah.  In  the  Jews  he  discerns  the  special  subjects 
of  the  Messianic  economy.  Kathanael  is  an  Israelite  indeed : 
the  temple  is  the  Father's  house  :  salvation  is  from  the  Jews : 
the  Jewish  Scriptures  testify  of  Christ :  the  testimonies  to 
Christ  are  drawn  from  the  three  successive  periods  of  the  peo- 
ple's training — the  patriarchal,  the  theocratic,  and  the  monarchi- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


8  DTTBODUOTIOK. 

cal :  the  Serpent  in  the  wilderness  prefigures  Christ's  ^^  lifting 
up,"  and  the  Passover  His  own  sacrifice  as  the  Lamb  of  God. 

The  fooi'th  Gospel  is  the  onlj  one  of  the  four  which  is  de- 
veloped according  to  a  prearranged  and  systematic  plan.  This 
plan  may  be  generally  described  as  the  exhibition  of  ^^  the  par- 
allel development  of  faith  and  onbelief  through  the  historical 
presence  of  Christ."  •  The  Gospel  accordingly  falls  into  two 
general  divisions :  the  Prologue  (L  1-18) ;  the  Narrative  (L 
19-xxi.  23).  The  narrative  consists  of  two  parts:  the  self- 
revelation  of  Christ  to  the  world  (L  19-xiL  60) ;  the  self -revela- 
tion of  Christ  to  the  disciples  (xiii.  xxi.).  In  the  development 
of  this  plan  the  author  dwells  upon  three  pairs  of  ideas:  wit- 
ness and  truth  ;  glory  and  light ;  judgment  and  life.  ^^  There 
is  the  manifold  attestation  of  the  divine  mission ;  there  is  the 
progressive  manifestation  of  the  inherent  majesty  of  the  Son  ; 
tliere  is  the  continuous  and  necessary  effect  which  this  mani- 
festation produces  on  those  to  whom  it  is  made ;  and  the  nar- 
rative may  be  fairly  described  as  the  simultaneous  unfolding 
of  these  three  themes,  into  which  the  great  theme  of  faith  and 
unbelief  is  divided  "  (Westcott).  The  plan  is  foreshadowed  in 
the  Prologue.  He  who  was  the  Word,  in  the  beginning  with 
God,  by  whom  all  things  came  into  being,  was  life  and  light — 
the  light  of  men.  To  Him  witness  was  borne  by  John,  who 
was  sent  to  testify  of  Him  that  all  men  might  believe  on  Him. 
But  though  He  was  made  fiesh  and  dwelt  among  men,  though 
He  came  unto  His  own  home,  though  He  was  full  of  grace  and 
truth,  the  world  knew  Him  not,  and  His  own  people  refused 
to  receive  Him.  There  were,  however,  those  who  did  receive 
Him;  and  to  such  He  gave  power  to  become  sons  of  God 
through  faith  in  His  name.  They  became  such,  not  in  a  physi- 
cal sense,  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God. 
They  received  of  His  fulness. 

Accordingly  the  Gt>spel  treats  of  the  nature  of  Christ,  and  of 
the  witness  borne  to  Christ  by  John,  by  the  disciples,  and  by  mir- 
acles. It  goes  on  to  describe  the  conflict  between  the  eternal 
Light  and  the  darkness  as  embodied  historically  in  the  persist- 

*  I  foUow  the  general  aziangement  of  Westcott. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


INTRODUOnON.  9 

ent  opposition  of  the  Jews  to  Jesus.  He  came  to  them  and  they 
received  Him  not  Tlien  the  other  aspect  is  presented — the 
blessing  of  those  who  did  receive  Him,  the  impartation  of  son- 
ship  and  the  couseqaent  privilege  of  communion  with  the  di- 
vine nature.  From  the  thirteenth  to  the  end  of  the  seven- 
teenth chapter  is  described  Christ's  revelation  of  Himself  to 
His  disciples  in  ministries  of  love  and  in  confidential  discourse. 
The  darkness  did  not  overcome  the  light  The  apparent  de- 
feat through  death  was  converted  into  victory  through  resur- 
rection. This  victory  of  the  light  is  unfolded  from  the  eigh- 
teenth to  the  end  of  the  twentieth  chapter,  in  the  story  of  the 
betrayal,  the  passion,  and  the  resurrection.  The  twenty-first 
chapter  forms  an  Epilogue  in  which  the  divine  light  again 
shines  forth  in  miracle,  ministry,  and  counsel,  before  the  final 
departure  to  the  Father. 

RELATION  TO  THE  8YN0PTI0  GOSPELS. 

The  fourth  Gospel  exhibits  marked  differences  from  the 
others  both  in  chronological  arrangement  and  in  the  selection 
of  material.  As  regards  the  latter,  it  contains  much  that  is 
peculiar  to  itself,  and  falls  in  with  the  Synoptists  only  in  a  few 
sections. 

But,  while  independent,  it  is  not  contradictory  of  the  Synop- 
tic Gk>8pels.  All  the  four  Gospels  are  consciously  based  upon 
the  same  great  facts ;  and  the  author  of  the  fourth  owns  and 
confirms  die  first  three.  The  incidents  common  to  the  fourth 
Gospel  and  all  the  Synoptists  are,  the  baptism  of  John ;  the 
feeding  of  the  five  thousand ;  the  triumphal  entry  into  Jeru- 
salem ;  the  last  supper  and  the  passion  and  resurrection.  John, 
with  Matthew  and  Mark,  relates  the  walking  on  the  sea  and  the 
anointing  at  Bethany. 

John's  Gospel  also  implies  acquaintance  with  incidents  which 
lie  does  not  relate.  Such  are  tlie  circumstances  of  Christ's 
baptism ;  the  position  and  character  of  Simon  Peter ;  Christ's 
early  home  at  Nazareth  and  later  residence  at  Capernaum ;  the 
number  of  the  disciples;  the  date  of  the  Baptist's  imprison- 
ment ;  the  Ascension,  etc.  The  same  imagery  appears,  in  the 
figures  of  the  bride  and  the  bridegroom,  the  harvest,  the  ser- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


10  INTRODUCTION. 

vant,  the  vine.  The  same  sayings  occur,  and  verbal  and  other 
coincidences  are  freqneut.^ 

The  inner  coincidences  are  still  more  striking.  John^s  por- 
trait of  Jesus,  for  instance,  is,  in  many  particulars,  unique.  It 
is  fuller,  more  subtile,  and  indicates  a  closer  intimacy.  John 
deals  with  His  person,  where  Matthew  and  Luke  deal  with  His 
offices.  In  Matthew  He  is  the  f ulfiller  of  the  law ;  in  John 
He  foreshadows  the  grander  and  richer  economy  of  the  Spirit. 
Nevertheless,  John's  Christ  is  the  same  figure  which  appears  in 
the  lines  of  the  Synoptists.  In  both  He  is  the  teacher,  the 
meek  and  lowly  one,  the  worker  of  miracles  of  power  and 
mercy.  In  both  He  is  plain  of  speech  toward  those  who  would 
become  His  disciples,  the  hater  of  hypocrisy,  the  reader  of 
men's  hearts. 

Similar  coincidences  appear  in  the  portraits  of  prominent 
disciples,  notably  of  Peter.  Though  appearing  in  some  scenes 
not  noted  by  the  Synoptists,  the  Peter  of  their  Gospels  is  easily 
recognized  in  the  portrait  by  his  fellow-disciple.  He  is  the 
same  combination  of  impulsive  boldness  and  cowardice ;  of  af- 
fectionateness  and  brusqueness ;  as  quickly  responsive  to  love 
as  to  anger  ;  as  prompt  to  leap  into  the  lake  at  the  sight  of  his 
Lord,  as  to  smite  Malchus. 

The  inner  coincidences  are  also  to  be  discerned  in  John's  as- 
sumption of  facts  recorded  by  the  other  evangelists,  so  that 
the  coincidence  sometimes  appears  in  what  he  does  not  record. 
Giving  no  details  of  the  birth  of  Christ,  like  Matthew  and 
Luke,  he  tells  us  that  the  Word  became  flesh.  The  childhood, 
with  its  subjection  to  parental  authority  appears  in  the  story 
of  the  wedding  at  Cana.  While  the  Synoptists  dwell  upon 
the  event  of  the  incarnation,  he  dwells  upon  the  doctrine.  The 
sacraments  of  Baptism  and  of  the  Eucharist,  the  institution  of 
which  he  does  not  relate,  are  assumed  as  familiar  in  the  con- 
versation with  Nicodemus  and  in  the  discourse  at  Capeniaum. 
The  ascension  is  not  described,  but  is  predicted  in  Christ's 
words  to  Mary.    Similarly,  the  work  of  Jesus  in  Galilee,  which 

*  For  a  list  of  theee  ooinotdenoes  see  Westoott^s  Introduotion  to  hia  Oooo- 
mentary  on  the  Gospeli  in  the  Speaker's  Commentaxy. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


INTRODUCTION.  11 

John  does  not  narratOy  h  presapposed  in  the  eixtli  and  seventh 
chapters.  The  anointing  at  Bethanj  is  assumed  to  be  known, 
as  is  the  hearing  of  Jesus  before  Caiaphas« 

With  these  coincidences  marked  differences  appear.  Setting 
aside  the  omission  bj  Mark  of  the  Gospel  of  tlie  infancy,  the 
Synoptic  narrative  falls  into  thi*ee  parts :  1,  The  ministry  of 
the  Baptist,  the  baptism  and  temptation  of  Jesus.  2,  The  re- 
turn of  Jesus  to  Galilee^  followed  by  a  series  of  connected  nar- 
ratives concerning  His  teaching  and  miracles  in  tliis  and  sur- 
roanding  districts,  without  any  intimation  that,  during  this 
time,  lie  also  visited  Judaea  and  Jerusalem.  3,  Uei'eupon  all  the 
three  pass  at  once  fi*om  the  last  journey  of  Jesus  to  Jerusalem 
to  the  Passover,  at  which  He  was  crucified.  Hence,  as  Dean 
Alford  remarks,  '^  had  we  only  their  accounts,  we  could  never, 
with  any  certainty,  have  asserted  that  He  went  to  Jerusalem 
during  His  public  life,  until  His  time  was  come  to  be  delivered 
up.  They  do  not,  it  is  true,  exclude  such  a  supposition,  but 
rather,  perhaps,  imply  it.  It  would  not,  however,  have  been 
gathered  f i-om  their  narrative  with  any  historical  precision." 

Turning  now  to  John's  Gospel,  we  find  Christ's  ministry  in 
Galilee  between  the  Baptism  and  the  Passion  interrnpted  by 
journeys  to  Jernsalem.  He  goes  up  to  the  Passover,  on  which 
occasion  occur  the  cleansing  of  the  temple  and  the  visit  of  Nic- 
odemus  (iL  13 ;  iii.  1-21).  A  second  visit  is  made  to  an  un- 
named feast  of  the  Jews  (v.  1),  during  which  He  heals  the  im- 
potent man  at  Bethesda,  excites  thereby  the  hostih'ty  of  the 
Jews,  and  delivers  the  discourse  in  v.  17-47.  He  goes  up 
again  at  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  (vii.  10),  and,  ten  months 
later,  appears  at  the  Feast  of  Dedication  (x.  22).  An  interval 
is  spent  on  the  other  side  of  the  Jordan  (x.  40),  at  Epliraim  in 
the  wilderness  of  Judaea  (xi.  63-4),  and  at  Betliany  (xi.,  xii.  1), 
after  which  He  makes  His  triumphal  entry  into  Jernsalem  (xii. 
12  sqq.).  According  to  John,  therefore,  between  Christ's  last 
journey  fi-om  Galilee  to  Jerusalem  and  His  triumphal  entry, 
there  is  an  interval  of  several  months,  spent  partly  in  Jerusa- 
lem and  partly  in  the  neighboring  districts ;  while  according  to 
the  Synoptists  it  seems  that  He  went  from  Galilee  to  Jerusa- 
lem to  the  last  Passover  only  a  short  time  before  it  began ;  and 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


12  INTRODUCTION. 

that  He  had  previously  remained  continuously  in  Galilee  or  in 
the  neighborhood,  having  taken  up  His  abode  there  at  the  be- 
ginning of  His  public  ministry. 

In  the  Synoptists  the  scene  of  Christ's  work  is  almost  exclu- 
sively Galilee,  while  John  mentions  only  five  events  connected 
with  the  GalilflBan  ministry.  On  the  other  hand,  the  fourth 
Gospel  assumes  a  knowledge  of  Jesus'  activity  in  Galilee  and 
Peraea  (vi.  1 ;  vii.  1 ;  v.  11,  52 ;  x.  40). 

The  difference  between  John  and  the  Synoptists  also  appears 
in  the  form  of  the  narrative.  The  latter  represent  Jesus'  teach- 
ing as  dealing  mainly  with  the  humble  peasantry.  It  is  pro- 
verbial, popular,  abounding  in  parable,  and  the  discourses  are 
brief.  John  represents  Christ  as  speaking  in  long  and  pro- 
foundly thonghtfnl  discourses.  While  John  has  nothing  an- 
swenng  to  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  and  the  groups  of  par- 
ables, the  other  evangelists  have  nothing  answering  to  the 
interviews  with  Nicodemus,  the  Samaritan  woman,  and  the 
disciples  before  the  Passover.  In  John  the  discourses  are  more 
di*amatic  and  dialectic ;  in  the  Synoptists,  proverbial,  parabolic, 
and  prophetic.  Yet  John's  account  of  Jesus'  teaching  is  not 
wanting  in  short  paradoxical  sayings,  such  as  abound  in  the 
Synoptists  (see  ii.  19 ;  iv.  32,  34, 35 ;  vii.  33 ;  v.  17  ;  vi.  27,  33, 
62) ;  nor,  though  no  parable  is  worked  out  by  John,  are  para- 
bolic sayings  wanting,  such  as  the  Good  Shepherd,  the  Vine, 
the  Living  Water,  and  the  Bread  of  Heaven. 

In  another  and  deeper  aspect  his  Gospel  stands  related  to  the 
others  as  completing.  He  alone  has  seized  and  preserved  cer- 
tain sides  of  the  life  and  teaching  of  the  Lord,  such  as  His  ut- 
terances as  to  His  eternal  relation  to  the  Father  and  His  eter- 
nal unity  with  Him  (iii.  13  sqq. ;  v.  17  sqq. ;  vi.  33,  61 ;  vii.  16, 
28  sqq. ;  viii.  68,  and  elsewhere).  It  is  to  John,  in  short,  that 
we  owe  the  view  of  the  speculative  side  of  Christ's  work; 
while  as  regards  the  relation  of  believers  to  their  Lord,  John 
gives  us  those  deep  and  comforting  words  concerning  the  mys- 
tical unity  and  community  of  life  between  Himself  and  His 
disciples,  into  which  they  will  enter  through  the  Holy  Spirit. 

Yet  these  deeper  and  more  mystical  views  were  not  alto- 
gether  the  outcome  of  John's  characteristic  personality.    They 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


INTRODUCTION.  13 

were  also  toned  and  shaped  by  the  peculiar  conditions  of  the 
Church  and  of  the  religions  thought  of  his  time.  The  conflict 
of  Christianity  was  no  longer  with  Judaistic  error  ;  no  longer 
between  the  Gospel  and  the  Law ;  between  circumcision  and 
uncircumcision ;  but  with  an  essentially  heathen  Onosticism 
which  appealed  to  the  Church  with  the  claim  of  a  profound 
insight  into  Christianity,  and  sought  to  wrest  the  Qospel  to  its 
own  service.  It  has  already  been  remarked  that  the  aim  of 
the  fourth  Gospel  was  not  distinctively  polemic  John  was 
impelled  to  write  by  the  pressure  upon  his  own  soul  of  the 
truth  *'  God  manifest  in  the  flesh,"  rather  than  by  the  aggres- 
sions of  heresy ;  but  none  the  less  the  utterances  of  a  Cerin- 
thus  *  lent  sharpness  to  the  lines  of  the  Apostle's  portrait  of  the 
Son  of  Man,  and  no  more  impressive  answer  to  such  teaching 
could  have  been  given  than  John  furnished  in  the  words  of  the 
Lord  himself  concerning  His  own  pre-existence  and  eternal 
Gh>dhead,  and  in  His  testimony  that  the  Father  has  created  all 
things  through  the  Word.  (See  L  3,  14,  33,  34,  49 ;  iii.  13, 
14 ;  V.  23,  26 ;  vi.  51,  62  ;  viii  58 ;  xiii.  23  sqq. ;  xvii.  1,  2, 16, 
19 ;  xviiL  6, 11,  37.) 

THE  EPISTLES. 

It  is  generally  conceded  that  the  flrst  Epistle  was  written  at 
Ephesus.  In  the  Latin  Church  the  opinion  prevailed  that  it 
was  primarily  addressed  to  the  Parthians;  but  ecclesiastical 
tradition  knows  of  no  mission  of  John  to  the  Parthians,  St 
Thomas  being  supposed  to  have  carried  the  Gospel  to  them. 

Its  exact  destination,  however,  is  of  little  consequence.  "  Its 
coloring  is  moral  rather  than  local."  It  is  a  unique  picture  of 
a  Christian  society,  the  only  medium  of  the  Spirit's  work  among 

*  Cerinthos  taught  that  the  world  was  not  made  by  the  supreme  God,  bnt 
by  another  and  remote  power  which  is  over  the  oniyerse.  Jesus  was  not  bom 
of  the  Virgin  by  miracoloas  conception,  bnt  was  the  Son  of  Joseph  and  Mary 
by  natural  generation,  though  specially  endowed  with  justice  and  wisdom. 
After  the  baptism  of  Jesus  the  Ohrist  descended  upon  Him  in  the  form  of  a 
dore,  from  that  sovereign  power  which  is  over  all  things.  He  then  an- 
nounced the  unknown  Father  and  wrought  miracles ;  but  toward  the  end  of 
His  ministry  the  Ohrist  departed  from  Jesus,  and  Jesus  suffered  and  rose 
from  the  dead,  while  the  ChziBt  xemiined  impassible  as  a  spiritual  being. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


14  INTRODUCTION. 

men.  There  is  no  trace  of  persecntion :  "  the  world  was  pcril- 
oos  bj  its  sedactions  rather  than  by  its  hostility ; "  the  dangers 
were  within  rather  than  withont. 

These  facts  give  character  to  the  Epistle  in  two  ways :  First, 
the  missionary  work  of  the  Clmrch  falls  into  the  background 
in  the  Apostle's  thonght.  The  world  is  overcome  by  faith  as 
represented  in  the  Church,  and  the  Grospel  is  proclaimed  by  the 
very  existence  of  the  Church,  and  effectively  proclaimed  in  pro- 
portion to  the  Church's  purity  and  fidelity.  Secondly,  attention 
is  concentrated  upon  the  central  idea  of  the  message  itself 
rather  than  upon  the  relation  of  the  message  to  other  systems. 
The  great  question  is  the  person  and  work  of  the  Lord. 

The  peculiar  form  of  error  combated  in  the  Epistle  is  Do- 
cetic  and  Corinthian.^  In  this  teaching  sin  and  atonement 
have  no  place.  Christ  came  into  the  world,  not  to  redeem  it 
by  the  remission  of  sins,  but  to  illuminate  a  few  choice  Intel- 
lects  with  philosophy :  Jesus  is  not  God  manifest  in  the  flesh : 
Jesus  and  the  Christ  are  distinct:  Jesus'  humanity  was  not  real, 
but  a  phantasm.  Against  these  views  John  asserts  that  no 
spirit  is  of  God  who  denies  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the 
flesh  (1  John  iv.  2,  3) :  that  he  that  denieth  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ  is  a  liar,  and  that  the  denial  of  the  Son  involves  the  re- 
jection of  the  Father  (ii.  22,  23) :  that  he  who  denies  that  he  is 
sinful  deceives  himself,  and  impugns  the  veracity  of  God  (i.  8, 
10).  The  Word  of  life  which  he  proclaims  was  the  real  hnman 
manifestation  of  God,  the  human  Christ  whom  he  and  his  fel- 
low-disciples had  seen  and  heard  and  touched  (i.  1,  2).  Jesus 
is  the  propitiation  for  sin  (ii.  2).  The  world  is  not  overcome 
bv  knowledge,  but  by  faith  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God  (v. 

*;  5). 

The  principal  evidence  for  John's  authorship  of  the  Epistle 
is  internal,  drawn  from  its  resemblance  to  the  Gospel  in  vocab- 
ulary, style,  thonght,  and  scope.  There  is  the  same  repetition 
of  fundamental  words  and  phrases,  such  as  triUh^  love^  light, 
horn  of  Ood^  abiding  in  Ood.    There  is  the  same  simplicity  of 

*  The  Dooetes  held  that  the  body  of  oar  Lord  win  an  immaterial  phantom. 
Their  name  it  derived  from  8oWt»  (dokeo)  to  i 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


INTRODUCTION.  15 

constmction  ;  the  same  rarity  of  particles  ;  the  employment  of 
the  simple  connective  {/caly  OAid)  instead  of  a  particle  of  logical 
sequence  (iii.  3,  16) ;  the  succession  of  sentences  and  clauses 
without  particles  (ii.  22-24 ;  iv.  -4-6  ;  7-10  ;  11-13 ;  ii.  5,  6,  9, 
10),  and  the  bringing  of  sentences  into  parallelism  by  the  rep- 
etition of  clauses  (i.  6,  8,  10 ;  v.  18,  20).  Verbal  coincidences 
abound.  Such  words  as  ic6<rfio^  (world),  ^0)9  (light),  axorla 
(darkness),  ^vepoOv  (to  manifest),  ^q>^  auovi^  (eternal  life),  6 
aKfiSiPo^  ©609  (the  i*eal  God),  o  fiopoycptf^  t/w  (the  only-begotten 
Son),  etc.,  are  common  to  both.  Coincidences  of  expression  are 
also  numerous.    Compare,  for  example, 

1  John  i.  2,  3.  Gospel  iii.  11. 

4.  xvi.  24. 

ii.  11.  xii.  35. 

14.  V.  38. 

17.  viii.  35. 

iii.  5.  46. 

8.  44. 

13.  XV.  18. 

14.  V.  24. 
16.  X.  15. 

iv.  6.  viii.  47. 

V.  4.  xvi.  23. 

The  Epistle  presupposes  the  Gospel.  The  differences  are 
such  as  would  naturally  appear  between  a  historian  and  a 
teacher  interpreting  the  history.  This  may  be  seen  by  a  com- 
parison of  the  Prologue  of  the  Gospel  with  the  Epistle.  The 
Prologue  and  the  Epistle  stand  in  the  same  relation  to  the  dis- 
courses, as  appears  from  a  comparison  of  the  thoughts  on  life, 
light,  and  truth  in  the  Prologue  with  passages  in  the  discourses. 
Thus  compare,  on  Life,  Gospel  v.  26 ;  xi.  25 ;  xiv.  6  ;  Prologue 
i.  4 ;  Epistle  i.  1 ;  v.  20.  On  Light,  Gospel  viii.  12  ;  xii.  46  ; 
Prologue  L  4,  7,  9  ;  Epistle  i.  6,  7  ;  ii.  8.  On  Truth,  Gospel 
viii.  32 ;  xiv.  6 ;  Prologue  i.  9,  14,  17 ;  Epistle  i.  6,  8,  10 ;  ii. 
4,  8,  21,  27  ;  iii.  19 ;  iv.  1,  6  ;  v.  20. 

The  theme  of  the  Gospel  is,  Jesics  is  the  Christ  in  process  of 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


16  INTRODUCTION. 

mwnifesti/ng  His  glory.  In  the  Epistle  the  manifestation  of 
the  glory  is  assumed  as  the  basis  of  the  exhortation  to  believ- 
ers to  manifest  it  in  their  life.  The  doctrine  of  propitiation, 
which  is  unfolded  to  Nicodemus,  is  applied  in  1  John  iii.  1. 
The  promise  of  the  Paraclete  in  the  Gospel  is  assumed  in  the 
Epistle  as  fulfilled  (ii.  20).  The  Epistle  deals  with  the  fruits 
of  that  love  which  is  commanded  in  the  Gospel.  (Compare 
Gospel  xiii.  34;  xv.  12,  and  Epistle  iii.  11 ;  iv.  7,  11 ;  iii.  14 ;  iv. 
12,  20,  21.)  In  the  Gospel  the  divine  glory  is  prominent ;  in 
the  Epistle,  Christ's  humanity.  The  doctrine  of  propitiation 
and  cleansing  is  more  fully  treated  in  the  Epistle  (ii.  2  ;  iii.  16 ; 
iv.  10  ;  i.  7,  9). 

The  epistolary  character  does  not  appear  in  the  form.  It  is 
without  address  or  subscription,  and  bears  no  direct  trace  of  its 
author  or  of  its  destination.  But  it  is  instinct  with  personal 
feeling  (i.  4 ;  ii.  12),  personal  experience  (i.  1),  and  appreciation 
of  the  circumstances  of  the  persons  addressed  (ii.  12,  22,  27 ; 
iii.  2,  13  ;  iv.  1,  4 ;  v.  18). 

The  Second  and  Third  Epistles  contain  no  direct  indication 
of  the  time  or  the  place  at  which  they  were  written.  They  wei-e 
probably  composed  at  Ephesus.  That  the  two  are  the  work  of 
the  same  author  is  apparent  from  their  agreement  in  style  and 
spirit.  As  related  to  the  First  Epistle,  the  resemblance  between 
the  second  and  first  in  language  and  thought  is  closer  than  be- 
tween the  fii*st  and  third. 

THE  APOCALYPSE. 

This  document  has  given  rise  to  voluminous  controversy  as 
to  its  author,  its  origin,  its  pui'pose,  and  its  interpretation.  It 
has  been  held  to  be  a  forgery  in  the  name  of  John ;  to  have 
been  composed  by  another  writer  in  the  apostle's  name,  not  in 
order  to  deceive,  but  in  order  to  record  an  oral  revelation  of 
John ;  or  to  have  been  the  work  of  another  John.  Some  who 
deny  that  John  wrote  the  Gospel,  have  attributed  the  Apoca- 
lypse to  him,  and  the  authenticity  of  the  latter  is  maintained 
by  some  prominent  rationalistic  critics. 

The  Apostle  John  was  banished  to  the  Island  of  Patmos, 
probably  by  the  Emperor  Domitian,  a.d.  95  or  96,  and  the 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


INTRODUCTION.  17 

book,  composed  either  during  his  exile,  or,  as  is  more  likely, 
after  his  return  to  Ephesus,  contains  the  revelation  given  him 
there  in  a  series  of  visions.  It  is  directly  addressed  to  the 
Seven  Churches  of  Proconsular  Asia ;  the  number  seven  being 
representative,  and  not  including  all  the  Asiatic  Churches.  Its 
design  was  to  encourage  the  Church  during  that  trying  period, 
predicted  by  Jesus  himself,  between  the  close  of  direct  revela- 
tion and  the  second  coming  of  the  Lord.  This  encouragement 
centres  in  the  return  of  Jesus  to  give  His  people  eternal  life 
and  to  trample  down  His  foes.  As  related  to  the  progress  of 
doctrine  in  the  New  Testament,  it  represents  the  final  con* 
summation  in  the  redeemed  Church,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem, 
which  is  foreshadowed  in  the  rise  and  growth  of  the  Apostolic 
Church. 

The  style  is  figurative  and  symbolical.  It  deals  with  princi- 
ples rather  than  with  particular  events.  To  the  neglect  of  this 
characteristic,  and  the  corresponding  attempt  to  link  the  sym- 
bols and  prophecies  with  specific  historical  incidents  or  person- 
i^es,  are  due  most  of  the  extravagances  of  interpretation.  Ko 
satisfactory  argument  against  its  authenticity  can  be  drawn  from 
its  contents  as  related  to  the  other  writings  of  John.  It  pro- 
claims the  same  eternal  truths  which  are  asserted  and  vindi- 
cated in  the  Gospel  and  in  the  Epistles — the  sovereignty  of  God, 
the  conflict  of  sin  with  righteousness,  the  temporary  triumph 
of  evil,  and  the  final,  decisive  victory  of  holiness.  As  in  the 
other  writings,  Christ  is  the  central  figure,  the  conqueror  of  sin 
and  death,  the  crowning  joy  of  the  redeemed,  and  the  object 
of  their  adoration.  It  emphasizes  the  divine  hatred  of  sin  and 
the  certainty  of  the  divine  judgment  of  the  wicked  and  of  the 
future  bliss  of  believers  in  Jesus.  The  main  idea  of  the  Gos- 
pel and  of  the  Apocalypse  is  the  same — that  of  a  decisive  con- 
flict between  the  powers  of  good  and  evil. 

The  symbolism  of  the  Apocalypse  is  Jewish,  and  not  Greek 
or  Boman.  It  is  pervaded  with  the  style  and  imagery  of  the 
Old  Testament,  and  is  moulded  by  its  historical  and  propheti- 
cal books.  "The  book,*'  says  Professor  Milligan,  "is  abso- 
lutely steeped  in  the  memories,  the  incidents,  the  thoughts,  and 
the  language  of  the  Church's  past.  To  such  an  extent  is  this 
Vol.  IL— 1 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


18  INTBODUCnON. 

the  case  that  it  may  be  doubted  whether  it  contains  a  single 
figure  not  drawn  from  the  Old  Testament,  or  a  single  complete 
sentence  not  more  or  less  built  up  of  materials  brought  from 
the  same  source.  .  •  .  It  is  a  perfect  mosaic  of  passages 
from  the  Old  Testament,  at  one  time  quoted  verbally,  at  an- 
other referred  to  by  distinct  allusion ;  now  taken  from  one 
scene  in  Jewish  history,  and  now  again  from  two  or  three  to- 
gether.'* Thus  the  heresy  of  the  Nicolaitanes  is  the  heresy  of 
Balaam  (ii.  14) :  the  evil  in  the  Church  of  Thyatira  is  personi- 
fied in  Jezebel  (ii.  20) :  the  angelic  captain  in  the  war  against 
the  dragon  is  the  Michael  of  Daniel  (xii.  7) :  Jerusalem,  Mount 
Zion,  Babylon,  the  Euphrates,  Sodom,  and  Egypt  are  symbols 
of  the  holy  bliss  of  the  saints,  of  the  transgressors  against  God, 
and  of  the  judgment  of  the  wicked  (xxi.  2  ;  xiv.  1 ;  xvi.  19  ;  ix. 
14 ;  xi.  8).  The  battle  of  Ilar-Magedon  carries  us  back  to  the 
great  slaughters  in  the  plain  of  Megiddo  (Judges  v.  19 ;  Ps. 
Ixxxiii.  9 ;  2  Kings  xxiii.  29).  The  promises  to  the  churches 
are  given  under  the  figure  of  the  tree  of  life,  the  hidden 
manna,  the  white  stone,  the  iron  sceptre,  the  pillar  in  the  tem- 
ple of  God  (ii.  7, 17,  27,  28 ;  iii.  5,  12,  20).  Heaven  is  de- 
scribed under  the  image  of  the  tabernacle  in  the  wilderness  (xi. 
1,  19 ;  vi.  9 ;  viii.  3 ;  iv.  6).  The  plagues  of  ch.  viii.  are  the 
plagues  of  Egypt :  the  crossing  of  the  Red  Sea  and  the  destruc- 
tion of  Korah  are  blended  in  the  representation  of  the  deliver- 
ance of  God's  people  (xii.  15, 16).  Of  the  Prophets,  Haggai 
contributes  the  earthquake  of  ch.  vi.,  and  Joel  the  sun  changed 
into  the  blackness  of  sackcloth  and  the  moon  into  blood :  Isaiah 
the  falling  stars,  the  fig-tree  casting  her  untimely  fruit,  and  the 
heavens  departing  as  a  scroll :  Ezekiel  the  scorpions  of  ch.  ix., 
the  description  of  the  New  Jerusalem  in  ch.  xxi.,  the  roll  in 
ch.  v.,  and  the  little  book  in  ch.  x. :  Zechariah  the  opening  of 
the  seals  in  ch.  vi.  and  the  olive  trees  in  ch.  xi.  The  vision 
of  the  glorified  Redeemer  (i.  12-20)  is  combined  from  Exodus, 
Zechariah,  Daniel,  Ezekiel,  Isaiah,  and  the  Psalms. 

Along  with  these  coincidences  there  are  certain  contrasts, 
notably  as  respects  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  coming,  which,  in 
the  Gospel  and  Epistles  lies  in  the  background,  while  it  is  the 
main  theme  of  the  Apocalypse.    The  Apocalypse  treats  the 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


INTRODUCTION,  19 

impending  judgment  as  external,  the  Gospel  as  spiritaal.  The 
Apocalypse  describes  the  trinmph  of  Christianity  under  the 
imagery  of  Judaism ;  the  consummation  being  an  ideal  Jer- 
usalem  and  an  ideal  worship ;  while  in  the  Gospel,  Judaism 
appears  in  opposition  to  Christ,  "standing  without,  isolated 
and  petrified,  and  not  taken  up  with  it,  quickened  and  glori- 
fied." 

The  symbols  of  the  book  are  drawn  from  objects  familiar  to 
the  writer — the  locusts,  the  eagles,  the  millstone,  the  olive  and 
palm  and  vine. 

The  principal  objection  urged  against  the  common  author- 
ship of  the  Gospel  and  the  Apocalypse,  is  the  difference  in 
language  and  style.  This  difPerence  must  be  frankly  admitted. 
•*  The  language,"  says  Dr.  Davidson,  "  departs  materially  from 
the  usual  Greek  of  the  New  Testament,  presenting  anomalies, 
incorrectnesses,  peculiar  constructions,  and  awkward  disposi- 
tions of  words,  which  have  no  parallel.  .  .  .  The  lan- 
guage is  so  thoroughly  Hebraistic  as  to  neglect  the  usual  rules 
of  Greek."  By  many  eminent  critics  these  differences  are  re- 
garded as  irreconcilable  on  the  assumption  of  a  common  au- 
thorship. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  may  be  urged  that  these  differences  are 
largely  intentional ;  that  the  author  departs  from  common 
usage  under  the  peculiar  demands  of  his  subject,  arising  from 
the  conditions  under  which  he  writes,  and  his  intent  to  con- 
form to  the  Old  Testament  style  of  address ;  and  further,  that 
his  familiarity  with  correct  usage  is  shown  by  other  passages 
in  the  same  book.  The  Apocalypse,  moreover,  contains  many 
of  the  words  which  are  peculiar  to  the  Gospel  and  Epistles, 
such  as  to  witness^  to  tabemacUy  to  keep,  to  overoome^  to  name 
as  the  expression  of  character,  true  (aXrfSivos;)  in  the  sense  of 
real;  and  the  figures  of  hungering  and  thirsting^  the  manna, 
the  Iwing  vxUeTy  the  eJiepherd  a/nd  the  sheep.  It  is,  indeed,  an- 
swered that,  where  the  same  words  occur,  they  are  used  in  a 
different  sense ;  but  many  of  these  alleged  differences  disap- 
pear upon  closer  examination.  The  Hebrew  character  is  only 
superficially  different  from  that  of  the  Gospel,  which  is  Hebrew 
in  spirit,  though  the  Greek  is  much  purer,  and  "  the  absence 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


20  INTRODUCTION. 

of  Bolecisms  arises  from  the  avoidance  of  idiomatic  expres- 
sions." * 

8TTLB  AND  DICTION  OP  JOHN. 

John's  style  in  the  Grospel  and  Epistles  is  marked  bj  simplic- 
ity and  ease.  It  is  plain  without  elegance,  and  the  diction  is 
comparatively  pure  so  far  as  words  and  grammar  are  con- 
cerned, but  anhnated  with  a  Hebrew  genius.  Godet  describes 
the  style  as  characterized  by  ^^  a  childlike  simplicity  and  trans- 
parent depth,  a  holy  melancholy,  and  a  vivacity  not  less  holy  ; 
above  all,  the  sweetness  of  a  pure  and  gentle  love." 

The  vocabulary  is  meagre.  The  same  expressions  continu- 
ally recur.  Thus  we  find  <f>m  (light),  23  times ;  Bo^a,  Bo^d^ea-- 
S(u  (glory,  to  be  glorified),  42 ;  few},  ^v  (life,  to  live),  52 ;  fiap- 
rvpelvj  iMpnvpla  (to  witness,  testimony),  47 ;  ^uhUhtkuv  (to  know), 
55  ;  Koaiio^  (world),  78 ;  wurreveiv  (to  believe),  98 ;  Spyov  (work), 
23  ;  Spofia  (name),  and  aXrjBeia  (truth),  each  25  ;  <rrf/ietov  (sign), 

17. 

The  meagreness  of  the  vocabulary,  however,  is  compen- 
sated by  its  richness.  The  few  constantly  recurring  words  are 
symbols  of  fundamental  and  eternal  ideas.  ^^They  are  not 
purely  abstract  notions,  but  powerful  spiritual  realities,  which 
may  be  studied  under  a  multitude  of  aspects.  If  the  author 
has  only  a  few  terms  in  his  vocabulary,  these  terms  may  be 
compared  to  pieces  of  gold  with  which  great  lords  make  pay- 
ment"  (Godet). 

A  similar  sameness  is  apparent  in  the  constructions.  These 
are  usually  simple,  plain,  and  direct.  The  sentences  are  short 
and  are  co-ordinated,  following  each  other  by  a  kind  of  paral- 
lelism as  in  Hebrew  poetry.  Thus  where  other  writers  would 
employ  particles  of  logical  connection,  he  uses  the  simple  con- 
nective Kol  (and).  For  example  in  ch.  i.  10,  John  means  to 
say  that  though  Jesus  was  in  the  world,  yet  the  world  knew 


*  It  is,  of  oonne,  foreign  to  the  soope  of  thiB  work  to  disonaB  this,  with 
other  Johannine  questions,  oriticaUy.  Snoh  a  disonssion  must  assume  the 
reader's  aoquaintanoe  with  Greek.  The  discussion  concerning  the  differences 
in  language  wiU  be  found  in  Professor  Milligan's  exoeUent  Lecturer  on  the 
Bevdatum  of  8L  John,  Appendix  II. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


INTRODUCTION.  21 

Him  not ;  bnt  he  states  the  fact  in  two  distinct  and  indepen^* 
dent  propositions :  ^^  He  was  in  the  world,  aiid  the  world  knew 
Him  not."  So  in  viii.  20.  Jesus  spake  in  the  treasury,  teach- 
ing in  the  temple,  (jmd  yety  though  He  appeared  and  taught 
thus  publicly,  no  one  laid  hands  on  Him.  John  writes : 
^^  Tlieee  words  spake  Jesus  as  He  taught  in  tlie  temple,  and  no 
man  laid  hands  on  Him."  He  uses  and^  where  the  antithetic 
hut  might  be  expected  (i.  5  ;  iii.  11 ;  xv.  24).  There  is  also  a 
frequent  absence  of  connecting  particles.  There  is  not,  for  in- 
stance, a  single  one  in  the  first  seventeen  verses  of  ch.  xv. 
Out  of  the  wealth  of  Greek  particles,  John  uses  only  five.  He 
abounds  in  contrasts  or  antidietic  parallelisms  without  connect- 
ing links.  Thus,  "  the  law  was  given  by  Moses :  grace  and 
truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ "  (i.  17) :  "  No  one  ever  saw  Grod : 
the  only-begotten  Son  revealed  Him  "  (i.  18).  Compare  viii.  28 ; 
XV.  5,  etc.  This  simple  co-ordination  of  clauses  is  assisted  by 
the  repetition  of  a  marked  word  or  phrase,  so  that  a  connection 
between  two  statements  is  established  and  the  idea  carried  for- 
ward in  a  new  direction  (see  x.  11 ;  xv.  13  sqq. ;  xv.  1,  5 ; 
xvii.  14  sqq. ;  vL  89,  40,  44). 

The  narrative  is  direct.  Even  the  words  of  others  are  given 
directly  and  not  obliquely.  Instead  of  saying  "  This  is  the  wit- 
ness of  John  when  the  Jews  sent  to  ask  him  who  he  was,  and 
he  confessed  that  he  was  not  the  Christ  '* — John  says,  "  This 
is  the  witness  of  John  when  the  Jews  sent  to  ask  him  Who  art 
then  f  and  he  confessed  I  am  not  the  Christ "  (i  19).  Compare 
vii.  40  sqq. ;  ii.  3  sqq. ;  iv.  24  sqq. ;  v.  10  sqq. ;  vi.  14 ;  viii.  22 ; 
X.  2  sqq.  Illustrative  details  are  not  wrought  into  the  texture 
of  the  narrative,  but  are  interjected  as  parentheses  or  distinct 
statements  (see  vi.  10  ;  iv.  6 ;  x.  22 ;  xiii.  80 ;  xviii.  40). 
John's  style  is  circumstantial.  An  action  which,  by  other  writ- 
ers, is  stated  as  complex,  is  analyzed  by  him  and  its  components 
stated  separately.  Thus,  instead  of  the  usual  Greek  idiom, 
"  Jesus  answering  said,*'  John  writes,  "  Jesus  answered  and 
said,''  thus  making  both  factors  of  the  act  equally  prominent 
(see  xii.  44 ;  vii.  28  ;  i.  15,  25).  This  peculiarity  is  further  il- 
lustrated by  the  combination  of  the  positive  and  negative  ex- 
pression of  the  same  truth  (see  i.  3,  20 ;  ii  24 ;  iii.  16 ;  x.  5 ; 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


22  iNTBODUcrnoK. 

xviii.  20;  1  John  1, 6 ;  ii.  4,  27).  The  detachment,  however,  ig 
only  superficial.  The  inner  connection  is  closely  held  in  the 
writer's  mind,  and  is  impressed  upon  the  reader  by  that  con- 
stant iteration  which,  upon  a  hasty  view,  savors  of  monotony, 
but  which  serves  to  represent  the  central  thought  in  its  many- 
sidedness,  and  to  place  it  in  its  commanding  relation  to  subor- 
dinate thoughts.  His  frequent  use  of  the  particle  ovp  (there- 
fore) directs  attention  to  the  sequence  of  events  or  ideas  (iu 
22  ;  iii.  25,  29  ;  iv.  1,  6,  46 ;  vi.  5 ;  vii.  25  ;  viii.  12,  21,  31,  38 ; 
X.  7 ;  xii.  1,  3,  9, 17,  21).  The  phrase  in  order  that  (o/a),  mark- 
ing an  object  or  purpose,  is  of  frequent  occurrence,  and  exhibits 
the  characteristic  of  John's  mind  to  regard  things  in  their 
moral  and  providential  relations.  Thus  iv.  34:  '^My  meat  is 
in  order  t/iai  I  may  do  the  will  of  Him  that  sent  me ; "  the  em- 
phasis lying  not  on  the  process,  but  on  the  end.  Compare  v. 
36 ;  vi.  29 ;  viii.  56 ;  xii.  23 ;  xiii.  34 ;  xviL  3. 

The  subject  or  the  significant  word  of  a  sentence  is  often 
repeated,  especially  in  dialogues  (which  are  characteristic  of 
John's  Gospel),  where,  by  the  constant  repetition  of  the  names 
of  the  parties  they  are  kept  clearly  before  the  reader's  mind 
(see  ii.  18 ;  iv.  7  sqq. ;  viii.  48  sqq. ;  x.  23  sqq.  Also  i.  1,  7, 
10;  iv.  22;  v.  31  ;  vi.  27;  xi.  33). 

The  demonstrative  pronoun  is  habitually  introduced  to  recall 
the  subject,  when  a  clause  has  intervened  between  the  subject 
and  the  verb  (see  xv.  5 ;  vii.  18 ;  x.  1 ;  xii.  48 ;  xiv.  21,  26 ;  xv. 
26).  The  personal  pronoun  is  frequently  employed,  especially 
that  of  the  first  person.  "In  this  respect,"  says  Westcott, 
^^  much  of  the  teaching  of  the  Lord's  discourses  depends  upon 
the  careful  recognition  of  the  emphatic  reference  to  His  undi- 
vided personality  "  (see  viiL  14,  16 ;  v.  31). 

The  quotations  are  commonly  from  the  Septuagint,  and  never 
immediately  from  the  Hebrew. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  JOHN- 


PROLOGUE* 


Vv.  1-18.  "The  Prologue  is  summed  up  in  three  thoughts, 
which  also  determine  its  plan :  Thb  Logos  :  the  Logos  disowned ; 
the  Logos  acknowledged  and  regained.  These  three  fundamen- 
tal aspects  correspond  with  the  three  principal  aspects  of  the 
history  as  related  in  this  gospel:  the  revelation  of  the  Logos; 
the  unbelief  of  the  Jewish  people ;  the  faith  of  the  disciples. 
Between  the  first  part  (vv.  1-5)  and  the  second  (vv.  6-11),  ver.  5 
forms  a  transition,  as  vv.  12, 13  connect  the  second  part  with 
the  third  (vv.  12-18),  which,  in  its  turn,  is  in  close  connection 
with  the  first.  The  relation  of  this  last  part  to  the  first,  indi- 
cated bj  the  similarity  of  thought  and  expression  which  may 
be  observed  between  ver.  18  and  ver.  1,  may  be  expressed  thus : 
The  Person  whom  the  Apostles  beheld,  who  was  proclaimed  by 
John  the  Baptist,  and  in  whom  the  Church  believed  (vv.  12-18), 
is  none  other  than  He  whose  existence  and  supreme  greatness 
have  been  indicated  by  the  title  Logos.  The  Church  possesses, 
therefore,  in  its  Redeemer  the  Creator  of  all  things,  the  Essen- 
tial Light,  the  Principle  of  Life,  God  himself.  The  original 
link  between  man  and  Ood,  which  sin  had  impaired  (ver.  5),  and 
which  unbelief  completely  broke  (ver.  11),  is  for  the  believer 
perfectly  restored ;  and,  by  means  of  faith,  the  law  of  Paradise 
(ver.  4)  becomes  once  more  the  law  of  human  history  (vv.  16-18)* 
Thus  the  Prologue  forms  a  compact,  organic  whole,  of  which 
the  germinal  thought  is  this :  by  the  Incarnation  believers  are 

*  I  give  the  arrangement  of  the  Pzologae  aooording  to  Godet 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


24  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

restored  to  that  communion  with  the  Word,  and  that  living  re- 
lation with  God,  of  which  man  had  been  deprived  by  sin." 


FIRST  DIVISION  OP  THE  PROLOGUE.    THE  WORD  (1-6). 

1.  In  the  beginning  was  (^i^  opx^  ^v).  With  evident  allu- 
sion to  the  fii*8t  word  of  Genesis.  But  John  elevates  the  phrase 
from  its  reference  to  a  point  of  time,  the  beginning  of  creation, 
to  the  time  of  absolute  pre-existence  before  any  creation,  which 
is  not  mentioned  until  ver.  3.  This  beginning  had  no  beginning 
(compare  ver.  3  ;  xvii.  6 ;  1  Ep.  i.  1 ;  Eph.  i.  4  ;  Prov.  viii.  23 ; 
Ps.  xc.  2).  This  heightening  of  the  conception,  however,  ap- 
pears not  so  much  in  apx^i,  heginning^  which  simply  leaves 
room  for  it,  as  in  the  use  of  Jjv,  waSy  denoting  absoltUe  existence 
(compare  elfil,  I  amy  John  viii.  58)  instead  of  iyivero,  came  into 
bemffy  or  iegan  to  bey  which  is  used  in  vv.  3, 14,  of  the  coming 
into  being  of  creation  and  of  the  Word  becoming  flesh.  Note 
also  the  contrast  between  iv  apj(^,  in  the  beginning,  and  the 
expression  air  apyrfi^froifn  the  beginning,  which  is  common  in 
John's  writings  (viii.  44 ;  1  Ep.  ii.  7,  24 ;  iii.  8)  and  which  leaves 
no  room  for  the  idea  of  eternal  pre-existence.  "  In  Gen.  i.  1, 
the  sacred  histonan  starts  from  the  beginning  and  comes  down- 
ward, thus  keeping  us  in  the  course  of  time.  Here  he  starts 
from  the  same  point,  but  goes  upward,  thus  taking  us  into  the 
eternity  preceding  time"  (Milligan  and  Moulton).  See  on  Col. 
i.  15.  This  notion  of  " beginning"  is  still  further  heightened  by 
the  subsequent  statement  of  the  relation  of  the  Logos  to  the 
eternal  God.  The  apxfl  ^^^^^  refer  to  the  creation — the  primal 
beginning  of  things ;  but  if,  in  this  beginning,  the  Logos  already 
vHiBy  then  he  belonged  to  the  order  of  eternity.  "  The  Logos 
was  not  merely  existent,  however,  in  the  beginning,  but  was 
also  the  efficient  principUy  the  beginning  of  the  beginning. 
The  apxi  (beginning)y  in  itself  and  in  its  operation  dark,  cha- 
otic, was,  in  its  idea  and  its  principle,  comprised  in  one  single 
luminous  word,  which  was  the  Logos.  And  when  it  is  said  the 
Logos  was  in  this  beginning.  His  eteraal  existence  is  already 
expressed,  and  His  eternal  position  in  the  Godhead  already  in- 
dicated thereby  "  (Lange).     ^^  Eight  times  in  the  narrative  of 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


PROLOGUE.  25 

creation  (in  Genesis)  there  occur,  like  the  refrain  of  a  hymn, 
the  words,  And  God  said.  John  gathers  up  all  those  sayings 
of  God  into  a  single  %ayi/ng^  living  and  endowed  with  activity 
and  intelligence,  from  which  all  divine  orders  emanate:  he 
finds  as  the  basis  of  all  spoken  words,  the  speakmg  Word^* 
(Godet). 

The  Word  (0X6709):  Logos.  This  expression  is  the  key- 
note and  theme  of  the  entire  gospel.  Aiyo^  is  from  the  root 
Xey,  appearing  in  \6y<o,  the  primitive  meaning  of  which  is  to 
lay  :  then,  to  pick  otU^  gather^  pick  up  :  hence  to  gather  or  pnt 
words  together,  and  so,  to  speak.  Hence  X6709  is,  first  of  all, 
a  collecting  or  collection  both  of  things  in  the  mind,  and  of 
words  by  which  they  are  expressed.  It  therefore  signifies  both 
the  outward  form  by  which  the  inward  thonght  is  expi*essed, 
and  tke  inward  thought  itself,  the  Latin  oraiio  and  ratio  :  com- 
pare the  Italian  ragionarcy  "to  think"  and  "  to  speak." 

As  signifying  the  outward  form  it  is  never  used  in  the  merely 
grammatical  sense,  as  simply  the  name  of  a  thing  or  act  (^09, 
SvofjM,  prjfia\  but  means  a  word  as  the  thing  referred  to:  the 
material^  not  ^q  formal  part :  a  word  as  embodying  a  concep- 
tion or  idea.  See,  for  instance.  Matt.  xxii.  46  ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  9, 
19.  Hence  it  signifies  a  saying^  of  God,  or  of  man  (Matt.  xix. 
21,  22  ;  Mark  v.  35, 36) :  a  decree,  2l  precept  (Rom.  ix.  28 ;  Mark 
viL  13).  The  ten  commandments  are  called  in  the  Septuagint, 
oi  Sixa  Xiyo^,  "  the  ten  toords  "  (Exod.  xxxiv.  28),  and  hence  the 
familiar  term  decalogue.  It  is  further  used  of  discourse:  either 
of  the  act  of  speaking  (Acts  xiv.  12),  of  skill  a^id practice  in 
speaking  (Eph.  vi.  19),  or  of  continttous  speaking  (Luke  iv.  32, 
36).  Also  of  doctrine  (Acts  xviii.  16 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  15),  specifi- 
cally the  doctrine  of  salvation  through  Christ  (Matt.  xiii.  20-23; 
Philip,  i.  14) ;  of  narrative^  both  the  relation  and  the  thing  re- 
lated (Acts  i.  1 ;  John  xxi.  23 ;  Mark  i.  45) ;  of  matter  under 
discussion,  an  afPair,  a  case  in  law  (Acts  xv.  6 ;  xix.  38). 

As  signifying  the  inward  thought,  it  denotes  the  facidty  of 
thinking  and  reasoning  (Heb.  iv.  12) ;  regard  or  consideration 
(Acts  XX.  24) ;  reckoning,  account  (Philip,  iv.  15, 17 ;  Heb.  iv. 
13) ;  cause  or  reason  (Acts  x.  29). 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


26  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

John  ases  the  word  in  a  peculiar  sense,  here,  and  in  ver.  14 ; 
and,  in  tiiis  sense,  in  these  two  passages  only.  The  nearest  ap- 
proach to  it  is  in  Apoc.  xix.  13,  where  the  conqueror  is  called 
the  Word  of  Ood;  and  it  is  recalled  in  the  phrases  Wordof  Life^ 
and  the  Life  was  manifested  (1  John  i.  1, 2).  Compare  Heb.  iv. 
12.  It  was  a  familiar  and  current  theological  term  when  John 
wrote,  and  therefore  he  uses  it  without  explanation. 

OLD  TESTAMENT  USAGE  OF  THE  TKBM. 

The  word  here  points  directly  to  Gren.  1,  where  the  act  of 
creation  is  effected  by  God  speaking  (compare  Ps.  xxxiii.  6). 
The  idea  of  God,  who  is  in  his  own  nature  hidden,  revealing 
himself  in  creation,  is  the  root  of  the  Logos-idea,  in  contrast 
with  all  materialistic  or  pantheistic  conceptions  of  creation. 
This  idea  develops  itself  in  the  Old  Testament  on  three  lines. 
(1)  The  Wordy  as  embodying  the  divine  willy  is  personified  in 
Hebrew  poetry.  Consequently  divine  attributes  are  predicated 
of  it  as  being  the  continuous  revelation  of  God  in  law  and 
prophecy  (Ps.  xxxiii.  4 ;  Is.  xl.  8 ;  Ps.  cxix.  105).  The  Word  is 
a  healer  in  Ps.  cvii.  20 ;  a  messenger  in  Ps.  cxlvii.  15  ;  the  agent 
of  the  divine  decrees  in  Isa.  Iv.  11. 

(2)  The  personified  wisdom  (Job  xxviii.  12  sq. ;  Prov.  viii.,  ix.). 
Here  also  is  the  idea  of  the  revelation  of  that  which  is  hidden. 
For  wisdom  is  concealed  from  man  :  "  he  knowetli  not  the  price 
thereof,  neither  is  it  found  in  the  land  of  the  living.  The 
depth  saith.  It  is  not  in  me ;  and  the  sea  saith,  It  is  not  with 
me.  It  cannot  be  gotten  for  gold,  neither  shall  silver  be 
weighed  for  the  price  thereof.  It  is  hid  from  the  eyes  of  all 
living,  and  kept  close  from  the  fowls  of  the  air"  (Job  xxviii.). 
Even  Death,  which  unlocks  so  many  secrets,  and  the  under- 
world, know  it  only  as  a  nimor  (ver.  22).  It  is  only  God  who 
knows  its  way  and  its  place  (ver.  23).  He  made  the  world, 
made  the  winds  and  the  waters,  made  a  deci*ee  for  the  rain  and 
a  way  for  the  lightning  of  the  thunder  (vv.  25,  26).  He  who 
possessed  wisdom  in  the  beginning  of  his  way,  before  His  works 
of  old,  before  the  earth  with  its  depths  and  springs  and  moun< 
tains,  with  whom  was  wisdom  as  one  brought  up  with  Him 
(Prov.  viii.  26-31),  declared  it.     "It  became,  as  it  were,  ob- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


PBOLOGUB.  27 

jective,  so  that  He  beheld  it"  (Job  xxviii.  27)  and  embodied  it 
in  His  creative  work.  This  personification,  therefore,  is  based 
on  the  thought  that  wisdom  is  not  shut  np  at  rest  in  God,  bat 
is  active  and  manifest  in  the  world.  ^^  She  standeth  in  the  top 
of  high  pkces,  bj  the  way  in  the  places  of  the  paths.  She 
crieth  at  the  gates,  at  tlie  entry  of  the  city,  at  the  coming  in  at 
the  doors"  (Prov.  viii,  2,  3).  She  builds  a  palace  and  prepares 
a  banqnet,  and  issnes  a  general  invitation  to  the  simple  and  to 
him  that  wanteth  understanding  (Prov.  ix.  1-6).  It  is  viewed 
as  the  one  giude  to  salvation,  comprehending  all  revelations 
of  God,  and  as  an  attribute  embracing  and  combining  all  His 
other  attributes. 

(3)  The  Angel  of  Jehovah.  The  messenger  of  God  who  serves 
as  His  agent  in  the  world  of  sense,  and  is  sometimes  distin- 
guished from  Jehovah  and  sometimes  identical  with  him  (Gen. 
xvi.  7-13 ;  xxxiL  24-28 ;  Hos.  xii.  4,  5 ;  Exod.  xxiii.  20,  21 ; 
Mai.  iii  1). 

APOOSTPHAL  USAQE. 

In  the  Apocryphal  writings  this  mediative  element  is  more 
distinctly  apprehended,  but  with  a  tendency  to  pantheism.  In 
the  Wisdom  of  Solomon  (at  least  100  b.o.),  where  wisdom 
seems  to  be  viewed  as  anotlier  name  for  the  whole  divine  nat- 
ure, while  nowhere  connected  with  the  Messiah,  it  is  described 
as  a  being  of  light,  proceeding  essentially  from  God ;  a  true 
image  of  God,  co-occupant  of  the  divuie  throne  ;  a  real  and  in- 
dependent principle,  revealing  God  in  the  world  and  mediating 
between  it  and  Him,  after  having  created  it  as  his  organ — in 
association  with  a  spirit  which  is  called  fiovoyeve:,  only  begotten 
(viL  22).  "  She  is  the  breath  of  the  power  of  God,  and  a  pure 
influence  flowing  from  the  glory  of  the  Almighty ;  therefore 
can  no  defiled  thing  fall  into  her.  For  she  is  the  brightness  of 
the  everlasting  light,  the  unspotted  mirror  of  the  power  of 
God,  and  the  image  of  his  goodness"  (see  ch.  vii.,  throughout). 
Again :  "  Wisdom  reacheth  from  one  end  to  another  mightily, 
and  sweetly  doth  she  order  all  things.  In  that  she  is  conver- 
sant with  God,  she  magnifieth  her  nobility :  yea,  the  Lord  of  all 
things  Himself  loved  her.    For  she  is  privy  to  the  mysteries  of 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


28  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

tlie  knowledge  of  God,  and  a  lover  of  His  works.  Moreover, 
by  the  means  of  her  I  shall  obtain  immortality,  and  leave  be- 
hind me  an  everlasting  memorial  to  them  that  come  after  me  " 
(ch.  ix.).  In  eh.  xvi.  12,  it  is  said,  "Thy  word,  O  Loi*d,  heal- 
eth  all  things  "  (compare  Ps.  cvii.  20) ;  and  in  ch.  xviiL  15,  16, 
"  Thine  almighty  word  leaped  from  heaven  out  of  thy  royal 
throne,  as  a  fierce  man  of  war  into  the  midst  of  a  land  of  de- 
Btraction,  and  brought  thine  unfeigned  commandment  as  a 
sharp  sword,  and,  standing  up,  filled  all  things  with  death ;  and 
it  touched  the  heaven,  but  it  stood  upon  the  earth."  See  also 
Wisdom  of  Sirach,  chs.  i.,  xxiv.,  and  Baruch  iii.,  iv.  1-4. 

LATER  JEWISH    USAGE. 

After  the  Babylonish  captivity  the  Jewish  doctora  combined 
into  one  view  the  theophanies,  prophetic  revelations  and  mani- 
festations of  Jehovah  generally,  and  united  them  in  one  single 
conception,  that  of  a  permanent  agent  of  Jehovah  in  the  sen- 
sible world,  whom  they  designated  by  the  name  Memra  {word^ 
X6709)  of  Jehovah,  The  learned  Jews  introduced  the  idea  into 
the  Targums,  or  Aramaean  paraphrases  of  the  Old  Testament, 
which  were  publicly  read  in  the  synagogues,  substituting  the 
name  the  word  of  Jehovah  for  that  of  Jehovah,  each  time 
that  God  manifested  himself.  Thus  in  Gen.  xxxix.  21,  they 
paraphrase,  "The  Memra  was  with  Joseph  in  prison."  In  Ps. 
ex.  Jehovah  addresses  the  first  verse  to  the  Memra.  The 
Memra  is  the  angel  that  destroyed  the  first-bom  of  Egypt,  and 
it  was  the  Memra  that  led  the  Israelites  in  the  cloudy  pillar. 

USAGE  IN  THE  JUDJBO-ALEXANDRINB  PHIL080PHT. 

From  the  time  of  Ptolemy  I.  (323-285  b.o.),  there  were  Jews 
in  great  numbers  in  Egypt.  Philo  (a.d.  50)  estimates  them  at 
a  million  in  his  time.  Alexandria  was  their  headquarters. 
They  had  their  own  senate  and  magistrates,  and  possessed  the 
same  privileges  as  the  Greeks.  The  Septuagint  translation  of 
the  Hebrew  Scriptures  into  Greek  (b.c.  280-150)  was  the  be- 
ginning of  a  literary  movement  among  them,  the  key-note  of 
which  was  the  reconciliation  of  Western  culture  and  Judaism, 
the  establishment  of  a  connection  between  the  Old  Testament 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


PROLOGUE.  29 

faith  and  the  Oreek  philosophy.  Hence  thej  interpreted  the 
facts  of  sacred  history  all^oricallj,  and  made  them  symbols  of 
certain  specnlative  principles,  alleging  that  the  Greek  philos- 
ophers had  borrowed  their  wisdom  from  Moses.  Aristobalas 
(about  150  B.a)  asserted  the  existence  of  a  previoas  and  much 
older  translation  of  the  law,  and  dedicated  to  Ptolemy  YI.  an 
all^orical  exposition  of  the  Pentateach,  in  which  he  tried  to 
show  that  the  doctrines  of  the  Peripatetic  or  Aristotelian  school 
were  derived  from  the  Old  Testament.  Most  of  the  schools 
of  Greek  philosophy  were  represented  among  the  Alexandrian 
Jews,  bnt  the  favorite  one  was  the  Platonic.  The  effort  at 
reconciliation  culminated  in  Philo,  a  contemporary  of  Christ. 
PhOo  was  intimately  acquainted  with  the  Platonic  philosophy, 
and  made  it  the  fundamental  feature  of  his  own  doctrines, 
while  availing  himself  likewise  of  ideas  belonging  to  the  Peri- 
patetic and  Stoic  schools.  Unable  to  discern  the  difference  in 
the  points  of  view  from  which  these  different  doctrines  severally 
proceeded,  he  jumbled  together  not  merely  discordant  doctrines 
of  the  Greek  schools,  but  also  those  of  the  East,  regarding  the 
wisdom  of  the  Greeks  as  having  originated  in  the  legislation 
and  writings  of  Moses.  He  gathered  together  from  East  and 
West  every  element  that  could  help  to  shape  his  conception  of 
a  vic^erent  of  God,  "  a  mediator  between  the  eternal  and  the 
ephemeral.    His  Logos  reflects  light  from  countless  facets." 

According  to  Philo,  God  is  the  absolute  Being.  He  calls 
God  "  that  which  is : "  "  the  One  and  the  All."  God  alone  ex- 
ists for  himself,  without  multiplicity  and  without  mixture.  No 
name  can  properly  be  ascribed  to  Him :  He  simply  is.  Hence, 
in  His  nature,  He  is  unknowable. 

Outside  of  God  there  exists  eternal  matter,  without  form  and 
void,  and  essentially  evil ;  but  the  perfect  Being  could  not  come 
into  direct  contact  with  the  senseless  and  corruptible ;  so  that 
the  world  could  not  have  been  created  by  His  direct  agency. 
Hence  the  doctrine  of  a  mediating  principle  between  God  and 
matter — the  divine  JReasany  the  Logos,  in  whom  are  comprised 
all  the  ideas  of  finite  things,  and  who  created  the  sensible 
world  by  causing  these  ideas  to  penetrate  into  matter. 

The  absolute  God  is  surrounded  by  \i\%  powers  {BupdfjL€i<:)  as  a 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


30  WORD  BTUD1K8  IK  THE  NBW  TB8TAMBNT. 

king  bj  bis  servants.  Tbese  powers  are,  in  Platonic  language, 
ideas ;  in  Jewisb,  angds  ;  bat  all  are  essentially  one,  and  their 
unity,  as  they  exist  in  God,  as  they  emanate  from  him,  as  they 
are  disseminated  in  the  world,  is  expressed  by  Logos.  Hence 
the  Logos  appears  under  a  twofold  aspect:  (1)  As  the  immanent 
reason  of  God,  containing  within  itself  the  woi'ld-ideal,  which, 
while  not  outwardly  existing,  is  like  the  immanent  reason  in 
man.  This  is  styled  Airfo<:  ivSiASero^j  i.e.,  the  Logos  conceived 
and  residing  in  the  mind.  This  was  the  aspect  emphasized 
by  the  Alexandrians,  and  which  tended  to  the  recognition  of  a 
twofold  personality  in  the  divine  essence.  (2)  As  the  outspoken 
toordj  proceeding  from  God  and  manifest  in  the  world.  This, 
when  it  has  issued  from  God  in  creating  the  world,  is  the  Aoyo^ 
7rpo<l>opuc6^,  i.e.,  the  Logos  uttered^  even  as  in  man  the  spoken 
word  is  the  manifestation  of  thought.  This  aspect  prevailed 
in  Palestine,  where  the  Word  appears  like  the  angel  of  the  Pen- 
tateuch, as  the  medium  of  the  outward  communication  of  Gk>d 
with  men,  and  tends  toward  the  recognition  of  a  divine  person 
subordinate  to  God.  Under  the  former  aspect,  the  Logos  is, 
really,  one  with  God's  hidden  being :  the  latter  comprehends 
all  the  workings  and  revelations  of  God  in  the  world ;  afFords 
from  itself  the  ideas  and  energies  by  which  the  world  was 
framed  and  is  upheld ;  and,  filling  all  things  with  divine  light 
and  life,  rules  them  in  wisdom,  love,  and  righteousness.  It  is 
the  beginning  of  creation,  not  inaugurated,  like  God,  nor  made, 
like  the  world ;  but  the  eldest  son  of  the  eternal  Father  (the 
world  being  the  younger) ;  God's  image ;  the  mediator  between 
God  and  the  world ;  the  highest  angel ;  the  second  God. 

Philo's  conception  of  the  Logos,  therefore,  is:  the  sum-total 
and  free  exercise  of  the  divine  energies  ;  so  that  God,  so  far  as 
he  reveals  himself,  is  called  Logos ;  while  the  Logos,  so  far  as 
he  reveals  God,  is  called  God. 

John's  doctrine  and  terms  are  colored  by  these  preceding  in- 
fluences. During  his  residence  at  Ephesus  he  must  have  be- 
come familiar  with  the  forms  and  terms  of  the  Alexandrian 
theology.  Nor  is  it  improbable  that  he  used  the  term  Logos 
with  an  intent  to  facilitate  the  passage  from  the  current  the- 
ories of  his  time  to  the  pure  gospel  which  he  proclaimed.    ^^  To 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


PBOLOGUB.  SI 

those  Hellenists  and  Hellenistic  Jews,  on  the  one  hand,  who 
were  vainlj  philosophizing  on  the  relations  of  the  finite  and  in- 
finite; to  those  investigators  of  the  letter  of  the  Scriptures,  on 
the  other,  who  speculated  about  the  theocratic  revelations,  John 
said,  by  giving  this  name  Logos  to  Jesus :  ^  Tiie  unknown  Me- 
diator between  God  and  the  world,  the  knowledge  of  whom 
you  are  striving  after,  we  have  seen,  heard,  and  touched.  Your 
philosophical  speculations  and  your  scriptural  subtleties  will 
never  raise  you  to  Him.  Believe  as  we  do  in  Jesus,  and  you 
will  possess  in  Hini  that  divine  Bevealer  who  engages  your 
thoughts'"  (Godet). 

But  John's  doctrine  is  not  Philo's,  and  does  not  depend  upon 
it.  The  differences  between  the  two  are  pronounced.  Though 
both  use  the  term  Logos,  they  use  it  with  utterly  different 
meanings.  In  John  it  signifies  wordj  as  in  Holy  Scripture 
generally ;  in  Philo,  reason  ;  and  that  so  distinctly  that  when 
Philo  wishes  to  give  it  the  meaning  of  word^  he  adds  to  it  by 
way  of  explanation,  the  term  fnjfia^  word. 

The  nature  of  the  being  described  by  Logos  is  conceived  by 
each  in  an  entirely  different  spirit.  John's  Logos  is  a  person^ 
with  a  consciousness  of  personal  distinction ;  Philo's  is  im- 
personal. His  notion  is  indeterminate  and  fiuctuating,  shaped 
by  the  infiuence  which  happens  to  be  operating  at  the  time. 
Under  the  influence  of  Jewish  documents  he  styles  the  Logos 
an  "  archangel ; "  under  the  infiuence  of  Plato,  "  the  Idea  of 
Ideas ; "  of  the  Stoics,  ^'  the  impersonal  Reason."  It  is  doubtful 
whether  Philo  ever  meant  to  represent  the  Logos  formally  as  a 
person.  All  the  titles  he  gives  it  may  be  explained  by  supposing 
it  to  mean  the  ideal  world  on  which  the  actual  is  modelled. 

In  Philo,  moreover,  the  function  of  the  Logos  is  confined  to 
the  creation  and  preservation  of  the  universe.  He  does  not 
identify  or  connect  him  with  the  Messiah.  His  doctrine  was, 
to  a  great  degree,  a  phOosophical  substitute  for  Messianic  hopes. 
He  may  have  conceived  of  the  Word  as  acting  through  the  Mes- 
siah, but  not  as  one  with  him.  He  is  a  universal  principle. 
In  John  the  Messiah  is  the  Logos  himself,  uniting  himself  with 
humanity,  and  clothing  himself  with  a  body  in  order  to  save  the 
world. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


32  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

The  two  notions  diflFer  as  to  origin.  The  impersonal  God  of 
Philo  cannot  pass  to  the  finite  creation  without  contamination 
of  his  divine  essence.  Hence  an  inferior  agent  must  be  inter- 
posed. John's  God,  on  the  other  hand,  is  personal,  and  a  loving 
personality.  He  is  a  Father  (i.  18) ;  His  essence  is  love  (iii.  16 ; 
1  John  iv.  8, 16).  He  is  in  direct  relation  with  the  world  which 
He  desires  to  save,  and  the  Logos  is  He  Himself,  manifest  in  the 
fiesh.  According  to  Philo,  the  Logos  is  not  coexistent  with  the 
eternal  God.  Eternal  matter  is  before  him  in  time.  According 
to  John,  the  Logos  is  essentially  with  the  Father  from  all  eternity 
(i.  2),  and  it  is  He  who' creates  all  things,  matter  included  (i.  3). 

Philo  misses  the  moral  energy  of  the  Hebrew  religion  as 
expressed  in  its  emphasis  upon  the  holiness  of  Jehovah,  and 
therefore  fails  to  perceive  the  necessity  of  a  divine  teacher  and 
Saviour.  He  forgets  the  wide  distinction  between  God  and  the 
world,  and  declares  that,  were  the  universe  to  end,  God  would 
die  of  loneliness  and  inactivity. 

THE  MEANING  OF  LOGOS  IN  JOHN. 

As  Logos  has  the  double  meaning  of  thought  and  ypeech^  so 
Christ  is  related  to  God  as  the  word  to  the  idea,  the  word  being 
not  merely  a  name  for  the  idea,  but  the  idea  itself  expressed. 
The  thought  is  the  inward  word  (Dr.  SchaflF  compares  the 
Hebrew  expression  "  I  speak  in  my  heart "  for  "  I  think  "). 

The  Logos  of  John  is  the  real,  personal  God  (i.  1),  the  Word, 
who  was  originally  before  the  creation  with  God,  and  was  Gt)d, 
one  in  essence  and  nature,  yet  pei*8onally  distinct  (i.  1,  18) ;  the 
revealer  and  interpreter  of  the  hidden  being  of  God ;  the  re- 
flection and  visible  image  of  God,  and  the  organ  of  all  His 
manifestations  to  the  world.  Compare  Heb.  i.  3.  He  made 
all  things,  proceeding  personally  from  God  for  the  accomplish- 
ment of  the  act  of  creation  (i.  3),  and  became  man  in  the  per- 
son of  Jesus  Christ,  accomplishing  the  redemption  of  the  world. 
Compare  Philip,  ii.  6. 

The  following  is  from  William  Austin,  "Meditation  for 
Christmas  Day,"  cited  by  Ford  on  John :  - 

"  The  name  Word  is  most  excellently  given  to  our  Saviour ; 
for  it  expresses  His  nature  in  one,  more  than  in  any  others. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


PROLOGUK  83 

Therefore  St  John,  when  he  names  the  Person  in  the  Trinity 
(1  John  V.  7),*  chooses  rather  to  call  Him  Word  than  Son  ;  for 
'word  is  a  phrase  more  communicable  than  wn.  Son  hath  only 
reference  to  the  Father  that  begot  Him ;  but  word  may  refer 
to  him  £hat  conceives  it ;  to  him  that  speaks  it ;  to  that  which 
is  spoken  5y  it ;  to  ^  voice  that  it  is  dad  in ;  and  to  the  effects 
it  raises  in  him  that  hears  it  So  Christ,  as  He  is  ^  Wordj 
not  only  refers  to  His  Father  that  begot  Him,  and  from  whom 
He  comes  forth,  but  to  all  the  creatures  that  were  made  by 
Him ;  to  th^  flesh  that  He  took  to  clothe  Him ;  and  to  the 
doctrine  He  brought  and  taught,  and  which  lives  yet  in  the 
hearts  of  all  them  that  obediently  do  hear  it  He  it  is  that  is 
this  Word;  and  any  other,  prophet  or  preacher,  he  is  but  a 
voice  (Luke  iii.  4).  Word  is  an  inward  conception  of  ihe  mmd; 
and  voiced  is  but  a  sign  of  intention.  St.  John  was  but  a  sign, 
a  voice ;  not  worthy  to  untie  the  shoe-latchet  of  this  Word. 
Christ  is  the  inner  conception  ^  in  the  bosom  of  His  Father ; ' 
and  that  is  properly  the  Word.  And  yet  the  Word  is  the  inten- 
tion uttered  forth,  as  well  as  conceived  within ;  for  Christ  was 
no  less  the  Word  in  the  womb  of  the  Virgin,  or  in  the  cradle  of 
the  manger,  or  on  the  altar  of  the  cross,  than  he  was  in  the  be- 
ginning, *  in  the  bosom  of  His  Father.*  For  as  the  intention 
departs  not  from  the  mind  when  the  word  is  uttered,  so  Christ, 
proceeding  from  the  Father  by  eternal  generation,  and  after 
here  by  birth  and  incarnation,  remains  still  in  Him  and  with 
Him  in  essence ;  as  the  intention,  which  is  conceived  and  bom 
in  the  mind,  remains  still  with  it  and  in  it,  though  the  word  be 
spoken.  He  is  therefore  rightly  called  the  Wordy  both  by  His 
coming  from,  and  yet  remaining  still  in,  the  Father." 

And  the  Word.    A  repetition  of  the  great  subject,  with  sol« 
enm  emphasis. 

Was  with  God  {fjv  irpb^  rbp  Oehv).    Anglo-Saxon  vers.,  mid 
Oode.    Wye,  at  God.    With  {irp6^)  does  not  convey  the  full 

*0f  oonne  not  antioipftting  the  oritioifm  which  has  eliminated  this  passage 
from  the  text 

f  Aostin  used  the  Latin  tax,  and  of  oonne  has  in  mind  the  seoondar  j  mean- 
ing  as  a  word  or  mying. 
Vol.  n.— « 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


84  WOBD  STUDIBS  IN  THB  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

meaning,  but  there  is  no  single  English  word  which  will  give 
it  better.  The  preposition  irpi^y  which,  with  the  accusative 
case,  denotes  motion  towards,  or  direction,  is  also  often  used  in 
the  New  Testament  in  the  sense  of  with;  and  that  not  merely 
as  being  near  or  hedde^  but  as  a  living  union  and  communion ; 
implying  the  active  notion  of  intercourse.  Thus :  ^^  Are  not  his 
sisters  here  with  t^"  (7r/>09  ij/^a?),  i.e.,  in  social  relations  with  us 
(Mark  vi.  8 ;  Matt.  xiii.  66).  "  How  long  shall  I  be  with  you'' 
{irpi^  vfJM^,  Mark  ix.  16).  "  I  sat  daily  vnth  you  "  (Matt.  xxvi. 
65).  "  To  be  present  tjoith  the  Lord  "  (wpo9  rov  Kvpiop,  2  Cor. 
V.  8).  "  Abide  and  winter  wUh  you "  (1  Cor.  xvL  6).  "The 
eternal  life  which  was  vnth  the  Father "  (w/>09  rov  waripa,  1 
John  i.  2).  Thus  John's  statement  is  that  the  divine  Word  not 
only  abode  with  the  Father  from  all  eternity,  but  was  in  the 
living,  active  relation  of  communion  with  Him. 

And  the  Word  was  God  (kqI  Oeo^  ^v  6  X0709).  In  the 
Greek  order,  and  God  was  the  Wordy  which  is  followed  by 
Ang.-Sax.,  Wye,  and  Tynd.  But  Oeb^,  Oodj  is  the  predAcate 
and  not  the  subject  of  the  proposition.  The  subject  must  be 
the  Word ;  for  John  is  not  trying  to  show  who  is  God,  but  who 
is  the  Word.  Notice  that  Bei^  is  without  the  article,  which 
could  not  have  been  omitted  if  he  had  meant  to  designate  the 
word  as  God ;  because,  in  that  event,  0€O9  would  have  been 
ambiguous ;  perhaps  a  God.  Moreover,  if  he  had  said  Ood  was 
the  Wordy  he  would  have  contradicted  his  previous  statement 
by  which  he  had  distinguished  (hypostatically)*  God  from  the 
word,  and  lUrfo^  (Logos)  would,  further,  have  signified  only  an 
attribute  of  God.  The  predicate  is  emphatically  placed  in  the 
proposition  before  the  subject,  because  of  the  progress  of  the 
thought ;  this  being  the  third  and  highest  statement  respecting 
the  Word — the  climax  of  the  two  preceding  propositions.  The 
word  Oody  used  attributively,  maintains  the  personal  distinction 
between  God  and  the  Word,  but  makes  the  unity  of  essence  and 

*  The  word  hypoiUuU  is  eqoiyalent  to  nibstanee.  In  theological  language  it 
ii  HBed  in  the  sense  of  person  as  distinguished  from  esienee.  Hence  the  adverb 
hypostaUcaUy  signifies  pemnaXly  in  the  theological  sense,  which  recogniiet 
three  persom  in  the  Qodhead  with  one  enence. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


PROLOGUBL  85 

nature  to  follow  the  distinction  of  person,  and  ascribes  to  the 
Word  all  the  attributes  of  the  divine  essence.  '^  There  is  some- 
thing majestic  in  the  way  in  which  the  description  of  the 
Logos,  in  the  three  brief  but  great  propositions  of  ver.  1,  is  un- 
folded with  inci'easvng  fulness"  (Meyer). 

2.  The  same  (0^09).  lit.,  this  one;  the  one  first  named; 
the  Word. 

Was  in  the  beginning  with  God.  In  ver.  1  the  elements 
of  this  statement  have  been  given  separately :  the  Word,  the 
eternal  being  of  the  Word,  and  his  active  communion  with 
God.  Here  they  are  combined,  and  with  new  force.  This 
same  Word  not  only  was  coetemal  with  God  in  respect  of  heing 
(^,  wa8\  but  was  eternally  in  actvoe  communion  with  Him 
{in  the  heginning  with  God :  w/009  rov  Oeov) :  "  not  simply  the 
Word  with  God,  but  God  with  God  "  (Moulton).  Notice  that 
here  Oeov  has  the  article,  as  in  the  second  proposition,  where 
God  is  spoken  of  absolutely.  In  the  third  proposition,  the 
Word  was  Ood,  the  article  was  omitted  because  Seo^  described 
the  nature  of  the  Word  and  did  not  identify  his  person.  Here, 
as  in  the  second  proposition,  the  Word  is  placed  in  personal  re- 
lation to  God. 

This  verse  forms  the  transition  point  from  the  discussion  of 
the  personal  being  of  the  Word  to  His  manifestation  in  creation. 
If  it  was  this  same  Word,  and  no  other,  who  was  Himself  God, 
and  who,  from  all  eternity,  was  in  active  communion  with  God, 
then  the  statement  follows  naturally  that  all  things  were  created 
through  Him,  thus  bringing  the  essential  nature  of  the  Word 
and  His  manifestation  in  creation  into  connection. .  As  the 
idea  of  the  Word  involves  knowledge  and  will,  wisdom  and 
force,  the  creative  function  is  properly  His.  Hence  His  close 
relation  to  created  things,  especially  to  man,  prepares  the  way 
for  His  incarnation  and  redeeming  work.  The  connection  be- 
tween creation  and  redemption  is  closer  than  is  commonly 
apprehended.  It  is  intimated  in  the  words  of  Isaiah  (xlvi.  4), 
"  I  have  made,  and  I  will  bear.''  Redemption,  in  a  certain 
sense,  grows  out  of  creation.    Because  God  created  man  in 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


36  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

His  own  image,  He  would  restore  him  to  that  image.  Because 
God  made  man,  He  loves  him,  educates  him,  bears  with  him, 
carries  on  the  race  on  the  line  of  His  infinite  patience,  is  bur- 
dened with  its  perverseness  and  blindness,  and  expresses  and 
effectuates  all  this  in  the  incarnation  and  redemptive  work  of 
Jesus  Christ.  Ood  is  under  the  stress  of  the  parental  instinct 
(humanly  speaking)  to  redeem  man. 

8.  All  things  (irdirra).  'Regarded  severally.  The  reference 
is  to  the  infiilite  detail  of  creation,  rather  than  to  creation  as 
a  whole,  which  is  expressed  by  rh  irdvra,  the  all  (Col.  i.  16). 
For  this  reason  John  avoids  the  word  tcoafjLo^j  the  toorldy  which 
denotes  the  world  as  a  great  system.  Hence  Bengel,  quoted 
by  Meyer,  is  wrong  in  referring  to  ic6<riAtf  {fiie  world)  of  ver.  10 
as  a  parallel. 

Were  made  (iyh/ero).  Lit.,  came  into  hemgj  or  became.  Ex- 
pressing the  passage  from  nothingness  into  being,  and  the  un- 
folding of  a  divine  order.  Compare,  vv.  14,  17.  Three  words 
are  used  in  the  !N'ew  Testament  to  express  the  act  of  creation  : 
/crl^eiv,  to  create  (Apoc.  iv.  11. ;  x.  6 ;  Col.  i.  16) ;  irouiv,  to 
make  (Apoc.  xiv.  7 ;  Mark  x.  6),  both  of  which  refer  to  the 
Creator ;  and  yiyveaSaiy  to  hecome^  which  refers  to  that  which 
is  created.  In  Mark  x.  6,  both  words  occur.  "  From  the  begin- 
ning of  the  creation  {Krlaem)  God  made  "  {h-oirfo-ep).  So  in 
Eph.  ii.  10:  "We  are  His  worknumship  {iroifffia\  created 
{/cTurShrres)  in  Christ  Jesus."  Here  the  distinction  is  between 
the  absolute  being  expressed  by  f^v  (see  on  ver.  1),  and  the  comr- 
ing  into  being  of  creation  {iyhero).  The  same  contrast  oc- 
curs in  vv.  6,  9:  "A  man  sent  from  God  ca/me  into  being^^ 
(iyhfero) ;  "  the  true  Light  toas  "  (^). 

"  The  main  conception  of  creation  which  is  present  in  the 
writings  of  St.  John  is  expressed  by  the  first  notice  which  he 
makes  of  it :  All  things  came  into  being  through  the  Word. 
This  statement  sets  aside  the  notions  of  eternal  matter  and  of 
inherent  evil  in  matter.  *  There  was  when '  the  world  *  was  not ' 
(John  xvii.  5,  24) ;  and,  by  implication,  all  things  as  made  were 
good.  The  agency  of  the  Word,  ^  who  was  God,'  again  excludes 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


PROLOGUE.  37 

both  the  idea  of  a  Creator  essentially  inferior  to  God,  and  the 
idea  of  an  abstract  Monotheism  in  which  there  is  no  living  re- 
lation between  the  creature  and  the  Creator ;  for  as  all  things 
come  into  being  *  through '  the  Word,  so  they  are  supported '  in ' 
Him  (John  L  3 ;  compare  Col.  i.  16  sq. ;  Heb.  i.  3).  And  yet 
more,  the  use  of  the  term  iyivero,  came  into  beiriffy  as  distin- 
guished from  i/crla-Sff,  were  created^  suggests  the  thought  that 
creation  is  to  be  r^arded  (according  to  our  apprehension)  as  a 
manifestation  of  a  divine  law  of  love.  Thus  creation  {aU 
things  came  into  being  through  Him)  answers  to  the  Incarna- 
tion {jJie  Word  hecame  flesh).  All  the  unfolding  and  infolding 
of  finite  being  to  the  last  issue  lies  in  the  fulfilment  of  His 
will  who  is  love  "  (Westcott,  on  1  John  ii.  17). 

By  Him  (8*'  airrov).  Lit.,  through  him.  The  preposition  hid 
is  generally  used  to  denote  the  working  of  God  through  some 
secondary  agency,  as  &^  rot)  Trpo^ffrov,  through  the  prophet 
(Matt.  i.  22,  on  which  see  note).*  It  is  the  preposition  by 
which  the  relation  of  Christ  to  creation  is  usually  expressed 
(see  1  Cor.  viii  6 ;  Col.  i.  16 ;  Heb.  i.  2),  though  it  is  oc- 


casionally used  of  the  Father  (Heb.  ii.  10 ;  Bom.  xL  36,  and 

it([^  does  not  lower  the  Word  to  the  rank  of  a  simple  instru-l    \VA^ 


€hd.  i.  1,  where  it  is  used  of  both).   Hence,  as  Godet  remarks. 


i'^r 


ment,"ybnt  merely  implies  a  different  relation  to  creation  on 
the  part  of  the  Father  and  the  Son. 

Without  (x^P^)*    I^^>  apart  from.    Compare  xv.  5. 

Was  not  anything  made  that  was  made  (^fivero  oiSi  fp, 
6  yiyovep).  Many  authorities  place  the  period  after  fr,  and  join 
o  yhfovep  with  what  follows,  rendering,  "  without  Him  was  not 
anything  made.  That  which  hath  been  made  was  life  in 
Him.^t 


♦  So  the  Rev.,  but  not  oonsigtentlj  thronghout.  A.  V.,  Jy.  See  my  article 
on  the  Eeviaed  New  TesUment,  Presbjteritn  Review,  October,  1881. 

t  This  reading  is  very  eamesUy  defended  by  Canon  Westcott,  and  is  adopted 
In  Westoott  and  Hort's  text,  and  supported  by  MiUigan  and  Moulton.  It  is 
rejected  by  Tisohendorf  and  by  the  Revisers ;  also  by  Alf ord,  De  Wette,  Meyer; 
and  Oodet  Grammatical  considerations  seem  to  be  against  it  (see  Alford  on 
the  paasage),  but  Canon  Westoott's  defence  is  most  ingenious  and  pUusible. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


38  WORD  BTUDIBS  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Made  {iyeperojy  as  before,  came  into  being. 

Not  anything  {oifBi  hi).  Lit.,  not  even  one  thing.  Compare 
on  irdirra  {all  things)  at  the  banning  of  this  verse. 

That  was  made  (6  yiyovep).  Bev.,  more  correctly,  that 
hath  been  made^  observing  the  force  of  the  perfect  tense  as  dis- 
tinguished from  tlie  aorist  {iyivero).  ^^he  latter  tense  points 
back  to  the  work  of  creation  considered  as  a  definite  act  or 
series  of  acts  in  the  beginning  of  time^  The  perfect  tense  in- 
(Tdicates  the  continuance  of  things  creal^;  so  that  the  full  idea 
is,  that  which  hath  been  made  and  exists.  The  combination  of 
a  positive  and  negative  clause  (compare  ver.  20)  is  characteristic 
of  John's  style,  as  also  of  James'.  See  note  on  ^^  wanting  noth- 
ing," Jas.  i.  4. 

4.  In  Him  was  life  {h  avT&  {>^  ^i^).  He  was  the  fountain 
of  life — ^physical,  moral,  and  eternal — ^its  principle  and  source. 
Two  words  for  Ufe  are  employed  in  the  New  Testament :  filo^ 
and  {r<^^.  The  primary  distinction  is  that  ^a>^  means  existence 
as  contrasted  with  death,  and  filo^y  the  period,  means,  or  man- 
ner of  existence.  Hence  ^109  is  originally  the  higher  word, 
being  used  of  men,  while  (fo>^  is  used  of  animals  {^&a).  We 
speak  therefore  of  the  discussion  of  the  life  and  habits  of  ani- 
mals as  zoology ;  and  of  accounts  of  men's  lives  as  ^graphy. 
Animals  have  the  vital  principle  in  common  with  men,  bat 
men  lead  lives  controlled  by  intellect  and  will,  and  directed 
to  moral  and  intellectual  ends.  In  the  New  Testament,  filo^ 
means  either  living^  i.e.,  m^eans  of  subsistence  (Mark  xii.  44 ; 
Luke  viii.  43),  or  course  of  life^  life  regarded  as  an  economy 
(Luke  viii.  14 ;  1  Tim.  iL  2 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  4).  Zoi^  occurs  in  the 
lower  sense  of  life,  considered  principally  or  wholly  as  existence 
(1  Pet.  iii.  10;  Acts  viii.  33;  xvii.  25;  Heb.  vii.  3).  There 
seems  to  be  a  significance  in  the  use  of  the  word  in  Luke  xvi. 
25 :  "  Thou  in  thy  lifetime  {iv  rtj  (J»S.  <^oi;)  receivedst  thy 
good  things;*'  the  intimation  being  that  the  rich  man's  life  had 
been  little  better  than  mere  existence,  and  not  life  at  all  in  the 
true  sense.    But  throughout  the  New  Testament  ^(off  is  the 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


PROLOGUB.  89 

nobler  word,  seeming  to  have  changed  places  with  filo^.  It  ex- 
presses the  sam  of  mortal  and  eternal  blessedness  (Matt  xxv. 
46 ;  Lnke  xviii.  30 ;  John  xi.  25 ;  Acts  ii.  28 ;  Bom.  v.  17 ;  vi. 
4),  and  that  not  only  in  respect  of  men,  but  also  of  God  and 
Christ  So  here.  Compare  John  v.  26 ;  xiv.  6  ;  1  John  i.  2. 
This  change  is  due  to  the  gospel  revelation  of  the  essential  con- 
nection of  sin  with  death,  and  consequently,  of  life  with  holi- 
ness. ^'  Whatever  truly  lives,  does  so  because  sin  has  never 
found  place  in  it,  or,  having  found  place  for  a  time,  has  since 
been  overcome  and  expelled  "  (Trench). 

Zo)^  is  a  favorite  word  with  John.  See  xi.  25 ;  xiv.  6 ;  viiL 
12 ;  1  John  i.  2 ;  v.  20 ;  John  vi.  35,  48 ;  vi.  63 ;  Apoc.  xxi. 
6;  xxii.  1, 17;  vii.  17;  John  iv.  14;  Apoc.  ii.  7;  xxii.  2, 14, 
19 ;  John  xii.  50  ;  xvii.  3 ;  xx.  31 ;  v.  26 ;  vi.  53,  54;  v.  40 ; 
iii.  15, 16,  36;  x.  10;  v.  24;  xii.  25;  vi.  27;  iv.  36;  1  John 
V.  12, 16 ;  John  vi.  51. 

Was  the  Light  of  men  {fjv  rb  <f>m  r&v  auBpdnmv).  Passing 
from  the  thought  of  creation  in  general  to  that  of  mankind, 
who,  in  the  whole  range  of  created  things,  had  a  special 
capacity  for  receiving  the  divine.  The  Light — the  peculiar 
mode  of  the  divine  operation  upon  men,  conformably  to  their 
rational  and  moral  nature  which  alone  was  fitted  to  receive  the 
light  of  divine  truth.  It  is  not  said  that  the  Word  was  light,  but 
that  the  life  was  the  light.  The  Word  becomes  light  through 
the  medium  of  life,  of  spiritual  life,  just  as  sight  is  a  function  of 
physical  life.  Compare  xiv.  6,  where  Christ  becomes  the  life 
through  being  the  truth ;  and  Matt  v.  8,  where  the  pure  heart 
is  the  medium  through  which  God  is  beheld.  In  whatever 
mode  of  manifestation  the  Word  is  in  the  world.  He  is  the  light 
of  the  world ;  in  His  works,  in  the  dawn  of  creation  ;  in  the 
happy  conditions  of  Eden ;  in  the  Patriarchs,  in  the  Law  and 
the  Prophets,  in  His  incarnation,  and  in  the  subsequent  history 
of  the  Church.  Compare  ix.  5.  Cf  meriy  as  a  class,  and  not 
of  individuals  only. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


40  WORD  BTUDIBS  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

THE  SEGOND  DIVISION  OP  THE  FBOLOGUE.    THE  WOBD 

DISOWNED. 

Against  the  eternal  being,  light  and  life  of  the  divine  Word, 
a  contrary  principle  emerges  in  the  world — darkness.  The 
purpose  and  work  of  God  in  creation  having  been  set  forth,  we 
are  now  shown  man's  attitude  toward  these. 

V  6'  Shineth  (^o^i).    Kote  the  present  tense,  indicating  not 

"^        merely  the  present  point  of  time,  but  that  the  light  has  gone 

^  \fSforth  continuously  and  without  interruption  from  the  beginning 

K    if  ^«  until  now,  and  is  still  shining.    Hence  ^ivei,  shmethy  denot- 

^  Jr  \J^  ^S  *^®  peculiar  property  of  light  under  all  circumstances,  and 

l\^  not  ^Ti^6i,  ligJvteneth  or  illuminatethy  as  in  ver.  9.    The  shin- 

^J"       ^"S  ^^^^  ^^^  always  illuminate.    Compare  1  John  ii.  8. 

In  the  darkness  {iv  if  a-tcorla).  S/cor^a,  darhtess,  is  a 
word  peculiar  to  later  Greek,  and  used  in  the  New  Testament 
almost  exclusively  by  John.  It  occurs  once  in  Matt.  x.  27,  and 
once  in  Luke  xii.  3.  The  more  common  Kew  Testament  word 
is  o-kSto^,  from  the  same  root,  which  appears  in  atadj  shadow^ 
and  a-Kijvij,  tent.  Another  word  for  darkness,  ^o^,  occurs  only 
in  Peter  and  Jude  (2  Pet.  ii.  4, 17 ;  Jude  6, 13).  See  on  2  Pet. 
ii.  4.  The  two  words  are  combined  in  the  phrase  UacJcness  of 
dcvrJcness  (2  Pet.  ii.  17 ;  Jude  13).  In  classical  Greek  o-kAto^^ 
as  distinguished  from  ^((^,  is  the  stronger  term,  denoting  the 
condition  of  darkness  as  opposed  to  light  in  nature.  Hence 
of  death;  of  the  condition  "before  hvrth;  of  nigJU.  Zoifx^,  which 
is  mainly  a  poetical  term,  signifies  gloom^  half-darJcnesSj  nebvr 
Umsness.  Here  the  stronger  word  is  used.  The  darkness  of 
sin  is  dey^.  The  moral  condition  which  opposes  itself  to  di- 
vine light  is  vUerly  dark.  The  very  light  that  is  in  it  is 
darkness.  Its  condition  is  the  opposite  of  that  happy  state  of 
humanity  indicated  in  ver.  4,  when  the  life  was  the  light  of 
men ;  it  is  a  condition  in  which  mankind  has  become  the  prey 
of  falsehood,  folly  and  sin.  Compare  1  John  L  9-11.  Rom.  L 
21,  22. 

Comprehended  (KariKa/Sev).  Bev.,  apprehended.  Wye, 
took  not  it.    See  on  Mark  ix.  18 ;  Acts  iv.  13.    Comprehended^ 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FR0L0GX7R  41 

in  the  sense  of  the  A.  Y.,  understood^  is  inadmissible.  This 
meaning  would  require  the  middle  voice  of  the  verb  (see  Acts 
iv.  13 ;  X.  34 ;  xxv.  25).  The  Eev.,  ajffprehendedj  i.e.,  gnuped 
or  seisedi  gives  the  correct  idea,  which  appears  in  John  xiL  35, 
'Mest  darkness  come  upon  jou,"  i.e.,  overUike  and  seize.  The 
word  is  used  in  the  sense  of  laying  hold  of  so  as  to  make  on^a 
own;  hence,  to  takepoeeeesion  of.  Used  of  obtaining  the  prize 
in  the  games  (1  Cor.  ix.  24) ;  of  attaining  righteousness  (Bom. 
ix.  30) ;  of  a  demon  taking  possession  of  a  man  (Mark  ix.  18) ; 
of  the  day  of  the  Lord  overtahmg  one  as  a  thief  (1  Thess.  v. 
4).  Applied  to  darkness,  this  idea  includes  that  of  eclipsing 
or  overwhelming.  Hence  some  render  overcame  (Westcott, 
Moulton).  John's  thought  is,  that  in  the  struggle  between 
light  and  darkness,  light  was  victorious.  The  darkness  did  not 
appropriate  the  light  and  eclipse  it  ^^  The  whole  phrase  is  in- 
deed a  startling  paradox.  The  light  does  not  banish  the  dark- 
ness; the  darkness  does  not  overpower  the  light  Light  and 
darkness  coexist  in  the  world  side  bj  side  "  (Westcott). 

6.  There  was  a  man  {iyipero  dvl^pwrosi).  Better,  Kev., 
'^  there  came  a  man,"  iyivero  denoting  the  historical  manifes- 
tation, the  emergence  of  the  Baptist  into  the  economy  of  the 
revelation  of  the  light  Compare  iii.  1,  there  was  a  man  (^ 
iv^peanro^\  where  the  mere  fact  that  there  was  such  a  man  as 
Kioodemus  is  stated.  See  remarks  on  ^y,  ver.  1.  A  distinction 
is  also  intimated  between  the  eternal  being  (^)  of  the  Word 
and  the  coming  into  being  of  his  messenger. 

Sent  (awecrrdK^AhH^).  See  on  Matt  x.  2, 16 ;  Mark  iv.  29 ; 
Luke  iv.  18.  The  verb  carries  the  sense  of  sending  an  envoy 
with  a  special  commdission.  Hence  it  is  used  of  the  mission  of 
the  Son  of  Gbd,  and  of  His  apostles ;  the  word  apostle  being  di- 
rectly derived  from  it  It  is  thus  distinguished  from  iriiAinB^  to 
sendj  which  denotes  simply  the  relation  of  the  sender  to  the  sent 
See  on  xx.  21,  and  1  John  iii.  5.  The  statement  is  not  merely 
equivalent  to  was  sent.  The  finite  verb  and  the  participle  are 
to  be  taken  separately,  as  stating  two  distinct  facts,  the  appear-^ 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


42  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

once  and  the  mission  of  John.    There  came  a  man,  and  that 
man  was  sent  from  God. 

From  God  {'irapct  Seov),  The  preposition  mesjis  Jrom  beside. 
It  invests  the  messenger  with  more  dignity  and  significance 
than  if  the  writer  had  said,  "  sent  by  God."  It  is  used  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  sentyr^wi  the  Father  (xv.  26). 

Whose  name  was  John  {6vofia  air^  'Iqm£i^9).  Lit.,  the 
nam>e  tmto  him  John.  The  first  mention  of  John  the  Baptist. 
The  last  occurs.  Acts  xix.  3.  On  the  name,  see  on  Matt.  iii.  1 ; 
Luke  iii.  2.  John  never  speaks  of  the  Baptist  as  John  the 
Baptist,  like  the  other  Evangelists,  but  simply  as  John.  This 
is  perfectly  natural  on  the  supposition  that  John  himself  is  the 
author  of  the  gospel,  and  is  the  other  John  of  the  narrative. 

7.  The  same  (o5to9).  Compare  ver.  2,  and  the  pronoun 
iK€ivo<:,  hej  in  ver.  8. 

For  a  witness  (cfc  ^/yrvplav).  Kev.,  more  correctly,  for 
witness :  a  witness  would  be  fidprvpa  as  Acts  i.  8.  The  sense 
is/or  witnesS'beo/ring  or  to  bear  witness.  On  the  word,  see  Acts 
i.  22 ;  1  Pet.  v.  1.  It  is  one  of  John's  characteristic  words,  oc- 
curring nearly  fifty  times  in  various  forms  in  his  Gospel,  and 
thirty  or  forty  times  in  the  Epistles  and  Apocalypse.  The 
emphatic  development  of  the  idea  of  witness  is  peculiar  to  this 
Gospel.  "  It  evidently  belongs  to  a  time  when  men  had  begun 
to  reason  about  the  faith,  and  to  analyze  the  grounds  on  which 
it  rested"  (Westcott).  He  develops  the  idea  under  the  follow- 
ing forms :  The  witness  of  the  Father  (v.  31,  34,  37) ;  the  wit- 
ness of  Christ  himself  (viii.  14 ;  xviii.  37) ;  the  witness  of  works 
(v.  17,  36 ;  X.  25 ;  xiv.  11 ;  xv.  24) ;  the  witness  of  Scripture 
(v.  39,  40,  46 ;  i.  46) ;  the  witness  of  the  forerunner  (i.  7  ;  v. 
33,  35) ;  the  witness  of  the  disciples  (xv.  27 ;  xix.  35 ;  xxi.  24 ; 
1  John  i.  2 ;  iv.  14) ;  the  witness  of  the  Spirit  (xv.  26 ;  xvi.  13, 
14 ;  1  John  v.  6).  Note  the  emphasis  attached  to  the  idea  here, 
by  the  twofold  form  in  which  it  is  put:  first,  generally, yjw  vnt- 
nesSy  and  then  by  giving  the  subject  of  the  testimony. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


PBOLOOUR  43 

AIL  The  Baptist  took  up  the  work  of  the  prophets,  as  re- 
spects their  preparation  for  the  universal  extension  of  the  divine 
call  (Isa.  xlix.  6).  His  message  was  to  men^  without  regard  to 
nation,  sect,  descent,  or  other  considerations. 

Through  him.    John  the  Baptist 

8.  He  (iKeiuos).  Emphatic,  '^  It  was  not  he  who  was  the  light." 
Compare  ii.  21,  '^  Me  {ixeiuo^)  spake,"  bringing  out  the  differ- 
ence between  Jesus'  conception  of  destroying  and  rebuilding 
the  temple,  and  that  of  his  hearers. 

That  light  (to  <f>ek).  Bev.,  the  light  The  emphatic  that  of 
the  A.  y.  is  unnecessary. 

Was  sent.  Bev.,  came.  Neither  in  the  original  text  Lit., 
^'  He  was  not  the  light,  but  in  order  that  (&a)  he  might  bear 
witness."  So  in  ix.  8.  "  Neither  hath  this  man  sinned,  nor  his 
parents,  but  (he  was  bom  blind)  that  the  works,"  etc.  Compare 
XV.  25. 

9.  That  was  the  true  light,  etc.  This  passage  is  differ- 
ently interpreted.  Some  join  coming  {ipxofievov)  with  man 
{avSfxmrop)^  and  render  every  man  that  com^thj  as  A.  Y.  Others 
join  coming  with  lights  and  render,  as  Bev.,  the  true  light — comr 
ing  into  the  world.  The  latter  is  the  preferable  rendering,  and 
is  justified  by  John's  frequent  use  of  the  phrase  coming  into 
the  world,  with  reference  to  our  Lord.  See  iii.  19  ;  vi.  14 ;  ix. 
39 ;  xi.  27;  xii.  46 ;  xvi.  28  ;  xviii.  37.  In  iii.  19  and  xii.  46, 
it  is  used  as  here,  in  connection  with  light.  Kote  especially  the 
latter,  where  Jesus  himself  says,  ^^I  am  corns  a  light  into  the 
toorld.^^  Was  (^y)  is  to  be  taken  independently,  there  waSy  and 
not  united  in  a  single  conception  with  coming  {ipx^iJkevov)^  so  as 
to  mean  was  coming.  The  light  wae^  existed,  when  the  Baptist 
appeared  as  a  witness.  Up  to  tlie  time  of  his  appearance  it 
was  all  along  coming:  its  permanent  being  conjoined  with  a 
slow,  progressive  coming^  a  revelation  ^^  at  sundry  times  and  in 
divers  manners  "  (Heb.  i.  1).  "  From  the  first  He  was  on  His 
way  to  the  world,  advancing  toward  the  incarnation  by  pre- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


44  WORD  STUDIBS  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

paratory  revelations ''  (Westcott).  Render  therefore  as  Rev., 
"  There  was  the  tme  light,  even  the  light  which  lighteth  every 
man,  coming  into  the  world.*' 

True  {oKri^wov).  Wye,  very  light  (compare  the  Nicene 
creed,  "wry  God  of  very  God").  This  epithet  is  applied  to 
light  only  here  and  1  John  ii.  8,  and  is  almost  confined  to  the 
writings  of  John.  A  different  word,  oXi/'^,  also  rendered 
t'Tue^  occurs  at  iii.  88 ;  v.  31 ;  viii.  13,  and  elsewhere.  The  dif- 
ference is  that  0X1^3179  signifies  1r%^y  as  contrasted  with  false  / 
while  aKri^af6^  signifies  what  is  real^  perfect^  and  substantial^ 
as  contrasted  with  what  is  fanciftdj  shadowy^  countsTfeit^  or 
merely  symbolic.  Thus  God  is  0X17.^179  (John  iii.  33)  in  that 
He  cannot  lie.  He  is  oXi/d^i^  (1  Thess.  i.  9),  as  distinguished 
from  idols.  In  Heb.  viii.  2,  the  heavenly  tabernacle  is  called 
oKri^ivri,  as  distinguished  from  the  Mosaic  tabernacle,  which 
was  a  figy/re  of  the  heavenly  reality  (Heb.  ix.  24).  Thus  the 
expression  true  light  denotes  the  realization  of  the  original  di- 
vine idea  of  the  Light — ^the  archetypal  Light,  as  contrasted 
with  all  imperfect  manifestations :  "  the  Light  which  fulfilled 
all  that  had  been  promised  by  the  preparatory,  partial,  even 
fictitious  lights  which  had  existed  in  the  world  before." 

'*  Onr  litUe  STStems  have  their  daj ; 
The  J  have  their  day  and  oease  to  be : 
They  are  bat  broken  lights  of  Thee, 
And  Thon,  O  Lord,  art  more  than  thej.** 

TSNKTSON,  In  Memcriam. 

Lighteth  {jxunlfyC).  See  on  shinethj  ver.  6,  and  compare 
Luke  xi.  85,  86. 

Every  man  {irivra  &v^pwrov).  Not  coUectiveh/y  as  in  ver.  7, 
but  vndividuaJHy  and  jpersonaUy. 

The  world  (rhv  K6<rfiov).  As  in  ver.  8,  the  creation  was  des- 
ignated in  its  several  details  by  wdpra,  all  things^  so  here, 
creation  is  regarded  in  its  totality^  as  an  ordered  whole.  See 
on  Acts  xvii.  24 ;  Jas.  iii.  6. 

Four  words  are  used  in  the  Kew  Testament  for  world :  (1) 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FBOLOOUB.  45 

yij,  landy  grownd^  territory ^  the  ewrthj  as  diBtingnished  from  the 
heavens.  The  sense  is  purely  physical.  (2)  oucovfjLhnf^  which 
is  a  participle,  meaning  inhabited^  with  7Q,  earth,  nnderstood, 
and  signifies  the  earth  as  the  abode  of  men;  the  whole  inhab- 
ited world.  See  on  Matt.  xxiv.  14 ;  Luke  ii.  1.  Also  in  a  phys- 
ical sense,  though  used  once  of  "the  world  to  come "  (Heb.  ii. 
5).  (3)  ala>v,  essentially  timey  as  the  condition  under  which  all 
created  things  exist,  and  the  measure  of  their  existence:  a 
jperiod  of  existence  ;  a  lifetime;  a  generation;  hence,  a  long 
space  of  time ;  an  age,  era,  epoch,  period  of  a  dispensation.  On 
this  primary,  physical  sense  there  arises  a  secondary  sense, 
viz.,  all  that  exists  in  the  world  vmder  the  conditions  of  time. 
From  this  again  develops  a  more  distinctly  ethical  sense,  the 
covrae  and  current  of  this  world* s  affairs  (compare  the  expres- 
sion, the  tim£s)y  and  this  course  as  corrupted  by  sin;  hence 
the  evil  world.  So  Gal.  L  4  ;  2  Cor.  iv.  4.  (4)  /tuia-fio^,  which 
follows  a  similar  line  of  development  from  the  physical  to  the 
ethical  sense ;  meaning  (a)  ornament,  arrangement,  order  (1 
Pet  iii.  3) ;  (b)  the  sum-total  of  the  material  tmiverse  considered 
as  a  system  (Matt.  xiii.  35 ;  John  xvii.  5  ;  Acts  xvii.  24 ;  Philip, 
ii.  15).  Compare  Plato.  "  He  who  is  incapable  of  commun- 
ion is  also  incapable  of  friendship.  And  philosophers  tell  us, 
Callides,  that  communion  and  friendship  and  orderliness  and 
temperance  and  justice  bind  together  heaven  and  earth  and 
gods  and  men,  and  that  this  universe  is  therefore  called  Cosmos, 
or  order,  not  disorder  or  misrule"  ("  Gorgias,"  508).  (c)  That 
unvoerse  as  the  abode  of  man  (John  xvi.  21;  1  John  iii.  17). 
(d)  The  sum-total  of  humanity  in  the  world;  the  hn^man  race 
(John  i.  29 ;  iv.  42).  (e)  In  the  ethical  sense,  the  sum-totcd  of 
hvman  life  in  the  ordered  world,  considered  apart  from^  alien- 
ated  from,  and  hostile  to  God,  and  of  the  earthly  things  which 
seduce  from  God  (John  vii.  7  ;  xv.  18 ;  xvii.  9, 14 ;  1  Cor.  i. 
20, 21 ;  2  Cor.  vii.  10 ;  Jas.  iv.  4). 

This  word  is  characteristic  of  John,  and  pre-eminently  in  this 
last,  ethical  sense,  in  which  it  is  rarely  used  by  the  Synoptists ; 
while  John  nowhere  uses  aUav  of  the  moral  order.  In  this  latter 
sense  the  word  is  wholly  strange  to  heathen  literature,  since  the 
heathen  world  had  no  perception  of  the  opposition  between  God 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


46  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

and  sinful  man ;  between  the  divine  order  and  the  moral  dis- 
order introduced  and  maintained  by  sin. 

10.  He  was  in  the  world.  Not  mei*elj  at  His  advent,  but 
before  His  incarnation  no  less  than  after  it.    See  on  vv.  4,  5. 

Was  made  {iyipero).    Came  into  being.    See  on  ver.  3. 

By  Him.    Or  through  Him  (Swi).    See  on  ver.  8. 

Knew  (^a>).  Becognized.  Though  He  was  in  the  world 
and  was  its  Creator,  jet  the  world  did  not  recognize  him.  This 
is  the  relation  of  ideas  in  these  three  clauses,  but  John  expresses 
this  relation  after  the  Hebrew  manner,  by  simply  putting  the 
three  side  by  side,  and  connecting  them  by  «cal,  and.  This  con- 
struction is  characteristic  of  John.  Compare  viii.  20,  where  the 
point  of  the  passage  is,  that  though  Jesus  was  teaching  publicly, 
where  He  might  easily  have  been  seized,  yet  no  man  attempted 
his  seizure.  This  is  expressed  by  two  parallel  clauses  with  the 
simple  copulative.  "  These  words  spake  Jesus,"  etc.,  "  and  no 
man  laid  hands  on  Him." 

Him  {axjTov).  The  preceding  hint  (avrov)  is,  in  itself,  am- 
biguous as  to  gender.  So  far  as  its  form  is  concerned,  it  might 
be  neuter,  in  which  case  it  would  refer  to  the  lights  "  the  Word 
regarded  as  a  luminous  principle^^^  as  it^  in  ver.  5.  But  ainov 
is  masculine,  Himj  so  that  the  Word  now  appears  as  a  jperson. 
This  determines  the  gender  of  the  preceding  ainov. 

On  the  enlightened  and  unenlightened  nature,  compare  the 
allegory  in  Plato's  "  Eepublic,"  at  the  beginning  of  Book  vii., 
where  he  pictures  men  confined  from  childhood  in  an  under- 
ground den,  chained  so  that  they  can  only  see  before  them,  and 
with  no  light  save  from  a  fire  behind  them.  They  mistake 
shadows  for  substance,  and  echoes  for  voices.  When  they  are 
liberated  and  compelled  to  look  at  the  light,  either  of  the  fire  or 
of  the  sun,  their  unaccustomed  eyes  are  pained,  and  they  imagine 
that  the  shadows  which  they  formerly  saw  are  truer  than  the 
real  objects  which  are  now  shown  them.  Finally,  they  will  be 
able  to  see  the  sun,  and  will  recognize  hini  as  the  giver  of  the 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


PROLOGUR  47 

eeasons  and  years,  and  tlie  gnardian  of  all  that  is  in  the  visible 
world.  "  When  the  eye  of  the  soul  is  turned  round,  the  whole 
soul  must  be  turned  round  from  the  world  of  becoming  into 
that  of  being,  and  of  the  brightest  and  best  of  being,  or,  in 
other  words,  of  the  good." 

Notice  also  the  appropriateness  of  the  two  verbs  joined  with 
the  neuter  and  the  masculine  pronouns.  In  ver.  5,  with  it,  the 
Word,  as  a  principle  of  ligJU,  KariXafiep,  (ipprehended.  Here, 
with  JKm,  the  Word,  as  Ajperson,  Syim,  recognized. 

11.  He  came  (fiXSev),  The  narrative  now  passes  from  the 
general  to  the  special  action  of  the  Word  as  the  Light.  The 
verb  camey  in  the  aorist  tense,  denotes  a  definite  act — the  In- 
carnation. In  ver.  10  the  Word  is  described  as  in  the  world 
invisibly.    Now  He  appea/ra. 

Unto  His  own  {eU  rh  X^ui).  Lit.,  his  own  things:  see  on 
Acts  i.  7.  Tlie  Rev.  follows  the  A.  V.  Wye,  into  his  own 
things.  Render  his  own  home,  and  compare  xvi.  32 ;  xix.  27 ; 
Acts  xxi.  6.  The  reference  is  to  the  land  of  Israel,  which  is 
recognized  as  God's  own  in  a  peculiar  sense.  See  Jer.  ii.  7 ; 
Hosea  ix.  3 ;  Zech.  ii.  12 ;  Deut.  vii.  6.  Not  a  repetition  of 
ver.  10.  There  is  a  progress  in  the  narrative.  He  was  in  the 
world  at  large :  then  he  carae  unto  His  own  home. 

His  own  {pi  ZSto^).  The  masculine  gender,  as  the  preceding 
was  neuter.  That  signified  His  own  honie  or  possessions,  this 
His  oi^VL people.    Rev.,  they  iJwib  were  His  own. 

Received  {irapeKa^ov).  Most  commonly  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment of  taking  one  along  with  another.  See  on  Matt.  iv.  6  ; 
xvii.  1 ;  Acts  xvi.  33.  But  also  of  accepting  or  acknowledging 
one  to  be  what  he  professes  to  be,  and  of  receiving  something 
transmitted,  as  1  Cor.  xi.  23  ;  Gal.  i.  12,  etc.  Westcott  thinks 
this  latter  sense  is  implied  here;  Christ  having  been  offered  by 
the  teachers  of  Israel  through  John.  ALford  adopts  the  former 
sense ;  ^^  expressing  the  personal  assumption  to  one's  self  as  a 
friend  or  companion.''  De  Wette  explains  to  receive  into  the 
house.    Godet  strains  a  point  by  explaining  as  welcomed.    De 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


48  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  OTJW  TESTAMENT. 

Wette's  explanation  seems  to  agree  best  with  his  own  home. 
Here  again  compare  the  nice  choice  of  verbs:  apprehended 
(KariKaffev)  the  Light  as  a  principle,  and  received  {irapiXafiop) 
the  Light  as  sl  person  and  the  Master  of  the  hoase. 

THIED  DIVISION  OP  THE  PROLOGUE.     THE  WORD  RE- 
CEIVED (12-18). 

12.  As  many  as  (Scoi).  Denoting  indimdtialay  as  oi  lBio$ 
(ver.  11)  signified  the  nation  at  large. 

Received  {iKa^ov).  The  simple  verb  of  the  compound 
wapiXafiop  in  ver.  11.  The  meaning  of  the  two  verbs  is  sub- 
stantially the  same  (so  Alford,  De  Wette,  and  apparently 
Meyer),  though  some  recognize  a  difference,  as  Milligan  and 
Moulton,  who  render  wapiKaffov  acceptedj  and  ekafiov  received^ 
and  say  that  *•'  the  former  lays  emphasis  upon  the  wiU  that  con- 
sented (or  refused)  to  receive,  while  the  latter  brings  before  us 
the  possession  gained:  ^  so  that  the  full  meaning  is.  As  many  as 
by  accepting  Him,  received  Him.''  For  the  use  of  the  simple 
verb,  see  v.  43 ;  xiii.  20 ;  xix.  6. 

Power  {i^ovalav).  Rev.,  the  right.  Six  words  are  used  for 
power  in  the  New  Testament :  fiia^forcey  often  oppressive,  ex- 
hibiting itself  in  violence  (Acts  v.  26  ;  xxvii.  41.  Compare  the 
kindred  verb  ffid^era^.  Matt.  xi.  12  ;  ''  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
is  taken  hy  violence) :  Svvafu^y  nattiral  dbiZity  (see  on  2  Pet.  ii. 
11) :  ivifyyeut,  energy,  power  m  exercise  ;  only  of  superhuman 
power,  good  or  evil.  Used  by  Paul  only,  and  chiefly  in  the 
Epistles  of  the  Imprisonment  (Eph.  i.  19 ;  iii.  7;  Col.  ii.  12. " 
Compare  the  kindred  verb  ip€pyi<o,  to  put  forth  power,  and  see 
on  Mark  vi.  14 ;  Jas.  v.  16) :  ur^tJ?,  strength  (see  on  2  Pet.  ii.  11. 
Compare  the  kindred  verb  Urxito,  to  he  strong,  and  see  on  Luke 
xiv.  30 ;  xvi.  3) :  Kpdros,  might,  only  of  Grod,  relatvve  and  mani- 
fested power,  dominion  (Eph.  i.  19 ;  vi.  10 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  16 ;  1 
Pet.  iv.  11.  Compare  the  kindred  verb  tepario),  to  havepoioerj 
to  he  master  of,  and  see  on  Mark  vii.  3  ;  Acts  iii.  11) :  i^ovtrla, 
liberty  of  auction  {S^earh  it  is  lawful),  authority,  delegated  or 
arbitrary  (John  v.  27 ;  x.  18 ;  xvii.  2 ;  xix.  10,  11.    See  on 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


PBOLOOUB.  49 

Mark  ii.  10 ;  Luke  xx.  20).  Here,  therefore,  i^ovala  is  not 
mere\jjpossihtlity  or  ability ^  but  legitimate  r^A^  derived  from 
a  competent  source— the  Word. 

To  become  {yevialicu).  As  those  who  are  iam  (ver.  13. 
Compare  iii.  3,  and  Matt.  v.  45). 

Sons  (riicua). .  Bev.,  more  correctly,  children.  San  is  vU^. 
Theyov,  child  {rucrm,  ta  bring  forth),  denotes  a  relation  based  on 
community  of  natttrcy  while  vlo*;.  Son,  may  indicate  only  adap- 
tion and  heirship.  See  Gal.  iv.  7.  Except  in  Apoc.  xxi.  7, 
which  is  a  quotation,  John  never  uses  vio^  to  describe  the  rela- 
tion of  Christians  to  Ood,  since  he  regards  their  position  not 
as  a  result  of  adoption,  but  of  a  new  Ufe.  Paul,  on  the  other 
hand,  regards  the  relation  from  the  legal  standpoint,  as  adop- 
tion, imparting  a  new  dignity  and  relation  (Bom.  viii.  15  ;  Oal. 
iv.  5,  6).  See  also  Jas.  i.  18 ;  1  Pet.  i.  3,  23,  where  the  point 
of  view  is  John's  rather  than  Paul's.  Titcvov^  indicating  the 
relationship  of  man  to  God,  occurs  in  John  i.  12 ;  xi.  52;  1  John 
iii.  1,  %  10 ;  V.  2,  and  always  in  the  pluraL 

Believe  on  {irurreuova-iv  ek).  The  present  participle,  he- 
Uevtng,  indicates  the  present  and  continuous  activity  of  faith. 
The  word  is  used  by  John,  sometimes  with  the  dative  case 
simply,  meaning  to  believe  a  person  or  thing ;  i.e.j  to  believe 
that  they  are  true  or  speak  the  truth.  Thus,  to  believe  the 
Scripture  (ii.  22) ;  believe  me{W.  21) ;  believe  Moeea,  his  wrtt- 
ingSy  my  words  (v.  46).  At  other  times  with  a  preposition,  ek, 
iniOy  which  is  rendered  ieUeve  in,  or  believe  on.  So  here,  vi.  29 ; 
viii.  30 ;  1  John  v.  10.  See  the  two  contrasted  in  vi.  29,  30 ; 
viii.  30,  31 ;  1  John  v.  10.  To  believe  tn,  or  on,  is  more  than 
mere  acceptance  of  a  statement.  It  is  so  to  accept  a  statement 
or  a  person  as  to  rest  upon  them,  to  trust  them  practically ; 
to  draw  upon  and  avail  one's  self  of  all  that  is  offered  to  him 
in  them.  Hence  to  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  not 
merely  to  believe  the  facts  of  flis  historic  life  or  of  His  saving 
energy  as  facts,  but  to  accept  Him  as  Saviour,  Teacher,  Sym- 
pathizer, Judge ;  to  rest  the  soul  upon  Him  for  present  and 
Vol.  n.— 4 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


60  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

future  salvation,  and  to  accept  and  adopt  His  precepts  and  ex- 
ample as  binding  upon  the  life. 

Name  (6vo/ia).  See  on  Matt,  xxviii.  19.  Expressing  the  sum 
of  the  qualities  which  mark  the  nature  or  character  of  a  person. 
To  believe  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of  GK>d,  is  to 
accept  as  true  the  revelation  contained  in  that  title.  Compare 
XX.  81. 

13.  Which  (ol).    Beferring  to  children  of  God. 

Were  born  {iyevviiSffa'av).  Lit,  were  begotten.  The  phrase 
yewrfSi^vcu  ix  rov  Oeov,  to  he  horn  or  hegotten  of  Oodj  occurs 
only  here  in  the  Gospel,  and  several  times  in  the  First  Epistle. 
It  is  peculiar  to  John. 

There  is  a  progress  of  thought  in  the  three  following  clauses, 
describing  the  proper  origin  of  a  believer's  new  life.  Children 
of  God  are  begotten,  not  of  hloody  nor  of  the  wiU  of  the  fleshy 
nor  of  iJie  will  of  num.  "  The  new  birth  is  not  brought  about 
by  descenty  by  desire,  or  by  human  jnnoer^^  (Westcott). 

Of  blood  (i(  alfuirmv).  Lit.,  of  Uoods.  The  plural  is  vari- 
ously explained :  by  some  as  indicating  the  duality  of  the  sexes, 
by  others  of  the  multiplicity  of  ancestors.  The  best  explana- 
tion seems  to  be  afforded  by  a  similar  use  of  the  plural  in  Plato, 
h-i,  iv  y£Ka{^  Tp€<l>6fjLevoi^  "while  still  nourished  by  milka^^ 
("Laws,"  887).  The  fluids,  blood  or  milk  being  represented  as 
the  sum-total  of  all  their  parts.    Compare  r^  iSara,  the  waters. 

14.  And  the  Word  (/ml).  The  simple  copula  as  before;  not 
yea,  or  namely^  or  therefore,  but  passing  to  a  new  statement 
concerning  the  Word. 

Was  made  flesh  (ahp(  ^hero).  Bev.,  ^^hecame  flesh."  The 
same  verb  as  in  ver.  3.  All  things  heoame  through  Him ;  He 
in  turn  hecame  flesh.  "  He  became  that  which  first  became 
through  Him."  In  becoming.  He  did  not  cease  to  be  the 
Eternal  Word.  His  divine  nature  was  not  laid  aside.  In  be- 
coming flesh  He  did  not  part  with  the  rational  soul  of  man. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


PBOLOGUK  61 

Betaining  all  the  essential  properties  of  the  Word,  He  entered 
into  a  new  rriode  of  being,  not  a  new  hemg. 

The  word  (t^^,  JUbK^  describes  this  new  mode  of  being.  It 
signifies  human  naktre  in  a/nd  aooarding  to  its  corporeal  mani- 
fesUxtion,  Here,  as  opposed  to  the  jpurdy  divine,  and  to  the 
purely  immaterial  nature  of  the  Word.  He  did  not  first  be- 
come a  personality  on  becoming  flesh.  The  prologae  through- 
oat  conceives  Him  as  a  personality  from  the  very  beginning — 
from  eternal  ages.  The  phrase  hecame  fleshy  means  more  than 
that  He  assumed  a  hvmwn  body.  He  assumed  krmum  nature 
entire^  identifying  Himself  with  the  race  of  man,  having  a 
human  body,  a  human  soul,  and  a  human  spirit  See  xii.  27 ; 
zL  38:  xiii.  21;  xix.  30.  He  did  not  assume,  for  a  time 
merely,  humanity  as  something  foreign  to  Himself.  The  in- 
carnation was  not  a  mere  aociderU  of  His  substantial  being. 
"He  became  flesh,  and  did  not  doihs  Simself  in  flesh."  Com- 
pare, on  the  whole  passage,  1  John  iv.  2 ;  2  John  7. 

Dwelt  (icKiivfoaev).  Lit,  tahemaded^  fixed^  or  had  Hie  tab- 
emade:  bom  aicrp^,  a  tent  or  tabernacle.  The  verb  is  used  only 
by  John :  in  the  Oospel  only  here,  and  in  Apoc  vii.  15  ;  xii.  12  ; 
xiii.  6  ;  xxL  3.  It  occurs  in  classical  writings,  as  in  Xenophon, 
iv  r^  weSC^  icicrpHw^  hs  pitched  hie  tent  in  the  plain  ("  Ana- 
basis," viL  4, 11).  So  Plato,  arguing  against  the  proposition 
that  the  unjust  die  by  the  inherent  destructive  power  of  evil, 
says  that  "  injustice  which  murders  others  keeps  the  murderer 
alive — aye,  and  unsleeping  too;  o6tw  tto^^  irao  co9  ioi,K€v 
iaKipHnnai  rov  Savdaifio^  elvtu^  Le.,  literally,  so  far  has  her  tent 
been  spread  from  being  a  house  of  death  "  ("  Eepublic,"  610). 
The  figure  here  is  from  the  Old  Testament  (Lev.  xxvii.  11 ;  2 
SauL  vii.  6 ;  Ps.  Ixxviii.  67  sqq. ;  Ezek.  xxxvii.  27).  The  taber- 
nacle was  the  dwelling-place  of  Jehovah ;  the  meeting-place  of 
God  and  Israel  So  the  Word  came  to  men  in  the  person  of 
Jesus.  As  Jehovah  adopted  for  His  habitation  a  dwelling  like 
that  of  the  people  in  the  wilderness,  so  the  Word  assumed  a 
community  of  nature  with  mankind,  an  embodiment  like  that 
of  humanity  at  large,  and  became  flesh.  "  That  which  was 
from  the  beginning,  we  heard,  we  saw,  we  beheld,  we  handled. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


52  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Oar  fellowship  is  with  the  Father,  and  with  his  Son  Jesns 
Christ"  (1  John  i.  1-3.    Compare  Philip.  iL  7,  8). 

Some  find  in  the  word  tdbemadey  a  teiriporary  strncture  (see 
the  contrast  between  aierjvo^^  tabemadey  and  oheoBofiii,  huUding^ 
in  2  Cor.  v.  1),  a  suggestion  of  the  transitoriness  of  our  Lord's 
stay  upon  earth ;  which  may  well  be,  although  the  word  does 
not  necessarily  imply  this ;  for  in  Apoc.  xid.  3,  it  is  said  of  the 
hea/oevdy  Jerusalem  ^^  the  tcihernaoU  of  God  is  with  men,  and 
He  vnll  set  vp  his  tcbbemacle  {(TKtivwaei)  with  them." 

Dante  alludes  to  the  incarnation  in  the  seventh  canto  of  the 
"Paradise:" 

"  the  haman  ipeoies  down  below 

Laj  sick  for  many  oentories  in  great  error, 
TiU  to  descend  it  pleased  the  Word  of  God 
To  where  the  nature,  which  from  its  own  Maker 
Estranged  itself,  He  joined  to  Him  in  person 
Bj  the  sole  act  of  His  eternal  love.'* 

Among  us  {iv  fifuv).  In  the  midst  of  us.  Compare  Gen. 
xxiv.  3,  Sept.,  ^^  the  Oanaanites,  wUh  whom  IckoeU  QieS^  &v  iyoB 
oucA  iv  avTois).^*  The  reference  is  to  the  eye-witnesses  of  our 
Lord's  life.  "  According  as  the  spectacle  presents  itself  to  the 
mind  of  the  Evangelist,  and  in  the  words  among  us  takes  the 
character  of  the  most  personal  recollection,  it  becomes  in  him 
the  object  of  a  delightful  contemplation  "  (Godet). 

The  following  words,  as  far  as  and  including  Father,  are 
parenthetical.  The  unbroken  sentence  is:  "The  Word  be- 
came flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us,  full  of  grace  and  truth.'' 

We  beheld  (^^curi/^eSa).  Compare  Luke  ix.  32 ;  2  Pet  iL 
16 ;  1  John  i.  1 ;  iv.  14.  See  on  Matt.  xi.  7 ;  xxiii  5.  The 
word  denotes  calm,  continuous  contemplation  of  an  object 
which  remains  before  the  spectator. 

Glory  (Wfav).  Not  the  absolvte  glory  of  the  Eternal  Word, 
which  could  belong  only  to  His  pre-existent  state,  and  to  the 
conditions  subsequent  to  his  exaltation ;  but  His  glory  revealed 
under  human  limitations  both  in  Himself  and  in  those  who  be- 
held Him.   The  reference  is  again  to  the  Old  Testament  mani* 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


PBOLOGUB.  53 

festations  of  the  divine  glory,  in  the  wilderness  (Exod.  xvi.  10; 
xxiv.  16,  etc) ;  in  the  temple  (1  Kings  viii.  11) ;  to  the  proph- 
ets (Isa.  yi.  8 ;  Ezek.  L  28).  The  divine  glorj  flashed  out  in 
Christ  from  time  to  time,  in  His  transfiguration  (Luke  ix.  31 ; 
compare  2  Pet.  i  16,  17)  and  His  miracles  (John  ii.  11 ;  xi.  4, 
40),  bat  appeared  also  in  His  perfect  life  and  character,  in  His 
fulfilment  of  the  absolute  idea  of  manhood. 

Glory*  Without  the  article.  This  repetition  of  the  word 
is  explanatory.  The  nature  of  the  glory  is  defined  by  what 
follows. 

As  (flk).  A  particle  of  comparison.  Compare  Apoc.  v.  6, 
^^  a  lamb  as  though  it  had  been  slain ; "  also  Apoc.  xiiL  3. 

Of  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father  (jAom^evou^  iraph 
varposi).  Kev.,  ^^from  the  Father."  The  glory  was  likej  cor- 
responds in  nature  to,  the  glory  of  an  only  Son  sent  from  a 
Father.  It  was  the  glory  of  one  who  partook  of  His  divine  Fa- 
ther's essence;  on  whom  the  Father's  love  was  visibly  lavished, 
and  who  represented  the  Father  as  His  ambassador.  The  word 
/u>vo7«yi^»  ordy  hegoUen  (De  Wette  and  Westcott,  "  only  lorn  ") 
is  nsed  in  the  New  Testament  of  a  human  relationship  (Luke 
vii.  12 ;  viiL  42 ;  ix.  88).  In  the  Septuagint  it  answers  to 
darling^  Heb.,  onlf/  oncy  in  Ps.  xxi,  A.  Y.  xxii.  20 ;  and  to 
desokUe  in  Ps.  xxiv.,  A,  V.  xxv.,  16.  With  the  exception  of 
the  passages  cited  above,  and  Heb.  xL  17,  it  occurs  in  the 
New  Testament  only  in  the  writings  of  John,  and  is  nsed 
only  of  Christ  With  this  word  should  be  compared  Panl's 
irporr&roicoqf  first  horn  (Rom.  viii.  29;  Col.  i.  16,  18),  which 
occurs  bnt  once  in  John  (Apoc.  i.  5),  and  in  Heb.  i.  6 ;  xi.  28 ; 
xii.  23.  John's  word  marks  the  relation  to  the  Father  as 
nniqne,  stating  the  fact  in  itself.  Paul's  word  places  the  eter- 
nal Son  in  relation  to  the  universe.  Paul's  word  emphasizes 
His  existence  before  created  things;  John's  His  distinctness 
from  created  things.  Mopoyepi^^  distinguishes  between  Christ 
as  the  only  Son,  and  the  many  children  (ritcpa)  of  Ood ;  and 
further,  in  that  the  only  Son  did  not  heoome  (ya4<r^<u)  snch 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


61  WORD  STUDIBS  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

by  receiving  power,  by  adoption,  or  by  moral  generation,  but 
was  (^)  such  in  the  beginning  with  God.  The  fact  set  forth 
does  not  belong  to  the  sphere  of  His  incarnation,  but  of  His 
eternal  being.  The  statement  is  anthropomorphic,*  and  there- 
fore cannot  fully  express  the  metaphysical  relation. 

Of  the  Foabher  is  properly  rendered  by  Kev.,  ^^from  the 
Father,"  thus  giving  the  force  of  wapi  (see  on  from  Godj 
ver.  6).  The  preposition  does  not  express  the  idea  of  generor 
tion^  which  would  be  given  by  iK  or  by  the  simple  genitive, 
but  of  tm88ion — eeni  from  the  Father,  as  John  from  God  (see 
vi.  46 ;  vii.  29  ;  xvi  27 ;  xvii.  8).  The  correlative  of  this  is  ver. 
18,  "  who  is  m  ^  bo8om  {ek  rbv  tcoXirov)  of  the  Father ; "  lit., 
^^  into  the  bosom,"  the  preposition  eh  signifying  who  haa  gone 
into  and  is  there  ;  thus  viewing  the  Son  as  having  returned  to 
the  Father  (but  see  on  ver.  18). 

Full  of  grace  and  truth  (irXiipff^  x<^to9  teal  akffSetas:). 
This  is  connected  with  the  main  subject  of  the  sentence :  ^^The 
Word — ^full  of  grace  and  truth."  A  common  combination  in  the 
Old  Testament  (see  Qen.  xxiv.  27,  49 ;  xxxii.  10 ;  Exod.  xxxiv. 
6 ;  Ps.  xl.  10, 11 ;  Ixi.  7).  In  these  two  words  the  character  of 
the  divine  revelation  is  sunmied  up.  ^^  Grace  corresponds  with 
the  idea  of  the  revelation  of  God  as  Love  (1  John  iv.  8, 16)  by 
Him  who  is  life;  and  Truth  with  that  of  the  revelation  of 
God  as  Light  (1  John  L  5)  by  Him  who  is  Himself  Light " 
(Westcott).    Compare  ver.  17.    On  Graoej  see  on  Luke  L  30. 

15.  As  ver.  14  is  parallel  to  tv.  1-5,  so  this  verse  is  parallel 
to  w.  6-8,  but  with  an  advance  of  thought  Vv.  6-8  set  forth 
the  Baptist's  witness  to  the  Word  as  the  general  light  of  men. 
This  verse  gives  the  Baptist's  witness  to  the  personal  Word  be- 
come flesh. 

Bare  witness  (jutprvpeT).  Present  tense.  Bev.,  correctly, 
ieareth  loUness.    The  present  tense  describes  the  witness  of  the 

*  ue,^  attribating  human  form  and  human  modes  of  actiyitj  to  God,  as 
when  we  speak  of  the  hand,  the  facet  the  ^  of  God,  or  of  €hxl  begetUng  as 
here. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FBOLOGUB.  55 

Saptist  as  abiding.    The  fact  of  the  Word's  becoming  flesh  is 
permanently  established  hj  his  testimony. 

Cried  {xiicpayev).  See  on  Mark  v.  5 ;  ix.  24 ;  Lnke  xriiL  89. 
The  verb  denotes  an  inarticulate  utterance  as  distinguished  from 
words.  When  used  iu  connection  with  articulate  speech^  it  is 
joined  with  Xeye^i^  or  elireiv,  to  say,  as  viL  28,  cried,  saying. 
Compare  viL  37;  xii.  44.  The  crying  corresponds  with  the 
Baptist's  description  of  himself  as  a  voice  (^i^,  soimd  or  tone), 
Mark  L  3 ;  Lnke  iiL  4 ;  John  i.  23.  The  verb  is  in  the  perfect 
tense,  but  with  the  usual  classical  sense  of  the  present. 

Was  He  {^v).  The  imperfect  tense,  pointing  back  to  a  testi- 
mony historically  past 

After  me  {inrCaw  funi).  Lit,  behind  me :  in  His  human  mani- 
festation. 

Is  preferred  before  me  {IfiirpoalUu  fiov  yiyoimi).  Lit,  **  is 
become,^^  so  Rev.,  "or  is  here  (compare  vi.  26)  before  me." 
£efore  is  used  of  Ume,  not  of  dignity  or  rank.  The  expression 
is  enigmatical  in  form :  "  my  successor  is  my  predecessor." 
The  idea  of  the  superior  dignity  of  Christ  is  not  a  necessary 
inference  from  His  coming  after  John,  as,  on  that  interpretation, 
the  words  would  imply.  On  the  contrary,  the  herald  who  pre- 
cedes is  inferior  in  dignity  to  the  Prince  whom  he  announces. 

For  (Sti).  Or  heoaatse.  The  reason  for  the  preceding  state- 
ment :  the  key  to  the  enigma. 

He  was  before  me  (irp&ri^  fiov  ^).  Lit,  first  in  regard 
of  me  (Rev.,  in  margin).  The  reference  to  dignity  would  re- 
quire iirrlv^  is  (see  Matt  iii.  11,  "m  mightier").  A  similar  ex- 
pression occurs  in  XV.  18  :  the  world  hated  me  before  (it  hated) 
you  {wpArov  vfi&v).  The  reference  is  to  the  pre-existence  of 
Christ.  When  speaking  of  Christ's  historic  manifestation,  is 
become  before  me,  the  Baptist  says  yiyovev.  When  speaking  of 
Christ's  eternal  being,  Se  was  before  me^  he  uses  ^.    The 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


66  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

meaning  is,  then,  that  Ohrist,  in  His  hnman  manifestation,  ap- 
peared after  John,  but,  as  the  Eternal  Word,  preceded  him, 
because  He  existed  before  him.    Compare  viii.  58.^ 

16.  And  {seal).  But  the  correct  reading  is  or^,  hecauacy  thus 
eonnecting  the  following  sentence  with  ^^fiM  of  grace  and 
truth  '*  in  ver.  14.  We  know  Him  as  full  of  grace  and  truth, 
because  we  have  received  of  ^B^Afulneaa.  i 

Of  His  fulness  {iK  rot)  irXfjpa^fiaro^  airrov).  These  and  the 
succeeding  words  are  the  Evangelist's,  not  the  Baptist's.  The 
word  /idnesa  (irkfiprnfAa)  is  found  here  only  in  John,  but  fre- 
quently occurs  in  the  writings  of  Paul,  whose  use  of  it  in 
Ephesians  and  Colossians  illustrates  the  sense  in  John ;  these 
being  Asiatic  churches  which  fell,  later,  within  the  sphere  of 
John's  influence.  The  word  is  akin  to  ir\i]pfi^,  fvJl  (ver.  14), 
and  to  irkffiipwVi  to  fill  or  complete;  and  means  that  which  is  oamr 
jplete  in  itedfj  jjlenvtude^  etUire  number  or  quantity.  Thus  the 
crew  of  a  ship  is  called  irkijpcffui,  its  complemevd.  Aristophanes 
("  Wasps,"  660),  "  Toxntav  irXiipiOfM,  the  strni-total  of  these,  is 
nearly  two  thousand  talents."  Herodotus  (iiL,  22)  says  that  the 
full  term  of  man's  life  among  the  Persians  is  eighty  years ;  and 
Aristotle  (^^  Polities,"  iv.,  4)  refers  to  Socrates  as  saying  that  the 
eight  classes,  representing  different  industries  in  the  state,  con« 
stitute  ihej)ler(mia  of  the  state  (see  Plato,  "Republic,"  371).  In 
Ephesians  i  23,  Paul  says  that  the  church  is  the  pleroma  of 
Christ:  t.«.,  the  plenitude  of  the  divine  graces  in  Christ  is  com- 
municated to  the  Church  as  His  body,  making  all  the  body, 
supplied  and  knit  together  through  the  joints  and  bands,  to  in- 
crease with  the  increase  of  God  (Col.  ii.  19  ;  compare  Eph.  iv. 
16).  Similarly  he  prays  (Eph.  iii.  19)  that  the  brethren  may 
be  filled  unto  all  the  pleroma,  of  God :  i.e.j  that  they  may  be 
filled  with  the  fulness  which  God  imparts.  More  closely  re- 
lated to  John's  use  of  the  term  here  are  Col.  i.  19,  "It  pleased 

*  I  foUow  Meyer  and  Oodet  De  Wette,  Alford,  MiUigan  and  Monlton 
ftdopt  the  other  interpretation,  referring  fywpoe^w,  to  rank  or  dignity.  So 
Weeteott,  who,  however,  does  not  itate  the  i«ne  between  the  two  expUnations 
with  his  usual  sharpness. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


PROLOGUB.  67 

the  Father  that  in  Hun  (Chmt)  shonld  all  thefulnesa  {rh 
irX^pmfjLa,  note  the  article)  dwell;"  and  ii.  9,  10,  "In  Him 
dwelleth  all  tAe  pLeroma  of  the  Gk)dhead  hodUy  (i.e.,  oorpo- 
redUy^  lecoming  incarnate^  and  in  Him  ye  Are/ulfClled  {ireirXtf' 
poi^liiifo£)P  This  declares  that  the  whole  aggregate  of  the  divine 
powers  and  graces  appeared  in  the  incarnate  Word,  and  corre- 
sponds with  John's  statement  that  "  the  Word  became  ^/Z^A  and 
tabernacled  among  men,  full  of  grace  and  tmth ; "  while  "  ye 
KrefuljiUed^  answers  to  John's  "  of  RiBjkdness  we  all  received." 
Hence  John's  meaning  here  is  that  Christians  receive  from  the 
divine  completeness  whatever  each  requires  for  the  perfection 
of  his  character  and  for  the  accomplishment  of  his  work  (com- 
pare John  XV.  16 ;  xvii.  22).* 

Have^ — received  {iKifio^jLcv).  Bev.,  we  received:  rendering 
the  aorist  tense  more  literally. 

Grace  for  grace  ix^^^  ^^  %<i/>iro9).  The  preposition  avrl 
originally  means  (yoer  agamst;  opposite;  before  (in  a  local  sense). 
Through  the  idea  of  placing  one  thing  over  against  another  is 
developed  that  of  exchange.  Thus  Herodotus  (iii,,  69),  "  They 
bought  the  island,  avrl  x/w7A*aT0)y,ybf  money."  So  Matt.  v.  38, 
"An  eye  for  (ami)  an  eye,"  etc.  This  idea  is  at  the  root  of  the 
peculiar  sense  in  which  the  preposition*  is  used  here.  We  re- 
ceived, not  Kew  Testament  grace  mstead  of  Old  Testament 
grace ;  nor  simply,  grace  added  to  grace ;  but  new  grace  im- 
parted as  the  former  measure  of  grace  has  been  received  and 
improved.  "To  have  realized  and  used  one  measure  of  grace, 
was  to  have  gained  a  larger  measure  (as  it  were)  in  eajchange 
for  it."  Consequently,  oontimumey  unintermitted  grace.  The 
idea  of  the  development  of  one  grace  from  another  is  elaborated 
by  Peter  (2  Pet.  L  6),  on  which  see  notes.  Winer  cites  a  most 
interesting  parallel  from  Philo.  "  Wherefore,  having  provided 
and  dispensed  the  first  graces  (x^^^ro?),  before  their  recipients 
have  waxed  wanton  through  satiety,  he  subsequently  bestows 

*  It  Is  hardly  necesBary  to  refer  the  oritioal  stadent  to  the  admirable  note 
of  Bishop  Lightf  oot,  in  his  Commentary  on  Coloesians,  p.  828  sq. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


58  WOKD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

different  graces  in  exchange/or  {optI)  those,  and  a  third  snpply 
/or  the  second,  and  ever  new  ones  in  exchange  far  the  older." 

17.  For  (Sri).  Because.  Oiving  the  ground  of  the  state- 
ment that  Christians  received  new  and  richer  gifts  of  grace : 
the  ground  being  that  the  law  of  Moses  was  a  limited  and 
narrow  enactment,  while  Jesus  Christ  imparted  the  fulness  of 
grace  and  truth  which  was  in  Him  (ver.  14).  Compare  Bom. 
iv.  15 ;  X.  4 ;  Gal.  iii.  10. 

Was  given  {i86$fi).  A  special  gift  serving  a  special  and 
preparatory  purpose  with  reference  to  the  Gospel:  the  word 
being  appropriate  to  ^^  an  external  and  positive  institution." 

By  Moses  (Sid).    Lit.,  through.    See  on  h/  Him^  ver.  3. 

Grace  and  truth  came  {iyhero).  Came  into  being  as  the 
development  of  the  divine  plan  inaugurated  in  the  law,  and 
unfolding  the  significance  of  the  gift  of  the  law.  They  came 
into  being  not  absoliUelyy  but  in  relation  to  mankind.  Com- 
pare 1  Cor.  i.  30,  where  it  is  said  of  Christ,  He  was  made  (prop- 
erly, became,  iyeui]^)  unto  us  wisdom  and  righteousness,  etc. 
Kote  the  article  with  grace  and  truth;  ths  grace  and  the  truth ; 
that  which  in  the  full  sense  is  grace  and  truth.  Orace  occurs 
nowhere  else  in  John,  except  in  salutations  (2  John  3 ;  Apoc. 
L  4 ;  xxiL  21). 

Jesus  Christ.  The  Being  who  has  been  present  in  the 
Evangelist's  mind  from  the  opening  of  the  Gospel  is  now  first 
named.  The  two  clauses,  ^'the  law  was  given,"  ^^  grace  and 
truth  came,"  without  the  copula  or  qualifying  particles,  illus- 
trate the  parallelism  which  is  characteristic  of  John's  style  (see 
on  ver.  10). 

18.  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time  {Behv  ovZeh  ho- 
paxev  irdyn'OTe).  God  is  first  in  the  Greek  order,  as  emphatic : 
^^God  hath  no  man  ever  seen."  As  to  the  substance  of  the 
statement,  compare  iii.  11 ;  Exod.  xxxiiL  20 ;  1  John  iv.  12. 
Manifestations  of  God  to  Old  Testament  saints  were  only  par- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


PBOLOOUB.  59 

tial  and  approximate  (Exod.  xzxiii.  23).  The  seeing  intended 
here  is  seeing  of  the  divine  essence  rather  than  of  the  divine  per- 
son,  which  also  is  indicated  bj  the  absence  of  the  article  from 
Beov^  Ood.  In  this  sense  even  Christ  was  not  seen  as  God. 
The  verb  opc£a>,  to  see^  denotes  a  physical  act,  bnt  emphasizes 
the  mental  discernment  accompanying  it,  and  points  to  the  re- 
salt  rather  than  to  the  act  of  vision.  In  1  John  i.  1 ;  iv.  12, 14, 
Sedofuu  is  used,  denoting  calm  and  deliberate  oontemplatian 
(see  on  ver.  14).  In  xii.  45,  we  have  Sea>pio,  to  behold  (see  on 
Mark  v.  15 ;  Luke  x.  18).  Both  Sedofiau  and  SecDpio)  imply  de- 
liberate contemplation,  but  the  former  is  gazing  with  a  view  to 
satisfy  the  eye,  while  the  latter  is  beholding  more  critically, 
with  an  inward  spiritual  or  mental  interest  in  the  thing  beheld, 
and  with  a  view  to  acquire  knowledge  about  it  ^^Oecapelv 
would  be  used  of  a  general  officially  reviewing  or  inspecting 
an  army ;  JhaaSm  of  a  lay  spectator  looking  at  the  parade " 
(Thayer). 

The  only  begotten  son  (o  fMwjyep^  vloq).  Several  of  the 
principal  manuscripts  and  a  great  mass  of  ancient  evidence 
support  the  reading  fiovoyevi^  06O9,  "  God  only  b^otten.'*  * 

Another  and  minor  difference  in  reading  relates  to  the  article, 
which  is  omitted  from  fwpoyep^  by  most  of  the  authorities 
which  favor  0€O9.  Whether  we  read  the  only  begotten  Son,  or 
God  only  begotten,  the  sense  of  the  passage  is  not  affected.  The 
latter  reading  merely  combines  in  one  phrase  the  two  attri- 
butes of  the  word  already  indicated — God  (ver.  1),  only  begot- 
ten (ver.  14) ;  the  sense  being  one  who  was  both  God  and  only 


*  Dr.  Sorirener,  "  Introdnotion  to  the  Oritioism  of  the  New  Testament^ "  re- 
marks :  * '  Those  who  wiU  resort  to  ancient  OTidence  ezolnsivel j  for  the  recension 
of  the  text,  may  weU  be  perplexed  in  dealing  with  this  passage.  The  oldest 
mannsoripts,  Tendons,  and  writers  are  hopelessly  divided."  He  decides,  how- 
ever, for  the  reading  vt^$.  So  TischendorTs  text,  and  of  commentators,  Mejer, 
De  Wette,  Alf ord,  Godet,  Schaif  (in  Lange).  Westcott  and  Hort*s  text  gives 
et^,  with  6  ^oMyei^f  vlbs  in  margin.  So  Westcott  (Gommentar  j),  Milligan  and 
Monlton,  and  Tregelles.  See  SchafiTs  note  on  the  passage  in  Lange ;  Scriv- 
ener, p.  525;  and  "Two  Diasertations,"  bj  F.  J.  A.  Hort,  Cambridge, 
1877. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


60  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Who  is  in  the  bosom  (o  &v  eh  rov  nSkirov).  The  expression 
o  &v,  who  18^  or  the  one  heingj  is  explained  in  two  ways :  1.  As  a 
timeless  present,  expressing  the  inherent  and  eternal  relation  of 
the  Son  to  the  Father.  2.  As  interpreted  by  the  preposition 
€W>  i/riy  lit.,  mto^  and  expressing  the  fact  of  Christ's  return  to 
the  Father's  glory  after  His  incarnation  :  "  The  Son  who  has 
entered  into  the  Father's  bosom  and  is  there."  In  the  former 
case  it  is  an  absolute  description  of  the  nature  of  the  Son  :  in 
the  latter,  the  emphasis  is  on  the  historic  fact  of  the  ascension, 
though  with  a  reference  to  his  eternal  abiding  with  the  Father 
from  thenceforth. 

While  the  fact  of  Christ's  return  to  the  Father's  glory  may 
have  been  present  to  the  writer's  mind,  and  have  helped  to  de- 
termine the  form  of  the  statement,  to  emphasize  that  fact  in 
this  connection  would  seem  less  consistent  with  the  course  of 
thought  in  the  Prologue  than  the  other  interpretation ;  since 
John  is  declaring  in  this  sentence  the  competency  of  the  incar- 
nate Son  to  manifest  Ood  to  mankind.  The  ascension  of  Christ 
is  indeed  bound  up  with  that  truth,  but  is  not,  in  the  light  of 
the  pi*evious  course  of  thought,  its  primary  factor.  That  is 
rather  the  eternal  oneness  of  the  Word  with  Ood;  which,  though 
passing  through  the  phase  of  incarnation,  nevertheless  remains 
unbroken  (iii.  13).  Thus  Godet,  aptly :  ^'The  quality  attributed 
to  Jesus,  of  being  the  perfect  revealer  of  the  divine  Being,  is 
founded  on  Uis  intimate  and  perfect  relation  to  Ood  Himself." 

The  phrase,  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father^  depicts  this  eternal 
relation  as  essentially  a  relation  of  l/yoe  ;  the  figure  being  used 
of  the  relation  of  husband  and  wife  (Deut.  xiii.  6) ;  of  a  father 
to  an  infant  child  (Num.  xi.  12),  and  of  the  affectionate  protec- 
tion and  rest  afforded  to  Lazarus  in  Paradise  (Luke  xvi  23). 
The  force  of  the  preposition  eU,  intOj  according  to  the  first  in- 
terpretation of  who  isy  is  akin  to  that  of  '^  vnth  Ood  "  (see  on 
ver.  1) ;  denoting  an  ever  active  relation,  an  eternal  going  forth 
and  returning  to  the  Father's  bosom  by  the  Son  in  His  eternal 
work  of  love.  He  ever  goes  forth  from  that  element  of  grace 
and  love  and  i*etums  to  it.  That  element  is  His  life.  He  is 
there  ^'  because  He  plunges  into  it  by  His  unceasing  action " 
(Godet). 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


PBOLOOUB.  61 

He  (iiceiuos).  Strongly  emphatic,  and  pointing  to  the  eternal 
Son.  This  pronoun  is  used  bj  John  more  frequently  than  bj 
any  other  writer.  It  occurs  seventy-two  times,  and  not  only  as 
denoting  the  more  distant  subject,  but  as  denoting  and  laying 
special  stress  on  the  person  or  thing  immediately  at  hand,  or 
possessing  pre-eminently  the  quality  which  is  immediately  in 
question.  Thus  Jesus  applies  it  to  Himself  as  the  person  for 
whom  the  healed  blind  man  is  inquiring :  '^  It  is  j5^  (^^09) 
that  talketh  with  thee  ^  (John  ix.  37).  So  here,  "  the  only-be- 
gotten  Son  who  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father — Me  hath  de- 
clared Him.** 

Hath  declared  (^fT/i^aro).  Or,  rendering  the  aorist  strictly, 
Se  declared.  From  ix,  farthj  and  fffiofuu^  to  lead  the  way. 
Orig.,  to  lead  or  govern.  Hence,  like  the  Lat  jpraeire  verbis^  to 
go  before  with  words^  to  preeoribe  or  dictate  a  form  of  words. 
To  draw  out  in  narrative^  to  recount  or  rehearse  (see  Acts  xv. 
14^  and  on  Luke  zxiv.  35).  To  relate  m  fvU  ;  to  interpret^  or 
translate.  Therefore  i^fypiiTis*  exegesisy  is  interpretation  or  ess- 
planation.  The  word  i^frffrni^  was  used  by  the  Greeks  of  an 
eospounder  of  oracles,  dreams,  omens,  or  sacred  rites.  Thus 
Croesus,  finding  the  suburbs  of  Sardis  alive  with  serpents,  sent 
to  the  soothsayers  {i^WH'^^)  of  Telmessus  (Hei*odotus,  L,  78). 
The  word  thus  comes  to  mean  a  spiritual  director.  Plato  calls 
Apollo  the  ttUelary  director  {irarp^  ^t'TTT^)  of  religion 
("  Republic,^  427),  and  says,  "  Let  the  priests  be  interpreters  for 
life  ^  C^  Laws,''  759).  In  the  Septuagint  the  word  is  used  of  the 
magicians  of  Pharaoh's  court  (6en.  xli.  8,  24),  and  the  kindred 
verb  of  teaching  or  interpreting  concerning  leprosy  (Levit  xiv. 
57).  John's  meaning  is  that  tiie  Word  revealed  or  m^amifested 
and  interpreted  the  Father  to  men.  The  word  occurs  only  here 
in  John's  writings.  Wye.  renders,  He  hath  told  out.  These 
words  conclude  the  Prologue. 

Thb  Hjstobioal  Nabrative  now  begins^  and  falls  into  two 
general  divisions. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


62  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


I.  THE  SELF-BEYELATION   OP  CHRIST  TO  THE  WORLD  (L 

19-xii.  60). 

XL  THE  SELF-REVELATION  OP  CHRIST  TO  THE  DISCIPLES 
(xiii  1-xxi  23).* 

19.  This  {aSrrjf).  The  following.  This  use  of  the  pronoun, 
calling  the  reader's  attention  to  what  follows,  and  preparing 
him  for  it,  is  frequent  in  John.  Sometimes  the  pronoun  carries 
the  sense  of  qiudity  :  of  this  character.  See  iii.  19 ;  xv.  12 ;  1 
John  V.  4,  9, 11, 14. 

Witness  (jiaprvpla).  Testimony.  See  on  ver.  7,  and  1  Pet. 
V.  L 

John.  See  on  ver.  6.  Kote  the  article :  the  John  previously 
mentioned. 

The  Jews  (ol  ^lovSatot).  This  is  a  characteristic  word  in 
John.  It  occurs  more  than  fifty  times  in  his  Gk)spel  as  his  own 
expression,  while  there  are  six  instances  of  the  formula  King 
of  the  Jeios  used  by  Gentiles.  In  the  Synoptic  Gospels,  on  the 
other  hand,  to  twelve  instances  of  ICing  of  the  Jeu>8y  there  are 
but  four  passages  in  which  the  word  Jews  occurs.  In  PauPs 
writings  it  is  comparatively  rare,  mostly  in  contrast  with  Greek, 
and  both  in  contrast  with  Christianity.  In  the  Apocalypse  it 
is  found  twice  (ii.  9 ;  iii.  9),  of  those  who  say  they  are  Jews  and 
are  not,  but  are  " of  the  synagogue  of  Satan  "  and  "do  lie." 

John,  in  the  Gospel,  distinguishes  between  the  muMitude  (o 
^Xo9)  and  the  Jews  (lovBaSot).  By  the  former  he  means  the 
aggregate  of  the  Jewish  inhabitants  of  Palestine,  the  mass  of 
the  people,  chiefly  Galilseans ;  by  the  latter,  more  particularly 
Jud»ans,  the  leaders  of  Judaism  in  opposition  to  tfesus.  The 
midtitude  are  unsettled  in  conviction,  inquisitive,  despised  by  the 
Pharisees,  inclined  to  listen  to  Jesus  and  to  believe ;  moved  by 
an  impulse  to  make  Him  a  king,  escorting  Him  triumphantly 
into  Jerusalem,  and  not  appearing  in  the  narrative  of  the  trial 

*  I  take  this  diyision  from  Westoott. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  63 

and  cmcifixion.  The  JewB  are  tenacions  of  the  expectation  of  a 
national  Messiah.  They  represent  the  narrow,  sectarian  aspect 
of  Judaism ;  they  are  the  instigators  and  leaders  of  the  opposi- 
tion to  Jesus,  and  to  them  His  crucifixion  is  attributed.  John 
uses  the  word  where  the  other  Evangelists  speak  of  the  op- 
posers  of  Christ  as  Pharisees,  Saddncees,  elders,  chief -priests, 
scribes,  or  lawyers.  He  recognizes  the  distinction  between 
Pharisee  and  Sadducee,  and  though  he  does  not  mention  the 
latter  by  name,  he  characterizes  them  by  their  position.  Jesus 
is  the  key  to  the  sense  in  which  John  employs  the  term  Jem^. 
He  regards  them  in  their  relation  to  Him.  The  idea  underly- 
ing the  word  is  habitually  that  of  separation  from  the  character 
and  privileges  of  a  true  Israelite  through  their  rejection  of 
Jesus.* 

Sent  {pnrkcreCKxw).    As  a  deputation.    See  on  ver.  6. 

Priests  and  Levites.  Bepresenting  the  ecclesiastical  ele- 
ment of  the  nation ;  the  two  classes  employed  in  the  temple 
service.  See  Josh.  iii.  3  ;  2  Chron.  xxx.  27 ;  Ezek.  xliv.  16.  The 
combination  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament.  These 
deputies  probably  came  from  the  Sanhedrim. 

To  ask  (&a  ipcmiamnv).  Lit,  in  order  that  they  should  a%k. 
See  on  Matt  xv.  23. 

Who  art  thou  (<n)  rk  Jt)  %    Lit,  Hum^  who  art  thou  f 

20.  He  confessed  and  denied  not.  John's  characteristic 
combination  of  a  positive  and  negative  clause.  See  on  ver.  3. 
Both  verbs  are  used  absolutely. 

I  anfi  not  the  Christ.  According  to  the  proper  reading,  *ya), 
/,  stands  first  in  the  Baptist's  statement,  the  Sn  having  the 
force  merely  of  quotation  marks.  It  is  emphatic :  ^'  I  am  not 
the  Christ,  though  the  Christ  is  here."    Some  were  questioning 

*  The  siadent  should  by  aU  means  read  Canon  Westoott's  admirable  sum* 
mary  of  this  subjeot  in  the  Introdaotion  to  his  Commentary  on  John's  GospeL 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


64  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  KEW  TESTAMENT. 

whether  John  was  the  Christ  (Luke  iii  15 ;  Acts  xiii.  25).  Kote 
the  frequent  occurrence  of  the  emphatic  /;  w.  23,  26,  27,  80, 
31,  33,  34.    On  the  Christy  see  on  Matt.  L  1. 

24.  What  then  ?  Art  thou  Elias  ?  Better,  as  Bev., 
Elijah.  Some  authorities  read,  What  then  art  thou  f  Elijah  f 
Elijah,  predicted  in  Mai.  iv.  5,  as  the  forerunner  of  the  day  of 
the  Lord. 

Artthou  that  prophet?  Rev.,  " ^  prophet.**  According 
to  the  Oreek  order,  the  prophet  aH  thou.  See  Dent  xviii. 
15,  and  compare  Acts  iiL  22 ;  vii.  37 ;  John  i.  46 ;  vi.  14. 

No.    Obserre  how  the  successive  denials  become  shorter. 

23.  The  voice  (^i^).  Or,  a  voice.  There  is  no  article. 
See  on  Matt.  iii.  6. 

Crying  in  the  wilderness.  Some  join  in  the  wHdemess 
with  make  straight,  as  in  the  Hebrew.  The  quotation  is  from 
Isa.  xl.  3.  In  the  other  three  Gbspels  it  is  applied  to  the  Bap- 
tist (Matt.  iiL  3 ;  Mark  i.  3 ;  Luke  iii.  4).  Here  he  uses  it  of 
himself.    On  vnldemeesj  see  on  Matt  iiL  1. 

Malce  straight  the  way  (eu^tWre  r^  oSbv).  For  oSov,  way, 
all  the  Synoptists  have  rpijSots,  beaten  tracks;  and  for  the  verb 
eifSvpare,  make  straight,  the  adjective  and  verb  ev^Uvi  iroieire. 
On  the  figure  of  preparing  the  roads,  see  on  Luke  iiL  5. 

24.  They  which  were  sent  were  (o«  awetrrakfUvoi  Ijirav). 
Lit,  those  having  been  sent  were.  But  the  best  texts  omit  the 
article,  so  that  the  remaining  words  form  the  pluperfect  pas- 
sive :  '^  they  had  been  sent  from  the  Pharisees.''  This  addition 
of  an  explanatory  circumstance  is  characteristic  of  John.  Com- 
pare i.  41,  45  ;  ix.  14 ;  xi.  5,  18  ;  xiii.  23. 

26.  I  baptize  with  water:  but  there  standeth.  The  best 
texts  omit  but ;  so  that  the  two  clauses  illustrate  John's  char- 
acteristic parallelism,  and  bring  out  the  sharp  contrast  be- 
tween the  Baptist  and  his  successor. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  65 

Among  you  (jj^co^  ifi&v).  The  Greek  idiom  is  a  mid  one 
in  respect  of  you.  *Eyoi),  ly  and  fiiao^,  a  mid  one^  stand  re- 
8pecti7elj  at  the  head  of  the  parallel  claoses,  thus  emphasizing 
the  two  contrasted  parties. 

Standeth  (Icm^/ca/).  The  best  texts  read  an^ict^  a  verb 
which  is  kindred  to  eanjKep,  but  with  the  added  sense  of  finUj 
j)ersistent  standing.  Thns,  standfast  (1  Cor.  xvL  13  ;  Gal.  v. 
1 :  Philip,  i  27).  The  verb  emphasizes  the  firm,  dignified  at- 
titude of  Christ. 

Ye  know  not  {v/iek).    Emphatic. 

27.  He  it  is  who,  coming  after  me  {aink  iarw  6  iwCam 
fiov  ipxifJi'Ctfos:).  The  best  texts  omit  the  first  two  words. 
Westcott  and  Hort  also  omit  o ;  so  that  the  rendering  is,  wAonh 
ye  know  not^  coming  after  me. 

Was  preferred  before  me.    The  best  texts  omit 

To  unloose  (&a  Xt/o-co).  Lit.,  that  I  should  unloose.  Mark 
(L  7)  and  Lnke  (iii.  16)  have  tmloose.  Matt  (iii  11)  bear. 
See  on  Matt  iii.  11. 

28.  Bethabara  (Bi7^a^ap{i).  The  correct  reading  is  JSi^Sai/io. 
Bethany.  Not  the  Bethany  of  John  xi.  18,  bat  an  nnknown 
village.  It  was  not  uncommon  for  two  places  to  have  the  same 
name,  as  the  two  JBethsaidaSy  the  one  on  the  eastern  shore  of 
the  Lake  of  Gennesaret  (Mark  vi.  32,  45),  and  the  other  on  the 
western  shore  (John  i  44) ;  the  two  Csesareas,  on  the  Mediter- 
ranean (Acts  viii.  40),  and  in  Gtinlonitis,  at  the  foot  of  Lebanon, 
Csdsarea  Philippi  (Matt  xvi.  13). 

Was  baptizing  (^  ffawrt^wv).  The  participle  with  the  sub- 
stantive verb  indicating  continued  action ;  was  engaged  in  bap- 
tiaing. 

29.  John.    The  best  texts  omit 
Vol.  n.— 6 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


66  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Seeth  (fi\err€^).  Both  6pd<o  and  fikbrm  denote  the  physical 
act  of  seeing,  the  former  seeing  in  general^  the  latter  the  single 
look.  The  perception  indicated  by  pKh'^  is  more  outward; 
the  perception  of  sense  as  distinguished  from  mental  discern- 
ment, which  is  prominent  in  opato.  A  look  told  the  Baptist 
tliat  the  Mightier  One  had  come.  See  on  ver.  18,  and  Matt. 
Vila. 

Unto  (tt/)^).    Strictly,  towa/rda. 

Behold  (ffie).  The  imperative  in  the  singular  nnmber, 
though  the  comjxvny  of  his  followers  is  addressed.  This  con- 
struction, however,  is  not  uncommon.  See  Matt.  xxvL  65; 
Acts  xiii.  46. 

The  Lamb  (o  afivb^).  The  word  occurs  in  John  only  here 
and  in  ver.  36.  Also  in  Acts  viii.  32 ;  1  Pet.  i.  19.  The  diminu- 
tive apvlov,  a  little  lamb,  is  found  once  in  the  Gospel  (xxi  15), 
often  in  the  Apocalypse,  but  only  of  the  glorified  Redeemer, 
and  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament.  In  some  instances 
the  word  may  emphasize  the  gentle  and  innocent  character  of 
Jesus  suffering  to  expiate  the  sins  of  men  (Apoc.  v.  6, 12 ;  xiii. 
8) ;  but  it  is  also  employed  in  describing  Him  as  indignant 
(Apoc.  vi.  16) ;  as  victorume  (Apoc.  xvii.  4) ;  as  ^  object  of 
adoration  (Apoc.  v.  8) ;  and  as  enthroned  (Apoc.  v.  13 ;  vii. 
17). 

The  term,  the  Larnh  of  God  (note  the  article),  is  evidently 
nsed  here  by  the  Baptist  in  some  sense  understood  by  his 
hearers,  and  points  to  Isa.  liii.  (7) ;  compare  Acts  viii.  32. 
The  reference  is  probably  to  the  Paschal  lamb,  though  com- 
mentators differ. 

Of  God.    Provided  by  Gkxl  for  sacrifice. 

That  taketh  away  (o  cXfmv).  Either  takes  away  or  Uihes 
v/pon  himself  J  in  order  to  bear:  either  removal  or  expiation  of 
sin.  The  one  idea,  however,  is  included  in  the  other.  The 
taking  anjoay  of  the  sin  is  through  His  bearing  it.  In  Isa.  liii. 
(Sept.),  if>ifm,  to  hear  J  and  its  compound  ava^pw  (see  on  1  Pet 


Digitized  by  VJOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  67 

ii  5)  are  used,  and  ol/w,  to  take  up  and  carry  OMay^  oocnrs  only 
in  the  phrase  Tm  life  is  taken  from  the  earthy  A.  V.,  he  was  cut 
off  out  of  the  land  of  the  living^  in  accordance  with  the  universal 
usage  of  the  Septuagint,  which  never  employs  cXp^w  to  express 
the  hearing  of  sin.  If  the  Baptist  had  meant  hearing^  he  would 
probably  have  used  if>ep(a.  Compare  1  John  iii.  5  :  "  He  was 
manifested  to  take  a/way  {ha  ipff)  our  sins,"  and  1  John  i.  7, 
"  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  In  the  use  of  the  present  tense, 
takethj  the  Baptist  views  the  future  consummation  of  Christ's 
atoning  work  as  potentially  present. 

The  sin  (t^v  ifiaprCav).    Collectively  regarded. 

World.    See  on  ver.  9. 

30.  Of  whom  {irepl  oS) ;  i.e.,  **  concerning  whom ;"  but  the 
proper  reading  is  inrip  oj,  "  on  'behalf  ol  whom ; "  im,  vindication 

A  man  {&v)fp).  Three  words  are  used  in  the  "New  Testa- 
ment for  man :  i^fyqv  or  ap<nfv,  avfip^  and  iv^p^airof;.  "Apcrpf 
marks  merely  the  sexual  distinction,  male  (Bom.  i.  27 ;  Apoc 
xii.  5, 13).  ^Avqp  denotes  the  man  as  distinguished  from  the 
woman,  as  male  or  as  a  husband  (Acts  viii.  12 ;  Matt.  i.  16),  or 
from  a  hoy  (Matt.  xiv.  21).  Also  man  as  endowed  with  courage, 
intelligence,  strength,  and  other  noble  attributes  (1  Cor.  xiii. 
11 ;  Eph.  iv.  13 ;  Jas.  iii.  2). 

"AvSpayn-o^  is  generic,  without  distinction  of  sex,  a  human 
heing  (John  xvi.  21),  though  often  used  in  connections  which 
indicate  or  imply  sex,  as  Matt.  xix.  10 ;  x.  35.  Used  of  manr 
kind  (Matt  iv.  4),  or  of  the  jf}e()ple  (Matt.  ▼.  13, 16 ;  vi.  6,  18 ; 
John  vi.  10).  Of  man  as  distinguished  from  animals  or  plants 
(Matt.  iv.  19 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  16),  and  from  Ood,  Christ  as  divine 
and  angels  (Matt«  x.  32 ;  John  x.  33  ;  Luke  ii.  15).  With  the 
notion  of  weakness  leading  to  sin,  and  with  a  contemptuous 
sense  (1  Cor.  ii  6 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  2 ;  John  v.  12 ;  Bom.  ix.  20). 
The  more  honorable  and  noble  sense  thus  attaches  to  atnip 
rather  than  to  Sv^p^nnro^.  Tlius  Herodotus  says  that  when  the 
Modes  charged  the  Greeks,  they  fell  in  vast  numbers,  so  that 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


68  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

it  was  manifest  to  Xerxes  that  be  had  many  men  comhatants 
{AvSpcmroi)  but  few  warriors  (ivBpes:)  viL,  210.  So  Homer:  "O 
friends,  be  men  (avipesi)^  and  take  on  a  stout  heart "  ("  Iliad,'' 
v.,  529).  ^Avqp  is  therefore  used  here  of  Jesus  by  the  Baptist 
with  a  sense  of  dignity.  Compare  av^ponrof;,  in  ver.  6,  where 
the  word  implies  no  disparagement,  but  is  simply  indefinite. 
In  John  aWip  has  mostly  the  sense  of  huiSHmd  (iv.  16-18).  See 
vi.  10. 

31.  And  I  (/eoTw).  Emphatic.  "And  /,  though  I  predicted 
His  coming  (ver.  30),  knew  Him  not." 

Knew  Him  not.  OiBcially,  as  the  Messiah.  There  is  no 
reference  to  personal  acquaintance.  It  is  inconceivable  that, 
with  the  intimate  relations  between  the  two  families,  the  Bap- 
tist should  have  been  personally  unacquainted  with  Jesus. 

Israel.  Always  with  the  idea  of  the  spiritual  privil^e  of 
tlie  race. 

32.  Bare  record  {ifLapripf^eii).  Better,  bear  wUamsSj  as 
Rev.    See  on  ver.  7. 

I  saw  {t^Moiuu).  Bev.,  more  correctly,  gives  the  force  of 
the  perfect  tense,  /  han)6  beheld.  Calmly  and  thoughtfully ; 
see  on  ver.  14.  The  perfect  indicates  the  abiding  effect  of  the 
vision.    Compare  idpaxa,  I  have  seen  (ver.  34). 

As  a  dove  {dnrel  irepurrepiv).  In  the  shape  of  a  dove.  See 
on  Matt  iii.  16. 

33.  The  same  (iKeivosi).  Bev.,  He.  See  on  ver.  18.  Em- 
phasizing the  pereanal  communication  of  Christ  to  the  Baptist 

With  the  Holy  Ghost  (^  nvevfian  "Ayi^).  Better,  as  Bev., 
Soly  Spirit.  The  preposition  hf,  in  (Bev.,  in  marg.),  often  has 
the  instrumental  force,  vnth.  Here,  however,  it  would  seem  to 
signify  the  element  of  the  new  life,  as  ip  HBari,  in  toaterj  signi- 
fies the  element  of  the  symbolic  baptism,  and  might  better  be 
rendered  in.    The  absence  of  the  article  from  Molt/  Spirit  falls 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  69 

in  with  this,  as  indicating  the  spiritual  inflaence  of  the  divine 
Agent  rather  than  His  personality. 

34.  I  saw  (idpoKa).  Bey.,  more  Btrictly,  according  to  the 
peifect  tense,  /  A(we  seen.  See  on  ver.  32,  and  note  the  dif- 
ferent verb  for  seeing,  on  which  see  on  ?er.  18. 

Bare  record  (jJbe/uifyrvpffKa).  Bev.,  h(we  borne  vntness. 
Also  the  perfect  tense. 

The  Son  of  God.  This  is  the  proper  reading,  but  one  very 
important  manuscript  reads  o  iicKAKTh^,  the  ohmen.  By  the 
phrase  John  means  the  Messiah.  It  has  the  same  sense  as  in 
the  Synoptic  Gospels.  Compare  Matt.  xi.  27 ;  xxviii.  19.  For 
the  sense  in  which  it  was  understood  by  the  Jews  of  Christ's 
day,  see  v.  18, 19 ;  x.  29,  30-36.  The  phrase  occurs  in  the 
Old  Testament  only  in  Daniel  iiL  26.  Compare  Ps.  ii  12.  On 
vlm^  Sony  as  distinguished  from  rhcvcv,  childj  see  on  ver.  12. 

35.  Stood  {€um]K€i).  Bev.,  more  correctly,  was  standing^ 
since  the  imperfect  tense  denotes  something  in  progress.  Here, 
therefore,  with  the  idea  of  waiting ;  was  standing  in  expecta- 
tion.   Compare  viL  37 ;  xviii.  5,  6, 18. 

Two  of  his  disciples.  The  one  was  Andrew  (ver.  'il),  the 
other  the  Evangelist  himself,  who  studiously  refrains  from 
mentioning  his  own  name  throughout  the  narrative.  The 
name  of  James  the  elder  also  does  not  appear,  nor  that  of 
Salome,  the  Evangelist's  mother,  who  is  mentioned  by  name  in 
Mark's  Gospel  (xv.  40 ;  xvi.  1).  The  omission  of  his  own  name 
is  the  more  significant  from  the  fact  that  he  is  habitually  ex- 
act in  defining  the  names  in  his  narrative.  Compare  the  sim- 
ple designation  Simon  (i.  42)  with  subsequent  occurrences  of 
his  name  after  his  call,  as  L  42 ;  xiii.  6 ;  xxi.  15,  etc  Also 
Thomas  (xi.  16 ;  xx.  24 ;  xxi.  2) ;  Judas  Iscariot  (vi.  71 ;  xii.  4 ; 
xiii.  2,  26) ;  the  other  Judas  (xiv.  22).  Note  also  that  he  never 
speaks  of  the  Baptist  as  Jokn  the  Baptist^  like  the  other  three 
Evangelists,  but  always  as  John. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


70  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  KBW  TESTAMENT. 

36.  Looking  (ififiKiy^).  Bev.,  giving  the  force  of  the 
aorist,  and  he  looked.  See  on  ver.  29.  The  verb  is  used  by 
John  only  here  and  yer.  42. 

As  He  walked  (irepiirarowrn).  The  verb  literally  means  to 
walk  abotU  {'irepi).  Here,  possibly,  walking  along.  Westcott, 
"  walking  away.^^    See  on  1  Pet.  v.  8  ;  Lake  xi.  44. 

37.  Speak  (XaXot)yro9).     Lit,  speaking. 

They  followed.  Bengel  says,  ^^  The  origin  of  the  Christian 
Church." 

38.  Saw  {^h€urdfA€vo<:).  Better,  as  Rev.,  hehdd:  looked 
steadfastly  apon  them  as  if  studying  them. 

What  seek  ye  ?  The  first  words  of  Christ  as  recorded  by 
John.    Compare  Matt  iii.  15 ;  Mark  L  15 ;  Luke  ii.  49. 

Rabbi.  My  great  one  ;  my  honorable  sir.  Explained  by 
Jesus  himself  as  BtBdcicctKo^,  teacher  (Matt  xxiii.  8,  where  the 
proper  reading  is  hiZwKoKo^^  instead  of  ira.9i77ifr^,  guide^  mas- 
ter^  found  in  Matt  xxiiL  10).  Used  by  the  Jews  in  addressing 
their  teachers,  and  formed  from  a  Hebrew  root  meaning  great. 
It  occurs  commonly  in  John,  and  is  found  in  Matthew  and 
Mark,  but  not  in  Luke,  who  uses  hrurrar^.  See  on  Luke  v.  6. 

Being  interpreted.  John  frequently  adds  explanatory  re- 
marks.   See  w.  42,  43  ;  ix.  7. 

Dwellest  thou  (jUp€k).  Bev.,  abidest.  Jesus  had  asked 
"  What  seek  ye  ?  *'  not  whom.  They  reply,  "  Where  dost  thou 
abide?" 

39.  See  (ISere).  But  the  correct  reading  is  iy^Be,  ye  shall 
see* 

They  came.  The  best  texts  add  oSp,  therefore.  So  Bev. 
This  connecting  particle  is  found  in  John's  Gospel  as  often  as 
in  the  other  three  combined,  and  most  commonly  in  narrative. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOBPBL  OF  JOHN.  71 

Inarking  the  transition  from  one  thing  to  another,  and  serving 
to  connect  the  several  parts  of  the  narrative.  See  ver.  22 ;  ii. 
18;  iii.  25  ;  iv.  28,  30,  etc.  Much  more  frequently  thns  than 
in  the  discouraes,  where  it  would  be  used  to  mark  a  sequence  of 
thought.  Still  such  instances  occur,  as  vv.  21, 25 ;  iii  29 ;  viii 
6;  iv.  11. 

He  dwelt  {fUifei).  The  present  tense.  Lit,  they  saw  where 
lie  ckoeUeth.  For  a  similar  construction  see  ii.  9 ;  iv.  1 ;  Acts 
X.  18,  etc. 

Tenth  hour.  The  question  is  whether  this  is  to  be  reck- 
oned according  to  the  Jewish  or  tlie  Boman  method  of  com- 
putation. The  Jewish  method,  employed  by  the  other  Evan- 
gelists, begins  the  day  at  sunrise ;  so  that,  according  to  this, 
the  tenth  hour  would  be  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  The 
Homan  method,  like  our  own,  reckons  from  midnight ;  accord- 
ing to  which  the  tenth  hour  would  be  ten  o'clock  in  the  morn- 
ing. The  weight  of  the  argument  seems,  on  the  whole,  to  be 
in  favor  of  the  Jewish  method,  which  is  nndoubtedly  assumed 
by  John  in  xi.  9.  The  Greeks  of  Asia  Minor,  for  whom  John 
wrote,  had  tlie  Jewish  method,  received  from  the  Babylonians. 
Godet  cites  an  incident  from  the  '^  Sacred  Discourses  "  of  Aelius 
Aristides,  a  Greek  sophist  of  the  second  century,  and  a  con- 
temporary of  Polycarp.  God  having  commanded  him  to  take 
a  bath,  he  chose  the  sixth  hour  as  the  most  favorable  to  health. 
It  being  winter,  and  the  bath  a  cold  one,  the  hour  was  mid- 
day;  for  he  said  to  his  friend  who  kept  him  waiting,  '^Seest 
thou  the  shadow  is  already  turning?"  Even  Canon  West- 
cott,  who  advocates  the  Eoman  method,  admits  that  ^^this 
mode  of  reckoning  was  unusual  in  ancient  times,"  and  that  ^^  the 
Bomans  and  Greeks,  no  less  than  the  Jews,  reckoned  their 
hours  from  sunrise,"  though  the  Bomans  reckoned  their  owU 
days  from  midnight,  and  the  tenth  hour  is  named  as  a  late 
hour,  when  soldiers  took  their  repast  or  were  allowed  to  rest 
Thus  Livy,  in  his  account  of  the  Boman  attack  on  Sutrium 
says,  ^'  About  the  tenth  hour  the  consul  ordered  his  men  a  re- 
past, and  gave  directions  that  they  should  be  ready  in  arms  at 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


72  WORD  STX7DIBS  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

whatever  time  of  the  day  or  night  he  should  give  the  signal. 
•  .  «  After  refreshing  themselves,  they  consigned  them- 
selves to  rest  **  (ix.,  37), 

Aristophanes  says, "  When  the  shadow  on  the  dial  is  ten  feet 
long,  then  go  to  dinner"  ("Ecclesiazusse,"  648),  and  Horace, "  Yoo 
will  dine  with  me  to  day.  Come  after  the  ninth  hour  "  ("  Epistle," 
Bk.  1.,  viL,  69).  It  is  objected  that  the  time  from  four  o'clock  to 
the  dose  of  the  day  would  not  have  been  described  as  that  day; 
but  beyond  the  marking  of  the  specific  hour  of  accompanying 
Jesus  as  the  first  hour  of  his  Christian  life,  John  would  not  have 
been  unlikely  to  use  a  looser  and  more  popular  form  of  speech 
in  indicating  the  length  of  the  stay  with  Jesus,  meaning  simply 
that  they  remained  with  him  during  the  remainder  of  the  day, 
and,  no  doubt,  prolonged  their  conversation  into  the  night* 

40.  One  of  the  two.    The  other  being  Joluu 

Andrew.  See  on  Mark  iiL  18.  Compare  Mark  xiii.  3 ; 
John  vL  8 ;  zii.  22. 

Simon  Peter's  brother.  The  mention  of  Simon  Peter  be- 
fore he  has  appeared  in  the  narrative  indicates  the  importance 
which  the  Evangelist  attaches  to  him.  It  seems  to  assume  a 
knowledge  of  the  evangelic  narrative  on  the  part  of  the  read- 
ers. See  a  similar  instance  of  anticipating  what  is  subsequently 
explained,  in  the  mention  of  Mary,  xL  2. 

41.  He  first  findeth  {evplaxei  otrro^  wp&ro^).  Eev.,  Jlndeth 
f/rst.  He  is  the  demonstrative  pronoun,  this  oney  which,  with 
Jirgt,  seems  to  point  to  the  later  finding  of  his  brother  by  the 
other  disciple, «.6.,  of  James  by  John.  Bengel  says:  ^^With  the 

*  It  is  not  easy  to  adjust  aU  the  references  to  the  hoar  of  the  daj  in  John's 
Gospel  to  either  of  the  two  methods.  Thus  xiz.  14  places  the  cmcifizion  at 
the  iixth  hoar,  or  noon^  reckoning  bj  the  Jewish  mode,  whUe  Ifark  (zr.  25) 
names  the  third  hoar,  or  between  8  and  9  A.H.  The  two  passages  in  ch.  ir. 
6,  62,  afford  little  help,  especiallj  the  latter.  Perhaps,  after  all,  the  passage 
most  nearlj  decisive  is  zi.  9.  There  are  strong  authorities  on  both  sides.  For 
the  Roman  method,  Tholuck,  Ebrard,  Ewald,  Westcott;  for  the  Jewish,  LUcke, 
De  Wette,  Mejer,  Alford,  Lange,  Godet 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOBFBL  OF  JOHN.  73 

festival  freshness  of  those  days  beautif  ally  corresponds  the  word 
Jindeihj  which  is  frequently  used  here.'' 

Hit  own  {jiv  Vbiov).  See  on  ]\£att  zxiL  5 ;  xzv.  15 ;  Acts  i 
7 ;  1  Pet  L  8. 

We  have  found  (evpiiKoiimf).  This  has  been  called  the  chap- 
ter of  the  Eurekas. 

The  Messias.  Pecoliar  to  this  Gospel,  and  only  here  and 
iv.  25. 

Christ.    See  on  Matt  i  1. 

42.  Beheld.  The  same  word  as  in  ver.  36,  on  which  see. 
Hev.,  looked  upon. 

Thou  art.    Some  read  interrogatively :  oH  thou. 

Jona  (I«ya).    The  correct  reading  is  ^liodpov,  of  John. 

A  stone  {lUrpaf:).  See  on  Matt  xvi  18.  A  detached  mass 
of  rock.  Cephas  is  the  Aramaic  name,  occorring  1  Cor.  L  12; 
iiL  22 ;  ix.  5 ;  xv.  5 ;  Gal.  iL  9. 

43.  Jesus.    The  best  texts  omit 

Would  go  forth  (v^^iKn<r€P  i^TJMif).  Eev.,  better,  wa$ 
minded  to  go.  On  the  construction  see  on  Matt  xx.  14.  On 
the  verb  to  he  mindedy  see  on  Matt  i.  19. 

And  findeth.  Note  the  graphic  interchange  of  tenses:  vhu 
mindedy  Jindeth.  The  co-ordination  of  the  two  clauses,  which 
by  other  writers  would  be  placed  in  logical  dependence,  is  char- 
acteristic of  John.  Even  where  there  is  a  real  inner  dependence 
he  uses  only  the  simple  connective  particles.  Compare  iL  13 
sqq. 

Philip.  See  on  Mark  iiL  18.  For  hints  of  his  character  see 
iri  5,  7;  xii.  21  sqq. ;  xiv.  8,  9. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


74  WORD  STUDIES  m  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Saith.  The  best  texts  insert  Jeeus:  ^^  And  Jesus  said  unto 
liim." 

Follow  {oKoXov^Cj.  Often  nsed  in  the  New  Testament  with 
the  special  sense  of  following  as  a  disciple  or  partisan.  See 
Matt  iv.  20,  22 ;  ix.  9 ;  Mark  i.  18 ;  John  viii.  12.  Also  with 
the  meaning  of  cleaving  steadfastly  to  one  and  conforming  to 
his  example.  See  Matt  x.  38;  xvi.  24;  John  xii.  26.  The 
verb  occurs  but  once  outside  of  the  writings  of  the  Evangelists^ 
1  Cor.  X.  4.  It  appears  in  the  noun  aoolytey  or  acolyih^  or  ogo- 
lothistj  a  church-servant  ranking  next  below  a  snbdeacon,  whose 
duty  it  was  to  trim  the  lamps,  light  the  church,  prepare  the 
sacramental  elements,  etc.  Under  the  Byzantine  emperors  the 
captain  of  the  emperor's  body-guard  was  called  Acolouthos,  or 
the  Follower.    See  Scott's  "  Count  Robert  of  Paris." 

44.  Of  Bethtaida.  Eev.,  more  literally,y7'ewi  (airo).  Beth- 
saida  of  Oalilee.  See  xii.  21,  and  on  ver.  28.  Philip,  being  of 
the  same  city  as  Andrew  and  Peter,  was  the  more  ready  to  wel- 
come Christ,  becaase  of  the  testimony  and  example  of  his  fel- 
low-citizens. Notice  the  change  of  preposition :  y7*o;7»  Beth- 
saida  (anro)  and  ouit  qf  {ix)  the  city.  See  on  from  the  dead, 
Luke  xvL  31. 

45.  Nathanael.  Probably  the  same  as  Bartholomew.  See 
on  Bai*tholomew,  ]\£ark  iii.  18. 

Moses  In  the  law,  etc.  Note  the  circumstantial  detail  of 
this  confession  as  compared  with  Andrew's  (ver.  42). 

46.  Come  out  of  Nazareth  {itc  Na^aper  ehcu).  Lit.,  "Ja 
out  of;"  a  characteristic  expression  of  John.  See  iii.  31;  iv. 
22 ;  vii.  17,  22  ;  viil  23 ;  xv.  19 ;  xviiL  36,  38,  etc  It  means 
more  than  to  oorne  out  of :  rather  to  come  out  of  as  that  which 
is  qf;  to  be  identified  with  something  so  as  to  come  forth  bear- 
ing its  impress,  moral  or  otherwise.  See  especially  iii.  31 :  '^He 
that  is  of  the  earth  is  of  the  earth;"  «.a.,  partakes  of  its  quality. 
Compare  Christ's  words  to  Nicodemus  (iii.  6),  and  1  Cor.  xv.  47. 

In  the  Oreek  order,  otU  of  Nazareth  stands  first  in  the  sen- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


608PBL  OP  JOHN.  76 

,tence  as  expressiDg  the  prominent  thought  in  Kathanael's  mind, 
/surprise  that  Jesus  should  have  come  from  Nazareth,  a  poor 
village,  even  the  name  of  which  does  not  occur  in  the  Old 
Testament  Contrary  to  the  popular  explanation,  there  is  no 
evidence  that  Nazareth  was  worse  than  other  places,  beyond  the 
fact  of  the  violence  offered  to  Jesus  by  its  people  (Luke  iv.  28, 
29),  and  their  obstinate  unbelief  in  Him  (Matt.  xiiL  58 ;  Mark 
vL  6).  It  was  a  proverb,  however,  that  no  prophet  was  to  come 
from  Galilee  (John  vii.  52). 

47.  An  Israelite  indeed  {aKrf$&^  ^ItrpavpUrfy;).  Lit.,  truly 
an  Israelite.  An  Israelite  not  merely  in  descent,  but  in  char- 
acter, according  to  the  ideal  laid  down  in  God's  law.  The  word 
Israelite  itself  was  an  honorable  designation.  See  on  men  of 
leradj  Acts  iii.  12,  and  compare  remarks  on  Jewa^  ver.  19. 

Guile  {J^Xof;).  Properly,  a  hcdt  for  fishy  and  related  at  the 
root  to  heKed!^m,  to  catch  with  a  hait,  or  beguile.  See  on  heguil- 
inffy  2  Pet.  ii.  14.  The  true  Israelite  would  be  the  true  child 
of  Israel  after  he  had  ceased  to  be  the  Supplanter.  It  is  an  in- 
teresting fact  that  in  Genesis  xxv.  27,  Jacob  is  called  a  plain 
nian,  i.e.j  as  some  explain  the  Hebrew,  a  perfect  or  uprigld 
man,  and  others,  a  man  of  quiet  and  wmple  habits^  and  that  the 
Septuagint  renders  this  adjective  by  a7r\a<rro9,  unfeigned^  with- 
out disguiecj  simple^  giMeleas.  The  Greek  here  reads  literally, 
in  wham  guile  is  not. 

48.  K  no  west  (7mMr«ceK).    See  on  Acts  xix.  16. 

Under  the  fig-tree  {ihr6  ripf  (rvietiv).  To  be  construed  with 
eZSoy  ae,  I  saw  thee  ;  i.e.,  /  sa/vo  thee  under  the  fi^-iree.  The 
preposition  with  the  accusative  case,  which  implies  motion  to- 
ward, indicates  his  withdrawal  to  the  shade  of  the  tree  for 
meditation  or  prayer.  See  on  ver.  60.  The  Jewish  writings 
tell  of  distinguished  rabbis  who  were  accustomed  to  rise  early 
and  pursue  their  studies  under  the  shade  of  a  fig-tree.  Com- 
pare Mic.  iv.  4 ;  Zech.  iii.  10.  Augustine,  in  his  "  Confessions," 
relates  of  himself :  ^^  I  cast  myself  down,  I  know  not  how, 
under  a  certain  fig-tree,  giving  full  vent  to  my  tears ;  and  the 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


76  WORD  8TUDIBS  IN  THB  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

floods  of  mine  eyes  gashed  out,  an  acceptable  sacrifice  to 
Thee''  (viii.  28).  Nathanael  asks,  "Whence  hnowest  thou 
ine } "    Jesus  answers,  "  I  saw  thee  (eZSoy)." 

49.  Rabbi.  Nathanael  here  gives  the  title,  which  he  had 
withheld  in  his  first  address. 

60.  Under  the  fig-tree  {inrb  rfy:  irvKfy:).  Compare  ver.  48. 
Here  the  same  preposition  is  used  with  the  genitive  case,  indi- 
cating rest,  without  the  suggestion  of  withdrawal  to. 

Believest  thou  ?  Sightly  so,  though  some  render  affirma- 
tively, thou  believesL 

51.  Verily,  verily  {afi^v,  ofjkfip).  The  word  is  transcribed 
into  our  Amen.  John  never,  like  the  other  Evangelists,  uses 
the  single  verUt/y  and,  like  the  single  word  in  the  Synoptists,  it 
is  used  only  by  Christ 

Hereafter  (air  ipri).  The  best  texts  omit.  The  words 
literally  mean,yrom  henceforth;  and  therefore,  as  Canon  West- 
cott  aptly  remarks, "  if  genuine,  would  describe  the  communion 
between  earth  and  heaven  as  established  from  the  time  when 
the  Lord  entered  upon  His  public  ministry." 

Heaven  {rov  ovpcaihv).    Bev.,  giving  the  article,  the  heaven. 

Open  {hv€^9y^a).  The  perfect  participle.  Hence  Bev., 
rightly,  opened.  The  participle  signifies  standing  open,  and  is 
used  in  the  story  of  Stephen's  martyrdom,  Acts  vii.  56.  Com- 
pare Isa.  Ixiv.  1.  The  image  presented  to  the  true  Israelite  is 
drawn  from  the  history  of  his  ancestor  Jacob  (Gen.  xzviii.  12), 

Angels.  With  the  exception  of  xii.  29  and  xx.  12,  John  does 
not  use  the  word  ^^  angel "  elsewhere  in  the  Gk>spel  or  in  the 
Epistles,  and  does  not  refer  to  their  being  or  ministry.  Trench 
(^^  Studies  in  the  Gospels  ")  cites  a  beautiful  passage  of  Plato 
as  suggestive  of  our  Lord's  words.  Plato  is  speaking  of  Love. 
^'  He  is  a  great  spirit,  and  like  all  spirits  he  is  intermediate  be- 
tween the  divine  and  the  mortal    He  interprets  between  gods 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


QOSPBL  OF  JOHN.  77 

and  men,  conveying  to  the  gods  the  prayers  and  sacrifices  of 
men,  and  to  men  the  commands  and  replies  of  the  gods ;  he  is 
the  mediator  who  spans  the  chasm  which  divides  them,  and  in 
him  all  is  bound  together,  and  throngh  him  the  acts  of  the 
prophet  and  the  priest,  their  sacrifices  and  mysteries  and 
charms,  and  all  prophecy  and  incantation  find  their  way.  For 
God  mingles  not  with  man,  but  throngh  Love  all  the  inter- 
course and  speech  of  God  with  man,  whether  awake  or  asleep, 
is  carried  on  "  ("  Symposium,"  203). 

Son  of  man.  See  on  Luke  vi.  23.  Notice  the  titles  suc- 
cessively applied  to  our  Lord  in  this  chapter :  the  greater  Suc- 
cessor of  the  Baptist,  the  Lamb  of  God,  the  Son  of  Gh>d,  the 
Messiah,  the  King  of  Israel.  These  were  all  given  by  others. 
The  title  Son  of  man  He  applies  to  Himself. 

In  John's  Gospel,  as  in  the  Synoptists,  this  phrase  is  used 
only  by  Christ  in  speaking  of  Himself ;  and  elsewhere  only  in 
Acts  vii.  56,  where  the  name  is  applied  to  Him  by  Stephen. 
It  occurs  less  frequently  in  John  than  in  the  Synoptists,  being 
found  in  Matthew  thirty  times,  in  Mark  thirteen,  and  in  John 
twelve. 

Jesus'  use  of  the  term  here  is  explained  in  two  ways. 

L  That  He  borrows  the  title  from  the  Old  Testament  to 
designate  Himself  either  (a)  as  a  prophety  as  in  Ezek.  ii.  13 ; 
iii.  1,  etc  ;  or  {b)  as  the  Messiahy  as  prefigured  in  Dan.  vii.  13. 
This  prophecy  of  Daniel  had  obtained  such  wide  currency  that 
the  Messiah  was  called  Ananij  or  the  man  of  the  dottda. 

(a.)  This  is  untenable,  because  in  Ezekiel,  as  everywhere  in 
the  Old  Testament,  the  phrase  Son  of  vnan^  or  Som  of  men,  is 
used  to  describe  man  under  his  human  limitations,  as  weak, 
fallible,  and  incompetent  by  himself  to  be  a  divine  agent 

(ft.)  The  allusion  to  Daniel's  prophecy  is  admitted ;  but 
Jesus  does  not  mean  to  say,  *^  I  am  the  Messiah  who  is  pre- 
figured by  Daniel."  A  political  meaning  attached  in  popular 
conception  to  the  term  Messiah  ;  and  it  is  noticeable  through- 
out John's  Gospel  that  Jesus  carefully  avoids  using  that  term 
before  the  people,  but  expresses  the  thing  itself  by  circumlo- 
cution,  in  order  to  avoid  the  complication  which  Uie  popular 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


78  WORD  STUDIES  m  THE  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

understanding  would  have  introdaced  into  his  work.  See  viii. 
24,  25  ;  X.  24,  26. 

Moreover,  the  phrase  Son  of  man  was  not  generally  applied 
to  the  Messiah.  On  the  contrary,  v.  27  and  xii.  84  show  that 
it  was  set  off  against  that  term.  Compare  Matt.  xvi.  18,  15. 
Son  of  Ood  is  the  Messianic  title,  which,  with  one  exception, 
appears  in  confessions  (i.  34,  49 ;  xi.  27  ;  xx.  31).* 

In  Daniel  the  reference  is  exclusively  to  the  final  stage  of 
human  affairs.  The  point  is  the  final  establishment  of  the 
divine  kingdom.  Moreover,  Daniel  does  not  say  "  ths  Son  of 
man,"  but  "  one  like  a  Son  of  man."  Compare  Apoc.  i.  13 ; 
xiv.  14,  where  also  the  article  is  omitted. 

II.  The  second,  and  correct  explanation  is  that  the  phrase 
Son  of  man  is  the  expression  of  Christ's  self -consciousness  as 
being  related  to  humanity  as  a  whole :  denoting  His  real  parti- 
cipation in  human  nature,  and  designating  Himself  as  the  rep- 
resentative man.  It  thus  corresponds  with  the  passage  in 
Daniel,  where  the  earthly  kingdoms  are  represented  by  beasts, 
but  the  divine  kingdom  by  a  Son  of  man.  Hence,  too,  the 
word  dvBpayn-o^  is  purposely  used  (see  on  a  fmm,  ver.  30,  and 
compare  John  viii.  40). 

While  the  human  element  was  thus  emphasized  in  the 
phrase,  the  consciousness  of  Jesus,  as  thus  expressed,  did  not 
exclude  His  divine  nature  and  claims,  but  rather  regarded 
these  through  the  medium  of  His  humanity.  He  showed  Him- 
self divine  in  being  thus  profoundly  human.  Hence  two 
aspects  of  the  phrase  appear  in  John,  as  in  the  Synoptists. 
The  one  regards  His  earthly  life  and  work,  and  involves  His 
being  despised ;  His  accommodation  to  the  conditions  of  hu- 
man life ;  the  partial  veiling  of  His  divine  nature ;  the  lov- 
ing character  of  His  mission ;  His  liability  to  misinterpreta- 
tion ;  and  His  outlook  upon  a  consummation  of  agony.  On 
the  other  hand,  He  is  possessed  of  supreme  authority ;  He  is 
about  His  Father's  work ;  He  reveals  glimpses  of  His  divine 


*  In  John  is.  85,  where  Jesus  himself  formulates  a  confession,  the  reading 
is  disputed ;  three  of  the  leading  MSS.  reading  Son  af  man.  See  on  that 
passage. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  79 

nature  through  His  humanity ;  His  presence  and  mission  en- 
tail serious  responsibility  upon  those  to  whom  He  appeals ;  and 
He  foresees  a  consummation  of  glory  no  less  than  of  agony. 
See  Matt.  viii.  20 ;  xi.  19  ;  xii.  8,  32 ;  xiii.  37 ;  xvi.  13  ;  xx. 
18 ;  xxvL  64 ;  Mark  viii  81,  88 ;  xiv.  21 ;  Luke  ix.  26,  58 ;  xii. 
8  ;  xviL  22  ;  xix.  10  ;  xxii  69. 

The  other  aspect  is  related  to  the  future.  He  has  visions  of 
another  life  of  glory  and  dominion;  though  present  in  the 
flesh,  His  coming  is  still  future,  and  will  be  followed  by  a  judg- 
ment which  is  committed  to  Him,  and  by  the  final  glory  of 
His  redeemed  in  His  heavenly  kingdom.  See  Matt.  x.  23 ;  xiii. 
40  sqq. ;  xvi.  27  sqq. ;  xix.  28 ;  xxiv.  27,  37,  44 ;  xxv.  31  sqq. ; 
Mark  xiii  26 ;  Luke  vL  22 ;  xvii.  24,  30 ;  xviiL  8 ;  xxi.  27. 


CHAPTER  IL 

1.  The  third  day.  Beckoning  from  the  last  day  mentioned 
(i.  43). 

A  marriage  (74^i09).  Or  marriage  festwaly  including  a 
series  of  entertainments,  and  therefore  often  found  in  the 
plural.    See  on  Matt.  xxii.  2. 

Cana  of  Galilee.  To  distinguish  it  from  Cana  in  Ccelo- 
Syria. 

Mother  of  Jesus.    Her  name  is  never  mentioned  by  John. 

Was  there.  When  Jesus  arrived.  Probably  as  an  intimate 
friend  of  the  family,  assisting  in  the  preparations. 

2.  Was  called.  Eev.,  hidden.  After  His  return  from  the 
Baptist 

His  discit>les.    In  honor  of  Jesus. 

3.  They  wanted  wine  {varepi^aravTa^  otvov).  Lit,  when  the 
wmefaJUed.    So  Eev.    Wye,  and  vnne  failing.    Some  early 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


80  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

authorities  read :  ^^  they  had  no  wine,  for  the  wine  of  the  mar- 
riage was  consumed."  Marriage  festivals  sometimes  lasted  a 
whole  week  (Gen.  xxix.  27 ;  Judg.  xiv.  15 ;  Tobit  ix.  12 ;  z.  1). 

They  have  no  wine.  Implying  a  request  for  help,  not 
necessarily  the  expectation  of  a  miracle. 

4.  Woman.  Implying  no  severity  nor  disrespect.  Compare 
XX.  13, 15.  It  was  a  highly  respectful  and  affectionate  mode  of 
address. 

What  have  I  to  do  with  thee  (rl  ifuA  koX  <rol).  Lit,  wJuxt  U 
there  to  me  and  to  thee.  See  on  Mark  v.  7,  and  compare  Matt 
viii.  29 ;  xxvii.  19 ;  Mark  i.  24 ;  Luke  viii.  28.  It  occurs  often 
in  the  Old  Testament,  2  Sam.  xvi.  10 ;  1  Kings  xvii.  18,  etc. 
Though  in  a  gentle  and  affectionate  manner,  Jesus  rejects  her 
interference,  intending  to  supply  the  demand  in  His  own  way. 
Compare  John  vi.  6»  Wyc.,TFAa^  to  me  and  to  theey  thou 
VHmianf 

Mine  hour  is  not  yet  come.  Compare  viii.  20;  xiL  23 ; 
xiii.  1.  In  every  case  the  coming  of  the  hour  indicates  some 
crisis  in  the  personal  life  of  the  Lord,  more  commonly  His  pas> 
sion.    Here  the  hour  of  His  Messianic  manifestation  (ver.  11). 

6.  Unto  the  servants  {Buucovois).  See  on  Matt.  xx.  26; 
Mark  ix.  85. 

6.  Water-pots  {vBplai).  Used  by  John  only,  and  only  in  the 
Gospel,  ver.  7 ;  iv.  28.  TFo^-pots  is  literally  correct,  as  the 
'word  is  from  iSiop,  toater. 

Of  stone.  Because  less  liable  to  impurity,  and  therefore 
prescribed  by  the  Jewish  authorities  for  wadiing  before  and 
after  meals. 

After  the  manner  of  the  purifying,  etc  That  is,  for  the 
purifications  customary  among  the  Jews. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  81 

Containing  (x^pov^^'oi)-  From  %a>po9>  a  place  or  space. 
Hence,  to  niake  room  or  give  jplaccj  and  bo,  to  ha/oe  epaoe  or 
room  for  holding  eomeUwag. 

Firlcins  (jierfyrfri^si).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 
From  fierpim,  to  fneasure;  and  therefore,  properly,  a  measurer. 
A  liqnid  measure  containing  nearly  nine  gallons. 

7.  Fill  {yefiCaare).  Compare  Mark  iv.  37,  and  see  on  Luke 
xiv.  23. 

8.  Draw  out  (ayrXi^a-are).  From  &vt\o<;,  the  hold  of  a  ship 
fffhere  the  hUge-water  settlesy  and  hence,  the  hUge^water  iUetf. 
The  verb,  therefore,  originally,  means  to  hale  out  hUge-^iJoater ; 
thence,  generally,  to  drawy  as  from  a  well  (iv.  15).  Canon 
Westcott  thinks  that  the  water  which  was  changed  into  wine 
was  not  taken  from  the  vessels  of  purification,  but  that  the  ser- 
vants were  bidden,  after  they  had  filled  the  vessels  with  water, 
to  continue  drawing  from  the  well  or  spring. 

Ruler  of  the  feast  {apxvrpucKlwp).  From  ip^,  to  he  chiefs 
and  rpUXivoPj  Lat.,  tridinvumy  a  hanqiceting-hM  with  three 
couches  (see  on  Mark  vi.  39).  Some  explain  the  word  as  mean- 
ing iJie  superintendent  of  the  hanquettng-chambery  a  servant 
whose  duty  it  was  to  arrange  the  table-furniture  and  the 
courses,  and  to  taste  the  food  beforehand.  Others  as  meaning 
one  of  the  guests  selected  to  preside  at  the  banquet  according 
to  the  Greek  and  Boman  usage.  This  latter  view  seems  to  be 
supported  by  a  passage  in  Ecclesiasticus  (xxxv.  1,  2) :  "  If  thon 
be  made  the  master  of  a  f^ast,  lift  not  thyself  up,  but  be  among 
them  as  one  of  the  rest ;  take  diligent  care  for  them,  and  so 
sit  down.  And  when  thou  hast  done  all  thy  office,  take  thy 
place,  that  thou  mayst  be  merry  with  them,  and  receive  a 
crown  for  thy  well  ordering  of  the  feast"  According  to  the 
Greek  and  Roman  custom,  the  ruler  of  the  feast  was  chosen  by 
throwing  the  dice.  Thus  Horace,  in  his  ode  to  his  friend 
Sestius,  says,  moralizing  on  the  brevity  of  life :  *^  Soon  the 
home  of  Pluto  will  be  thine,  nor  wilt  thou  cast  lots  with  the 
dice  for  the  presidency  over  the  wine."  He  prescribed  the 
Vol.  IL— « 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


82  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

proportions  of  wine  and  water,  and  could  also  impose  fines  for 
failures  to  gness  riddles,  etc  As  the  success  of  the  feast  de- 
pended largely  upon  him,  his  selection  was  a  matter  of  some 
delicacy.  Plato  says,  ^^  Must  we  not  appoint  a  sober  man  and 
a  wise  to  be  our  master  of  the  revels  ?  For  if  the  ruler  of 
drinkers  be  himself  young  and  drunken,  and  not  over-wise,  only 
by  some  special  good  fortune  will  he  be  saved  from  doing  some 
great  evil  '*  ("  Laws,"  640).  The  word  occurs  only  here  and  ver. 
9.    Wye.  simply  transcribes :  architridyn. 

10.  Have  well  drunk  (jieBv<r^&ai).  Wye,  leJvUed.  Tynd., 
he  drunk.  The  A.  V.  and  Tynd.  are  better  than  the  Eev.,  wh^n 
7nen  hcuos  d/nmk  fredy.  The  ruler  of  the  feast  means  that 
when  the  palates  of  the  guests  have  become  less  sensitive 
through  indulgence,  an  inferior  quality  of  wine  is  offered.  In 
every  instance  of  its  use  in  the  New  Testament  the  word 
means  intoxication.  The  attempt  of  the  advocates  of  the  unfer- 
mented-wine  theory  to  deny  or  weaken  this  sense  by  citing  Mtf 
v)dlrV)aiered  ga/rden  (Isa.  Iviii.  11 ;  Jer.  xxxi  12)  scarcely  re- 
quires comment.  One  might  answer  by  quoting  Plato,  who 
uses  pairrC^ea^iUf  to  he  hapHzed^  for  being  drunk  ("  Sympo- 
sium,*'  176).  In  the  Septuagint  th^  verb  repeatedly  occurs  for 
toatering  (Ps.  Ixv.  9, 10),  but  always  with  the  sense  of  drench^ 
mff  or  soaking;  of  being  drunken  or  surfeited  with  water.  In 
Jer.  xlviii.  (Sept.  xxxi.)  26,  it  is  found  in  the  literal  sense,  to 
he  drunken.  The  metaphorical  use  of  the  word  has  passed  into 
common  slang,  as  when  a  drunken  man  is  said  to  be  wetted  or 
soaked  (so  Plato,  above).  The  figurative  use  of  the  word  in  the 
Septuagint  has  a  parallel  in  the  use  of  irorl^m,  to  give  to  drinkj 
to  express  the  watering  of  ground.  So  Gten.  ii.  6,  a  mist 
watered  the  face  of  the  earth,  or  gave  it  drink.  Compai*e  Gen. 
xiii.  10 ;  Dent.  xi.  10.  A  curious  use  of  the  word  occurs  in 
Homer,  where  he  is  describing  the  stretching  of  a  bull's  hide, 
which,  in  order  to  make  it  more  elastic,  is  soaked  {jiel^vouaav) 
with  fat  ("  Hiad,"  xvii.,  390). 

Worse  {iXAa'aoo).  Lit.,  smaller.  Implying  both  worse  and 
weaker.  SmaU  appears  in  tiie  same  sense  in  English,  as  smaU-heer. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


OOSPBL  OF  JOHN.  88 

Hast  kept  {renipffKo/i).    See  on  1  Pet  L  4. 

11.  This  beginning.    Or,  more  strictlj,  Ma  as  a  hegrnninff. 

Of  miracles  {arnuioav).  Bev.,  correctly,  aigns.  See  on  Matt, 
zi.  20 ;  xxiv.  24.  This  act  was  not  merely  a  prodigy  {ripa^)^ 
nor  a  wonderful  thing  {Bavfuiaiop\  nor  a  jnnoer  {SihHifu^)y  but 
diBtinctively  a  sign^  a  mark  of  the  doer's  power  and  grace,  and 
divine  character.  Hence  it  falls  in  perfectly  with  the  words 
manifested  Sis  glory. 

Believed  on  Him  {hrUrrevaav  ek  aMv).  See  on  i.  12. 
Lit,  believed  into.  Canon  Westcott  most  apdy  says  that  it 
conveys  the  idea  of  ^^  the  abeolnte  transference  of  tmst  from 
one's  self  to  another.'' 

12.  He  went  down  {tcarififj).  Capernaum  being  on  the  lake 
shore,  and  Nazareth  and  Cana  on  the  higher  ground. 

13.  The  Jews'  passover.  On  John's  use  of  the  term  Jetoa^ 
see  on  i.  19.  So  it  is  used  here  with  an  under-reference  to  the 
national  religion  as  consisting  in  mere  ceremonies.  The  same 
hint  underlies  the  words  in  ver.  6,  *'  after  the  Jews'  manner 
of  purifying."  Only  John  mentions  this  earliest  passover  of 
Christ's  ministry.  The  Synoptists  relate  no  incident  of  his 
ministry  in  Judssa,  and  but  for  the  narrative  of  John,  it  could 
not  be  positively  asserted  that  Jesus  went  up  to  tferusalem  dur- 
ing His  public  life  until  the  time  of  His  arrest  and  crucifixion. 

14.  The  temple  {!ep£).  The  temple  incloeure:  not  the 
sanctuary  {vaosi).    See  on  Matt  ix.  5 ;  Mark  xi.  16. 

Those  that  sold  (roi)?  TrwXoSmro?).  The  article  defines  them 
as  a  well-known  class. 

Changers  of  money  (scep/jtarurri^).  Only  here  in  the  New 
Testament  The  kindred  noun  idpfM,  moneys  which  occurs 
only  in  ver.  15,  is  from  /celpc^,  to  cut  into  JntSy  and  means  there- 
fore smaU  coin ;  "small  change,"  of  which  the  money-changers 
would  require  a  large  supply.  Hence  changers  qf  money  means, 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Si^  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

stiictlj,  dealers  in  email  change.  Matthew  and  Mark  use  teoKr 
Xufiumiii  (see  ver.  16),  of  which  the  ineanmg  is  substantially 
the  same  so  far  as  regards  the  dealing  in  email  coin  ;  bat  with 
the  difference  that  fcoXKufio^,  the  noun  from  which  it  is  derived, 
and  meaning  a  email  oawij  is  also  used  to  denote  the  rate  of  ex- 
change. This  latter  word  therefore  gives  a  hint  of  the  jpremi- 
i$m  on  exchange,  which  John's  word  here  does  not  convey. 
The  money-changers  opened  their  staUs  in  the  country  towns  a 
month  before  the  feast.  By  the  time  of  the  first  arrivals  of 
passover-pilgrims  at  Jerusalem,  the  country  stalls  were  closed, 
and  the  money-changers  sat  in  the  temple  (see  on  Matt.  xvii. 
24 ;  xxi.  12 ;  Mark  xi.  15).  John's  picture  of  this  incident  is 
more  graphic  and  detailed  than  those  of  the  Synoptists,  who 
merely  state  summarily  the  driving  out  of  the  traders  and  the 
overthrow  of  the  tables.  Compare  Matt  xxL  12, 13 ;  Mark  xL 
16-17;  Luke  xix.  46,  46.* 

15.  A  scourge  (il>parfiXSMp).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment.   Only  John  records  this  detaiL 

Of  small  cords  {iic  axowleiv).  The  Bev.  omits  emaU,  but 
the  word  is  a  diminutive  of  axoipo^i  a  ruehj  and  thence  a  rcfpe 
qftwieUd  ruehee.  The  A.  Y.  is  therefore  strictly  literal.  He- 
rodotus Bays  that  when  Croesus  besieged  Ephesus,  the  Ephesians 
made  an  offering  of  their  city  to  Diana,  by  stretching  a  emM 
rope  {(TXpivUv)  from  the  town  wall  to  the  temple  of  the  goddess, 
a  distance  of  seven  furlongs  (L,  26).  The  ecKoene  was  an  Egyp- 
tian measure  of  length,  marked  by  a  rush-rope.  See  Herodotus, 
iL  6.     Some  find  in  this  the  etymology  of  shein. 

I  Drove  out  (i^fiaT^jeii).  Lit.,  as  Bev.,  caet  out.  See  on  Matt 
X.  34;  xii.  36 ;  Mark  i.  12 ;  Jas.  ii.  26. 

All.  Bef erring  to  the  animale.  The  A.  Y.  makes  the  ref- 
erence to  the  traders;  but  Bev.,  correctly,  "cast  all  out — both 
the  sheep  and  the  oxen." 

*  I  do  not  raise  the  qneetion  whether  the  fuurratiyes  of  John  and  of  the 
SjnoptistB  refer  to  the  same  event. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPBL  OF  JOHN.  86 

Money.    See  on  ver.  14. 

Tablet.  yfjc.jturti£diymded(nontheloard8.  SeeonLnke 
xix.  28. 

16.  My  Father's  house.  See  on  FaiAer^s  huaineaSy  Luke  ii. 
49.,  and  compare  Matt,  xxiii.  38,  where  Jeans  speaks  of  the 
temple  as  your  house.  The  people  had  made  Gk)d's  house  their 
own. 

Merchandise  (ifMropCou).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament 
The  Synoptists  say  a  den  of  robbers. 

17.  It  was  written  (yeyp<ifAfUiHnf  iarhi).  lit.,  it  stands  torit- 
ten.  This  form  of  the  phrase,  the  participle  with  the  substan- 
tive verb,  is  peculiar  to  John  in  place  of  the  more  common 
y^pcv/TTM.    For  a  similar  construction  see  iiL  21. 

The  zeal  of  thine  house.  Jealousy  for  the  honor  of  Qod*B 
house.    Zeal,  {^Xo9,  from  l^icoy  to  boil.    See  on  Jas.  iii.  14. 

Hath  eaten  me  up  (jeart^a^  |*e).  So  the  Sept,  Ps.  IzviiL 
(A.  Y.,  Ixix.  9).  But  the  best  texts  read  /cara^l>dry€Tai,  shall  eai 
ttp.  So  Kev.,Wyc,  "The  fervor  of  love  of  thine  house  hath 
eaten  me." 

18.  Answered.  Often  used  in  reply  to  an  objection  or 
criticism,  or  to  something  present  in  another's  mind,  as  xix.  7, 
or  iiL  3,  where  Jesus  answers  with  reference  to  the  error  in 
Nicodemus'  mind,  rather  than  in  direct  reply  to  his  address. 

Destroy  this  temple  (Kwrare  rbv  vahv  toOtov).  Destroy^ 
lit.,  loosen.  Wye.,  undo.  See  on  Mark  xiii.  2 ;  Luke  ix.  19 ; 
Acts  V.  38.  Notice  that  the  word  for  temple  is  vahp,  sanctuary 
(see  on  ver.  14).  This  temple  points  to  the  literal  temple,  whi(^ 
is  truly  a  temple  only  as  it  is  the  abode  of  God,  hence  sanctu- 
an/j  but  with  a  typical  reference  to  Jesus'  own  person  as  the 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


86  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

holy  dwelling-place  of  Grod  who  "  was  in  Chrisf  Compare  1 
C!or.  iiL  16, 17.  Christ's  death  was  therefore  the  pulling  down 
of  the  temple,  and  His  resurrection  its  rebuilding.  The  imper- 
ative in  dest/rcy  is  of  the  nature  of  a  challenge.  Compare  fU 
ye  upj  Matt.  ;udii  82. 

20.  Forty  and  six  years  was  this  temple  in  building 
{reacapd/eovra  teal  i^  treauf  ^KoBofAniSff  6  pob^  oSrov).  Lit,  In 
forty  cmd  siw  years  was  this  temple  huiU.  It  was  spoken  of  as 
completed,  although  not  finished  until  thirty-six  years  later. 

Thou.  The  position  of  the  Oreek  pronoun  makes  it  em- 
phatic. 

21.  He  {ifeupoi).  See  on  i.  18.  Emphatic,  and  marking  the 
contrast  between  the  deeper  meaning  of  Jesus  and  the  literal- 

.  ism  of  the  Jews  and  of  His  disciples  (see  next  verse).  For 
other  illustrations  of  John's  pointing  out  the  meaning  of  words 
of  Jesus  which  were  not  at  first  understood,  see  viL  89 ;  xiL 
83 ;  xxL  19. 

22.  Was  risen  ivy^pSv)*  Rev.,  more  correctly,  woe  raised. 
The  same  verb  as  in  vv.  19,  20. 

Had  said  {iXeyai).  Bev.,  more  correctly,  Se  qpake.  The  best 
texts  omit  tmto  them. 

Believed  the  Scripture  {hrLrrmHrav  r§  ifpaji^).  Notice  that 
hrUrretHTov,  hdievedy  is  used  here  with  the  simple  dative,  and 
not  with  the  preposition  €49,  into  (see  on  i.  12).  The  meaning 
is,  therefore,  they  believed  that  the  Scripture  was  true.  On 
ypa(fyii,  tL  passage  or  section  of  Scripture,  see  on  Mark  xii.  10. 

In  John,  as  elsewhere,  the  word  almost  always  refers  to  a 
particular  passage  cited  in  the  context.  The  only  two  excep- 
tions are  xvii.  12 ;  xx.  9.  For  the  Old  Testament,  as  a  whole, 
John  always  uses  the  plural  ai  ypa/^.  The  passage  referred  to 
here  is  probably  Ps.  xvL  10.    Compare  Acts  iL  27,  81 ;  xiii.  35. 

The  word.  The  saying  just  uttered  concerning  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  temple. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPBL  OF  JOHK.  87 

23.  At  the  passover.  Note  the  omission  oi  of  the  Jew 
(ver.  13). 

in  the  feast-day  {h  rg  foprg).  Eev.,  dwrvng  the  feast.  Tlie 
feast  of  unleavened  bread,  during  the  seven  dajs  succeeding  the 
actual  passover  (see  on  Mark  xiv.  1). 

Beh'eved  on  {iiriarrevaav  ek).  The  stronger  expression  of 
faith  (L  12). 

His  name.  See  on  i.  12.  With  the  phrase  believe  on  His 
namej  compare  believe  on  Hvm,  (viii.  30),  which  is  the  stronger 
expression,  indicating  a  casting  of  one's  self  upon  Him ;  while 
to  believe  on  the  name  is  rather  to  believe  in  Him  as  being  that 
which  he  claims  to  be,  in  this  case  the  Messiah.  It  is  believing 
reooffniiion  rather  than  approprioHan.  "Their  faith  in  His 
name  (as  that  of  the  Messiah)  did  not  yet  amount  to  any  de- 
cision of  their  inner  life  for  Jesus,  but  was  only  an  opinion 
produced  by  the  sight  of  His  miracles,  that  He  was  the  Mes- 
siah '*  (Meyer). 

When  they  saw  {^etopouvresi).  Bev.,  literally  and  rightly, 
beholding  (see  on  L  14,  29). 

He  did  {hroki).  Better,  was  doing;  the  imperfect  denoting 
the  wonderful  works  as  inj>rogres8. 

24.  But  Jesus  {avTh<:  ii  6  ^Irjaoih).  The  avri^;,  which  does 
not  appear  in  translation,  has  the  force  of  on  Hisjxx/rty  marking 
the  contrast  with  those  just  mentioned. 

Did  not  commit  {oiic  hrtarevep).  Bev.,  tnutt.  There  is  a 
kind  of  word-play  between  this  and  hrlareuaaVj  believed^  in  the 
preceding  verse.  Wye.  reproduces  it :  "  Jesus  himself  believed 
not  himself  to  them."  He  did  not  trust  His  person  to  them. 
Tynd.,  jErn^  not  himself  in  their  hands.  ^^  He  had  no  faith  in 
their  faith  "(Gk)det). 

Because  He  knew  (8i^  rh  ainhv  yuHoctceai).  lit,  on  aooouni 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


88  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NBW  TBSTAHBNT. 

of  ike  fad,  of  lEa  knowing.  John  describes  the  Lord's  knowl- 
^ge  hy  two  words  which  it  is  important  to  distinguish. 
TuwHTKeof,  as  here,  implies  acquired  knowlege ;  knowledge  which 
is  the  result  of  discernment  and  which  may  be  enlarged.  This 
knowledge  may  be  drawn  from  external  facts  (v.  6  ;  vL  15)  or 
from  spiritual  sympathy  (x.  14,  27 ;  xvii.  25).  ElBevai  (L  26) 
implies  absolute  knowledge :  the  knowledge  of  intuition  and  of 
satisfied  conviction.  Hence  it  is  used  of  Christ's  knowledge  of 
divine  things  (iii.  11 ;  v.  32  ;  vii.  29),  of  the  facts  of  His  own 
being  (vi.  6  ;  viiL  14 ;  xiiL  1),  and  of  external  facts  (vL  61,  64 ; 
xiii.  11).  In  XXL  17  the  two  words  appear  together.  Peter  says 
to  Jesus,  appealing  to  His  absohUe  knowledge,  ^^  Thou  knawest 
(oZSo?)  idl  things : "  appealing  to  his  discernmenty  '^  Thou  hfuyuh 
est  ovperoeioeet  {yiiniaKei^)  that  I  love  Thee." 

26.  He  needed  not  {oi  xp^^  cIxcp).   Lit.,  he  had  not  need. 

Testify  Qiofyrvpi^).  Bev.,  better,  bear  wUnees.  The  same 
word  is  in  L  7,  8, 15,  32  (see  on  i.  7). 

Of  man  {'n-epl  rod  iof^pwirov).  Better,  as  Bev.,  concerning 
man. 

He  knew  (auro^  iylvfUHTKev).  The  pronoun  is  expressed,  and 
with  a  view  to  emphasis,  as  Bev.,  "  He  himsdfkaesv.^^  The 
imperfect  expresses  continuance :  He  was  aJl  along  cognizant 
as  the  successive  cases  presented  themselves;  thus  falling  in 
with  the  next  words,  '^  what  was  in  the  man/'  i.e.y  in  each  par- 
ticular man  with  whom  He  had  to  do.  No  such  characteristic 
as  this  was  attributed  to  the  gods  of  Paganism.  '^  While,  then, 
the  gift  of  anything  like  general  foreknowledge  appears  to  be 
withheld  from  all  the  deities  of  invention,  that  of  Hhe  discemer 
of  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart,'  is  nowhere  found ;  nor 
was  it  believed  of  any  member  of  the  Olympian  community, 
as  it  was  said  of  One  greater  than  they,  ^  He  knew  all  men,  and 
needed  not  that  any  should  testify  of  man,  for  He  knew  what  was 
in  man,' "  (Gladstone, "  Homer  and  the  Homeric  Age,"  ii.,  366). 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


G06PBL  OF  JOHN.  89 


CHAPTER  III. 

1.  A  man.  With  a  reference  to  the  last  word  of  the  pre- 
vious chapter.  The  interview  with  Nicodemns  is,  apart  from 
the  important  truth  which  it  embodies,  an  illustration  of 
Christ's  knowledge  of  what  was  in  man.  Godet  truthfully  ob- 
serves that  John  reminds  us  bj  the  word  avSpaoTro^  (man),  that 
Kicodemus  was  a  specimen  of  the  race  which  Jesus  knew  so 
welL 

Named  Nicodemus.  lit,  IfioodemitSy  the  name  tmto  Aim. 
The  name  means  conqueror  of  the  j>eople  {vi/crj,  victory^  and 
SrffM)^,  jpecple)j  though  some  give  it  a  Hebrew  derivation  mean- 
ing innocent  blood. 

A  ruler.    A  member  of  the  Sanhedrim. 

2.  To  Jesus.    The  best  texts  substitute  irph<:  avrov,  to  him^ 

By  night.  Through  timidity,  fearing  to  compromise  his 
dignity,  and  possibly  his  safety.  The  fact  is  noticed  again,  xix. 
39  (see  on  vii.  50).  By  niffhtj  *^  when  Jewish  superstition 
would  keep  men  at  home."  He  could  reach  Jesus'  apaitment 
without  being  observed  by  the  other  inmates  of  the  house,  for 
an  outside  stair  led  to  the  upper  room. 

Rabbi.  The  teacher  of  Israel  (ver.  10)  addresses  Jesus  by 
the  title  applied  by  his  own  disciples  to  himself — my  master 
(see  on  i.  38).  "  We  may  be  sure  that  a  member  of  the  sect 
that  carefully  scrutinized  the  Baptist's  credentials  (L  19-24) 
would  not  lightly  address  Jesus  by  this  title  of  honor,  or  ac- 
knowledge Him  as  teacher  "  (Milligan  and  Moulton). 

We  know  (oiSa/jbev).  Assured  conviction  based  on  Jesus' 
miracles  (see  on  iL  24). 

Thou  art  a  teacher.  According  to  the  Greek  order,  that 
thou  art  come  from  God  as  teacher. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


90  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NBW  TBSTAMBNT. 

From  God.  These  words  stand  first  in  the  sentence  as  em- 
phatic.   It  is  from  Ood  that  thou  hast  come. 

3.  Answered  and  said.    See  on  iL  18. 

Verily,  verily.    See  on  i.  51. 

Be  born  again  {yeinnfS^  coHoBev).  See  on  Lnke  L  3.  Lit, 
from  the  top  (Matt.  xxviL  51).  Expositors  are  divided  on  the 
rendering  of  avm^,  some  translating,  yn>m  dbovej  and  others, 
ago/in  or  anew.  The  word  is  used  in  the  following  senses  in 
the  New  Testament,  where  it  occurs  tliirteen  times  : 

1.  From  t/te  top :  Matt  xxvii.  51 ;  Mark  xv«  38 ;  Jolm  xix. 
23. 

2.  Ff'om  above  :  John  iii.  31 ;  xix.  11 ;  Jas.  i.  17 ;  iii.  15, 17. 

3.  From  the  beginning:  Luke  i  3 ;  Acts  xxvi.  5. 

4.  Again  :  Gal.  iv.  9,  but  accompanied  by  waKxv^  again. 

In  favor  of  the  rendering /r^wi  ahove^  it  is  urged  that  it  cor- 
responds to  John's  habitual  method  of  describing  the  work  of 
spiritual  regeneration  as  a  birth  from  God  (i.  13 ;  1  John  iii. 
19 ;  iv.  7 ;  v.  1, 4, 8) ;  and  further,  that  it  is  Paul,  and  not  John, 
who  describes  it  as  a  new  birth. 

In  favor  of  the  other  rendering,  again^  it  may  be  said :  1. 
that^^m  above  does  not  describe  the  fact  but  theno^t^r^  of  the 
new  birth,  which  in  the  logical  order  would  be  stated  after  the 
fact,  but  which  i&  first  announced  if  we  rendery^om  above.  If 
we  translate  anew  or  again,  the  logical  order  is  preserved,  the 
nature  of  the  birth  being  described  in  ver.  5.  2.  That  Nico- 
demus  clearly  understood  the  word  as  meaning  again,  since,  in 
ver.  4,  he  translated  it  into  a  second  time.  3.  That  it  seems 
strange  that  Nicodemus  should  have  been  startled  by  the  idea 
of  a  birth  from  heaven. 

Canon  Westcott  calls  attention  to  the  traditional  form  of  the 
saying  in  which  the  word  ava/yevpoaSai,  which  can  only  mean 
reborn,  is  used  as  its  equivalent.  Again,  however,  does  not 
give  the  exact  force  of  the  word,  which  is  rather  as  Bev.,  anew, 
or  afresh.  Render,  therefore,  as  Kev.,  except  a  m>an  be  bom 
anew.    The  phrase  occurs  only  in  John's  Grospel. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  91 

See  {IBehi).  The  things  of  God's  kingdom  are  not  apparent 
to  the  natural  vision*  A  new  power  of  sight  is  required,  which 
attaches  onlj  to  the  new  man.    Compare  1  Cor.  ii.  14 

Kingdom  of  God.    See  on  Luke  vL  20. 

4.  When  he  is  old  {^iptov  &v).    Lit.,  leing  cm  eld  man. 

Can  he  {p'h  ivvar<u).  The  interrogative  particle  anticipates 
a  negative  answer.    Surely  he  ccmnot 

Second  time.  Nicodemus  looks  at  the  subject  merely  from 
the  physical  side.  His  second  time  is  not  the  same  as  Jesus' 
anew.  As  Godet  remarks,  ^'  he  does  not  understand  the  differ- 
ence between  a  second  beginning  and  a  different  beginning." 

6.  Born  of  water  and  the  Spirit.  The  exposition  of  this 
much  oontroverted  passage  does  not  fall  within  the  scope  of 
this  work.  We  may  observe,  1.  That  Jesus  here  lays  down  the 
preliminary  conditions  of  entrance  into  His  kingdom,  expanding 
and  explaining  His  statement  in  ver.  3.  2.  That  this  condition 
is  here  stated  as  complex,  including  two  distinct  factors,  water 
and  the  Spirit.  3.  That  the  former  of  these  two  factors  is  not 
to  be  mei^d  in  the  latter ;  that  the  spiritual  element  is  not  to 
exclude  or  obliterate  the  external  and  ritfual  element  We  are 
not  to  understand  with  Calvin,  the  Holy  Spirit  as  the  purifying 
water  in  the  spiritual  sense :  ^^  water  which  is  the  Spirit."  4. 
That  waler  points  definitely  to  the  rite  of  baptism,  and  that 
with  a  twofold  reference — to  the  past  and  to  the  future. 
Water  naturally  suggested  to  Nicodemus  the  baptism  of  John, 
which  was  then  awakening  such  profound  and  general  interest; 
and,  with  this,  the  symbolical  purifications  of  the  Jews,  and  the 
Old  Testament  use  of  washing  as  the  figure  of  purifying  from 
sin  (Ps.  li.  2,  7 ;  Ezek.  xxxvi.  25  ;  Zech.  xiii.  1).  Jesus'  words 
opened  to  Kicodemus  a  new  and  more  spiritual  significance  in 
both  the  ceremonial  purifications  and  the  baptism  of  John 
which  the  Pharisees  had  rejected  (Luke  viL  30).  John's  rite 
had  a  real  and  legitimate  relation  to  the  kingdom  of  Ood 
which  Nicodemus  must  accept    5.  That  while  Jesus  asserted 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


92  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

the  obligation  of  the  oatward  riiej  He  asserted  likewise,  as  its 
necessary  complement,  the  presence  and  creating  and  inf  oiming 
energy  of  the  Spirit  with  which  John  had  promised  that  the 
coming  one  should  baptize.  That  as  John's  baptism  had  been 
unto  repenUmce^for  the  remission  of  einSy  so  the  new  life  must 
include  the  real  no  less  than  the  symbcUo  cleansing  of  the  old, 
sinful  life,  and  the  infusion  by  the  Spirit  of  a  new  land  divine 
principle  of  life.  Thus  Jesus'  words  included  a  prophetic  ref- 
erence to  the  complete  ideal  of  Christian  baptism — "  the  wash- 
ing of  regeneration  and  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost "  (Tit 
iii.  5  ;  Eph.  v.  26) ;  according  to  which  the  two  factors  are  in- 
separably blended  (not  the  one  swallowed  up  by  the  other),  and 
the  new  life  is  inaugurated  both  symbolically  in  the  baptism 
with  water,  and  acttudly  in  the  renewing  by  the  Holy  Spirit, 
yet  so  as  that  the  ritey  through  its  association  with  the  Spirit's 
energy,  is  more  than  a  mere  symbol :  is  a  veritable  vehicle  of 
grace  to  the  recipient,  and  acquires  a  substantial  part  in  the  in- 
auguration of  the  new  life.  Baptism,  considered  merely  as  a 
rite,  and  apart  from  the  operation  of  the  Spirit,  does  not  and  can- 
not impart  the  new  life.  Without  the  Spirit  it  is  a  lie.  It  is  a 
truthful  sign  only  as  the  sign  of  an  inward  and  spiritual  grace. 
6.  That  the  ideal  of  the  new  life  presented  in  our  Lord's  words, 
includes  the  relation  of  the  regenerated  man  to  an  organization. 
The  object  of  the  new  birth  is  declared  to  be  that  a  man  may 
see  and  enter  into  the  Mngdom  of  God.  But  the  kingdom  of 
Gk>d  is  an  economy.  It  includes  and  implies  the  organized 
Christian  community.  This  is  one  of  the  facts  which,  with  its 
accompanying  obligation,  is  revealed  to  the  new  vision  of  the 
new  man.  He  sees  not  only  God,  but  the  kingdom  of  God  ; 
God  as  King  of  an  organized  citizenship ;  God  as  the  Father  of 
the  family  of  mankind ;  obligation  to  God  implying  obligation 
to  the  neighbor ;  obligation  to  Christ  implying  obligation  to 
the  church,  of  which  He  is  the  head,  ^^  which  is  His  body,  the 
fulness  of  Him  that  filleth  all  things  with  all  things  "  (Eph.  L 
23).  Through  water  alonSy  the  mere  external  rite  of  baptism,  a 
man  may  pass  into  the  outward  fellowship  of  the  visible  church 
without  seeing  or  entering  the  kingdom  of  God.  Through 
water  and  the  Spirit,  he  passes  indeed  into  the  outward  fellow- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOBPBL  OF  JOHN.  93 

ship,  but  through  that  into  the  vision  and  fellowship  of  the 
kingdom  of  Ood. 

Enter  into.  This  more  than  see  (ver.  3).  It  is  to  become 
partaker  of ;  to  go  in  and  possess,  as  the  Israelites  did  Canaan. 

6.  That  which  is  born  {rh  yeyevprffUvov).  Strictly,  thai 
tohich  hoik  been  bonij  and  consequently  is  now  before  us  as 
bom.  The  aorist  tense  (3, 4,  5,  7),  marks  the^a^  of  birth ;  the 
perfect  (as  here),  the  state  of  that  which  has  been  bom  (see  on 
1  John  y.  18,  where  both  tenses  occur)  ;  the  neuter,  that  whicJh^ 
states  the  principle  in  the  abstract.  Compare  ver.  8,  where  the 
statement  is  personal :  everyone  that  is  bom.  Compare  1  John 
V.  4,  and  1  John  v.  1, 18. 

Of  the  flesh  {iic  t%  aaptchsi).  See  on  ver.  14.  John  uses 
the  word  adp^  generally,  to  express  humanity  under  the  condi- 
tions of  this  life  (i.  14 ;  1  John  iv.  2,  3,  7 ;  2  John  7),  with 
sometimes  a  more  definite  hint  at  the  sinful  and  fallible  nature 
of  humanity  (1  John  ii.  16 ;  John  viiL  15),  Twice,  as  opposed 
to  iTpevfUh  Spirit  (iii.  6 ;  vi.  63). 

Of  the  Spirit  {iic  rot)  TrvevfuiTo^).  The  Holy  Spvrit  of  Gody 
or  the  jmncijple  of  life  which  He  imparts.  The  difference  is 
slight,  for  the  two  ideas  imply  each  other;  but  the  latter  perhaps 
is  better  here,  because  a  little  more  abstract,  and  so  contrasted 
with  ihejlesh.  Spirit  and  flesh  are  the  distinguishing  princi- 
ples, the  one  of  the  heavenly,  the  other  of  the  earthly  economy. 

7.  Unto  thee — ye  must.  Kote  the  change  from  the  singu- 
lar to  the  plural  pronoun.  In  his  address  to  Nicodemus  {f,hei) 
the  Lord  had  spoken  also  to  those  whom  Nicodemus  repre- 
sented, and  whom  he  had  included  when  he  said  "  we  know  " 
(ver.  2).    His  error  was  the  error  of  his  class. 

8.  The  wind  (rd  irpevfui).  Some  hold  by  the  translation 
spirit^  as  Wye,  the  spvrit  hreatheth  where  it  wUl.  In  Hebrew 
die  words  ^i/rU  and  wvnd  are  identical.  Ilvevfui  is  from  wpim 
to  breathe  or  hhwj  the  verb  used  in  this  verse  {Uoioeth),  and 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


94  WORD  BTUDIBS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

everywhere  in  the  New  Testament  of  the  blowing  of  the  wind 
(Matt.  vii.  25,  27 ;  Luke  xii.  55 ;  John  vi  18).  It  frequently 
occurs  in  the  classics  in  the  sense  of  vmid.  Thus  Aristoph- 
anes, t6  TTPevfi  iKarrov  yOyverai,  the  wind  is  dymg  away 
("  Knights,"  441),  also  in  the  New  Testament,  Heb.  L  7,  where 
the  proper  translation  is,  "who  maketh  His  angels  winds^^ 
quoted  from  Ps.  ciii.  4  (Sept.).  In  the  Septuagint,  1  Kings 
xviit  45 ;  xix.  11 ;  2  Kings  iil  17 ;  Job  i.  19.  In  the  New 
Testament,  in  the  sense  of  breathy  2  Thess.  ii.  8  ;  Apoc.  xi.  11. 
The  usual  rendering,  wind^  is  confirmed  here  by  the  use  of  the 
kindred  verb  irvel^  hlowethy  and  by  <fHDvfjv,  eoundj  voice.  Tho- 
luck  thinks  that  the  figure  may  have  been  suggested  to  Jesus 
by  the  sound  of  the  night-wind  sweeping  through  the  narrow 
street 

Where  it  listeth  {iirov  ^iKei).  On  the  verb  ^^Xo>,  to  wiU 
or  determine^  see  on  Matt.  i.  19.  Lieteth  is  old  English  for 
jpleaseih  or  wiUeth,  from  the  Anglo-Saxon  lusty  meaning  pUas- 
v/re.    Chaucer  has  the  forms  lesUy  lusty  and  list. 

** Strong  was  the  wyn,  and  wel  to  drjnke  tu  UmU  {jpisa9ed)»** 

"  Canterbury  Tales,"  753. 

«' Lore  if  thee  ItM^" 

••  Canterbury  Tales,"  1185. 

**  She  waUceth  np  and  down  wher  as  hire  list  {tehermoer  $he plea$e$),^ 

«•  Canterbury  Tales,"  1054. 

'*  A  wretch  by  fear,  not  force,  like  Hannibal, 
DriTes  back  our  troops,  and  conquers  as  she  liiti,^ 

Shakspeare,  "Henry  VL,"  Pt.  L,  i.,  t.,  2fL 

Hence  Usdees  is  devoid  of  desire.  The  statement  of  Jesus  is 
not  meant  to  be  scientifically  precise,  but  is  rather  thrown  into 
a  poetic  mould,  akin  to  the  familiar  expression  ^^  free  as  the 
wind."  Compare  1  Cor.  xii.  11 ;  and  for  the  more  prosaic  de- 
scription of  the  course  of  the  wind,  see  Eccl.  i.  6. 

Sound  (^1^1^).  Bev.,  voioe.  Used  both  of  articulate  and 
inarticulate  utterances,  as  of  the  words  from  heaven  at  Jesus' 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


QOSFBL  OF  JOHIL  95 

baptism  and  transfignration  (Matt  iii.  17 ;  2  Pet  i.  17, 18) ;  of 
the  trumpet  (Matt  xxiv.  31 ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  8),  and  of  inanimate 
things  in  general  (1  Cor.  xiv.  17).  John  the  Baptist  calls  him* 
self  ^vii,  a  voicej  and  the  word  is  used  of  the  wind,  as  here,  in 
Acts  iL  6.  Of  thunder,  often  in  the  Apocalypse  (vi.  1 ;  xiv.  2, 
etc.). 

Canst  not  tell  {ovk  oTSoi).  Better,  as  Bev.,  hwweat  not 
Socrates,  (Xenophon's  "  Memorabilia),"  says, "  The  instruments 
of  the  deities  you  will  likewise  find  imperceptible ;  for  the  thun- 
der-bolt, for  instance,  though  it  is  plain  that  it  is  sent  from 
above,  and  works  its  will  with  everything  with  which  it  comes 
in  contact,  is  yet  never  seen  either  approaching,  or  striking,  or 
retreating;  the  winds,  too,  are  themselves  invisible,  though 
their  eflfects  are  evident  to  us,  and  we  perceive  their  course  '* 
(iv.,  3, 14).    Compare  Eccl.  xi.  5. 

So.  So  the  subject  of  the  Spirit's  invisible  influence  gives 
visible  evidence  of  its  power. 

9.  These  things.    Such  as  the  new  birth. 
Be  (yepialicu).    lit,  come  to  pass. 

10.  Answered  and  said.    See  on  ii  18. 

Art  thou  a  master  of  Israel  {<rif  el  6  StSdatcaXof;  rov  lapaifk). 
The  <rif,  thou,  is  emphatic.  A  master  is  more  correctly  rendered 
by  Bev.,  the  teacher.  Not  ironical,  but  the  article  marks  Nico- 
demus'  oflScial  relation  to  the  people,  and  gives  additional  force 
to  the  contrast  in  the  following  words.  Similarly  Plato :  **  Will 
you  {crif,  emphatic),  O  professor  of  true  virtue,  pretend  that  you 
are  justified  in  this?  "  ("  Crito,''  61).  On  "Israel,"  see  on  i.  47. 
The  word  occurs  four  times  in  John's  Oospel ;  here,  i.  31,  47, 
49. 

Knowest  not  (ov  yiwoatceisi).  See  on  ii.  24.  Kicodemus  is 
not  reproved  for  the  want  of  previous  knowledge,  but  for  the 
want  of  perception  or  understanding  when  these  truths  are  ex- 
pounded to  him.    Rev.,  better,  tmderstandeet  not. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


96  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

11.  We  speak— we  know— we  have  seen.  After  the  use 
of  the  singular  number  in  yy.  3,  5,  7,  12,  the  plural  here  is 
noteworthy.  It  is  not  merely  rhetorical — "  a  plural  of  majesty  ^ 
— but  is  explained  by  ver.  8,  "  every  one  that  is  bom  of  the 
Spirit."  The  new  birth  imparts  a  new  vision.  The  man  who  is 
bom  of  the  Spirit  haih  eternal  life  (ver.  36) ;  and  life  eternal 
is  to  know  Ood  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  He  hath  sent  (xvii.  3). 
"Ye  have  an  anointing  from  the  Holy  One,  and  ye  hruyw  (oTSare) 
all  things"*  (1  John  ii.  20).  He  who  is  bom  of  water  and  of 
the  Spirit  seeB  the  kingdom  of  God.  This  we  therefore  includes, 
with  Jesus,  all  who  are  traly  bora  anew  of  the  Spirit.  Jesus 
meets  the  we  know  of  Nicodemus  (ver.  2),  referring  to  the  class 
to  which  he  belonged,  with  another  toe  knaw^  referring  to 
another  class,  of  which  He  was  the  head  and  representative. 
We  know  (olSafLa/),  absolutely.    See  on  ii.  24. 

Testify  Qiofyrvpovfiep).    Bev.,  better,  bear  wUnese  of.    See 

on  L  7. 

# 

12.  Have  told  {Airov).  Bendering  the  aorist  more  strictly, 
Itold. 

Earthly  things  {rh  hrlyeui).  Compounded  of  hrl^  upon^  and 
7^,  earth.  In  Col.  iii.  2,  the  adjective  appears  in  its  analyzed 
form,  rh  hr\  1%  7^*  things  on  the  earth.  It  is  in  this  literal 
sense  it  is  to  be  taken  here ;  not  things  of  earthly  nature^  but 
things  whose  proper  place  is  on  earth.  Not  worlcUy  affaiA's^  nor 
things  sinftd^  but,  on  the  contrary,  "those facts  and  phenomena 
of  tiie  higher  life  as  a  class,  which  have  their  seat  and  mani- 
.festation  on  earth;  which  belong  in  their  realization  to  our 
present  existence ;  which  are  seen  in  their  consequences,  like 
the  issues  of  birth ;  which  are  sensible  in  their  effects,  like  the 
action  of  the  wind ;  which  are  a  beginning  and  a  pi*ophecy,  and 
not  a  fulfilment "  (Westcott).  The  earthly  things  would  there- 
fore include  the  phenomena  of  the  new  birth. 


^  Or,  Moording  to  some  high  authoriUei,  **  je  all  knaw.** 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OP  JOHN.  97 

Heavenly  things  (r^  hrovptivui).  Compounded  with  iiri, 
upon  or  m,  and  ovpavo^,  heaven.  Not  holy  things  as  compared 
with  smfuLy  nor  epirUiuU  things  as  compared  with  temjpordl; 
but  things  which  are  in  heaven,  mysteries  of  redemption,  hav- 
ing their  seat  in  the  divine  will,  realized  in  the  world  throngh 
the  work  and  death  of  Jesus  Christ  and  the  faith  of  mankind 
(v.  14-16).  Thus  it  is  said  (ver.  13)  that  the  Son  of  man 
who  is  in  heaven  came  down  out  of  heaven,  and  in  w.  31,  32 
that  He  that  cometh  out  of  heaven  beareth  witness  (on  earth) 
of  what  He  has  seen  and  heard ;  and  that,  being  sent  from 
Gfod,  He  speaketh  the  words  of  God  (ver.  34). 

It  has  been  urged  against  the  genuineness  of  the  fourth 
Gospel  that  the  lofty  and  mystical  language  which  is  there  as- 
cribed to  Jesus  is  inconsistent  with  the  synoptical  reports  of 
His  words.  That  if  the  one  represents  truthfully  His  style  of 
speaking,  the  other  must  misrepresent  it.  Godet^s  words  on 
this  point  are  worth  quoting :  "  It  would  be  truly  curious  that 
the  first  who  should  have  pointed  out  that  contrast  should  be 
the  Evangelist  himself  against  whose  narrative  it  has  been 
brought  forward  as  a  ground  of  objection.  The  author  of  the 
fourth  Gospel  puts  these  words  (iii.  12)  into  the  mouth  of 
Jesus.  He  there  declares  that  He  came  down  from  heaven  to 
bring  this  divine  message  to  the  world.  The  author  of  the 
fourth  Gospel  was  then  clearly  aware  of  two  ways  of  teaching 
adopted  by  Jesus ;  the  one  the  usual,  in  which  he  explained 
earthly  things,  evidently  always  in  their  relation  to  God  and 
His  kingdom;  the  other,  which  contrasted  in  many  respects 
with  the  first,  and  which  Jesus  employed  only  exceptionally,  in 
which  He  spoke  directly,  and  as  a  witness,  of  God  and  the 
things  of  God,  always  naturally  in  connection  with  the  fate  of 
mankind.  The  instructions  of  the  first  kind  had  a  more  simple, 
more  practical,  more  varied  character.  They  referred  to  the 
different  situations  of  life ;  it  was  the  exposition  of  the  true 
moral  relations  of  men  to  each  other,  and  of  men  to  God. 
.  .  .  But  in  that  way  Jesus  could  not  attain  to  the  final 
aim  which  He  sought,  the  full  revelation  of  the  divine  mys- 
tery, of  the  plan  of  salvation.  Since  His  baptism  Jesus  had 
heaven  constantly  open  before  Him ;  the  decree  of  salvation  was 
Vol.  II— 7 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


98  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

disclosed  to  Him ;  He  had^  in  particular,  heard  these  words : 
*  Thou  art  my  well  beloved  Son ; '  He  reposed  on  the  Father's 
bosom,  and  He  could  descend  and  redescend  without  ceasing 
into  the  depths  of  the  Father's  fathomless  love,  of  which  He 
felt  the  vivifying  power ;  and  when  He  came,  at  certain  excep- 
tional moments,  to  speak  of  that  divine  relationship,  and  to 
give  scope  to  that  fulness  of  life  with  which  it  supplied  Him, 
His  language  took  a  peculiar,  solemn,  mystical,  one  might  even 
say  a  heavenly  tone ;  for  they  were  heaverdy  things  which  He 
then  revealed.  Now  such  is  precisely  the  character  of  His 
language  in  the  fourth  Gospel."  Compare  Luke  x.  18,  sqq., 
where  Jesus'  words  take  on  a  character  similar  to  that  of  His 
utterances  in  John. 

13.  And  {jcciX).  Note  the  simple  connective  particle,  with 
nothing  to  indicate  the  logical  sequence  of  the  thought. 

Hath  ascended.  Equivalent  to  hcUh  been  in.  Jesus  says 
that  no  one  has  been  in  heaven  except  the  Son  of  man  who 
came  down  out  of  heaven ;  because  no  man  could  be  in  heaven 
without  having  ascended  thither. 

Which  is  in  heaven.    Many  authorities  omit. 

14.  Must  (SeZ).  Mitet  signifies  the  eternal  necessity  in  the 
divine  counsels.  Compare  Luke  xxiv.  26,  46  ;  Matt.  xxvi.  64 ; 
Mark  viii.  31 ;  John  xii.  34. 

Lifted  up  {(n^wSfivcu).  The  following  are  the  uses  of  the 
word  in  the  New  Testament:  The  exaUoHon  qf  pride  (Matt, 
xi.  23 ;  Luke  x.  15 ;  xiv.  11).  The  raising  of  the  hvmMe  (Luke 
i.  52 ;  Jas.  iv.  10 ;  1  Pet.  v.  6).  The  exaUatian  of  Christ  in 
glory  (Acts  ii.  33  ;  v.  31).  The  vfplifting  on  the  cross  (John  iiu 
14 ;  viii.  28  ;  xii  32,  34).  The  reference  here  is  to  the  cnici^ 
fadon^  but  beyond  that,  to  the  glorification  of  Christ.  It  is 
characteristic  of  John  to  blend  the  two  ideas  of  Christ's  passion 
and  glory  (viii.  28 ;  xii.  32).  Thus,  when  Judas  went  out  to 
betray  him,  Jesus  said,  "  Now  is  the  Son  of  man  glorified  '* 
(xiii.  31).    Hence  the  believer  overcomes  the  world  through 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OP  JOHN.  99 

faith  in  Him  who  came  not  by  water  only,  but  by  water  and 
blood  (1  John  v.  4-6). 

15.  Believeth  in  Him  {irurreiwv  ek  axnov).  The  best  texts 
read  iv  ain^,  constrning  witli  have  eternal  Ufe^  and  rendering 
may  in  Him  have  eternal  life.    So  Rev. 

Should  not  perish,  but.    The  best  texts  omit 

Have  eternal  life.  A  characteristic  phrase  of  John  for  Uve 
forever.  See  vv.  16,  36 ;  v.  24 ;  vi.  40,  47,  54 ;  1  John  iii. 
15 ;  V.  12. 

The  interview  with  Nicodemns  closes  with  ver.  15 ;  and  the 
succeeding  words  are  John's.  This  appears  from  the  following 
facts  :  1.  The  past  tenses  loved  and  gave,  in  ver.  16,  better  suit 
the  later  point  of  view  from  which  John  writes,  after  the  aton- 
ing death  of  Christ  was  an  accomplished  historic  fact,  than  the 
drift  of  the  present  discourse  of  Jesus  before  the  full  revelation 
of  that  work.  2.  It  is  in  John's  manner  to  throw  in  explan- 
atory comments  of  his  own  (L  16-18  ;  xii.  37-41),  and  to  do  so 
abruptly.  See  i.  15, 16,  and  on  and^  i.  16.  3.  Ver.  19  is  in  the 
same  line  of  thouglit  with  i.  9-11  in  the  Prologue ;  and  the  tone 
of  that  verse  is  historic,  carrying  the  sense  of  past  rejection,  as 
hved  darkness ;  were  evil.  4.  The  phrase  believe  on  the  name 
is  not  used  elsewhere  by  our  Lord,  but  by  John  (i.  12  ;  ii.  23 ; 
1  John  v.  13).  5.  The  phrase  only-begotten  son  is  not  elsewhere 
used  by  Jesus  of  himself,  but  in  every  case  by  the  Evangelist 
(1 14,  18  ;  1  John  iv.  9).  6.  The  phrase  to  do  truth  (ver.  21) 
occurs  elsewhere  only  in  1  John  i  6.* 

16.  The  world  (Kocfwv).    See  on  i  9. 

Gave.    Bather  than  sent;  emphasizing  the  idea  of  sacrifice. 
Only-begotten  Son.    See  on  i.  14. 
Have.    See  on  ver.  15. 

*  This  view,  however,  is  opposed  bj  Hejer,  Lange,  De  Wetie,  Alford,  and 
Godet 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


100  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

This  attitude  of  God  toward  the  world  is  in  suggestive  con- 
trast with  that  in  which  the  gods  of  paganism  are  represented* 
Thus  Juno  says  to  Yulcan : 

*'  Dear  son,  refrain :  it  is  not  weU  that  thns 
A  god  should  suffer  for  the  sake  of  men." 

"  Uiad,"  xxL,  879,  88a 

And  Apollo  to  Keptune : 

**  Thou  would*8t  not  deem  me  wise,  should  I  contend 
With  thee,  O  Neptune,  for  the  sake  of  men, 
Who  flourish  like  the  forest-leaves  awhile. 
And  feed  upon  the  fruits  of  earth,  and  then 
Deoaj  and  perish.     Let  us  quit  the  field, 
And  leaTO  the  combat  to  the  warring  hosts.** 

•«niad,"xxi.,461,467. 

Man  has  no  assurance  of  forgiveness  even  when  he  offers  the 
sacrifices  in  which  the  gods  especially  delight  ^'  Man's  sin  and 
the  divine  punishment  therefor  are  certain;  forgiveness  is 
uncertain,  dependent  upon  the  arbitrary  caprice  of  the  gods. 
Human  life  is  a  life  without  the  certainty  of  grace  "  (Nagels- 
bach, "  Homerische  Theologie  ").  Mr.  Gladstone  observes :  "  No 
Homeric  deity  ever  will  be  found  to  make  a  personal  sacrifice 
on  behalf  of  a  human  client"  (^^  Homer  and  the  Homeric 
Age,"  ii.,  372). 

17.  Sent  {airiirTeCKjev),  See  on  i.  6.  Sent  rather  than  ga/m 
(ver.  16),  because  the  idea  of  sacrifice  is  here  merged  in  that 
of  authoritative  commission. 

His  Son.    The  best  texts  read  rhv,  thcj  for  avrov,  his. 

Condemn  {icpivrj).  Better,  as  Bev.,  jvdge.  Candem/n  is 
fcaraKpivfo,  not  used  by  John  (Matt.  xx.  18  ;  Mark  x.  33,  etc.). 
The  verb  Kphfto  means,  originally,  to  separate.  So  Homer,  of 
Ceres  separating  the  grain  from  the  chaflF  ("Uiad,"  v.,  501). 
Thence,  to  distinguish,  to  pick  ovJt^  to  he  of  opinion^  to  judge. 
See  on  Hypocrite^  Matt,  xxiii.  13. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  101 

World.  The  threefold  repetition  of  the  word  has  a  certain 
solemnitj.    Ck>mpare  L  10 ;  xv.  19. 

18.  Is  condemned  already  (^Si;  tcitcpirai).  Bev.,  more  cor- 
rectly, hath  been  judged  already.  Unbelief,  in  separating  from 
Christy  implies  judgment.  He  has  been  judged  in  virtue  of  his 
unbelief. 

19.  This-  That  is,  herein  consists  the  judgment  The  pref- 
acing a  statement  with  this  is,  and  tlien  defining  the  statement 
by  8t$  or  ha,  that,  is  characteristic  of  John.  See  xv.  12  ;  xviL 
3 ;  1  John  L  6 ;  v.  11, 14 ;  3  John  6. 

Light  {t6  ^£9).     Bev.,  correctly,  the  light     See  i.  4,  9. 

Men  (oi  avSpwroi).    lit,  the  men.    Regarded  as  a  class. 

Darkness  {t6  a/eoros).  See  on  i.  5.  Bev.,  correctly,  the 
darkness.  John  employs  this  word  only  here  and  1  John  i.  6. 
His  usual  term  is  aeoria  (i.  5  ;  viii.  12  ;  1  John  i.  5,  etc.),  more 
commonly  describing  a  state  of  dai*kness,  than  darkness  as 
opposed  to  light 

Were  (^).  Habitually.  The  imperfect  tense  marking  con- 
tinuation. 

Evil  (irovijpa).  Actively  evil.  See  on  Mark  viL  22;  Luke 
iiL19. 

20.  Doeth  {trpda-a-fov).  The  present  participle,  indicating 
habit  and  general  tendency. 

Evil  {ifkwKa).  Bev.,  {U.  A  different  word  from  that  in  the 
previous  verse.  Originally,  lights  paltry,  trivial,  and  so  vxnih- 
less.  Evil,  therefore,  considei*ed  on  the  side  of  worthlessness. 
See  on  Jas.  iii.  16. 

Lest  his  works  should  be  reproved  (iva  fi^  i><^eyxSQ  'fh 
ipya  avTov).    Bather,  in  order  that  his  warks  may  not  he  re- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


102  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

jproved.  *E\^7^,  rendered  reprovCj  has  fieveral  phases  of 
meaning.  In  earlier  classical  Greek  it  signifies  to  disgrace  or 
jnU  to  shame.  Thus  Uljsses,  having  succeeded  in  the  trial  of 
the  bow,  says  to  Telemachus,  '^  the  stranger  who  sits  in  thy 
halls  disgraces  {ikeyx^')  ^^^  ^^^"  C^  Odyssey,  xzi.,  424). 
Then,  to  cross-eoDomine  or  question^  for  the  purpose  of  convinc- 
imgj  cofwictingy  or  refuting;  to  censurcy  accuse.  So  Herodotus : 
^'  In  his  reply  Alexander  became  confused,  and  diverged  from 
the  truth,  whereon  the  slaves  interposed,  confuted  his  state- 
ments (^Xe/^ov,  cross-questioned  and  caught  him  in  falsehood), 
*nd  told  the  whole  history  of  the  crime  "  (i.,  115).  The  mes- 
senger in  the  '^  Antigone"  of  Sophocles,  describing  the  consterna- 
tion of  the  watchmen  at  finding  Polynices'  body  buried,  says : 
^^Evil  words  were  bandied  among  them,  guard  accusing 
{ikiyxo^v)  gnard  "  (260).  Of  arguments,  to  bring  to  the  proof ; 
prove;  prove  by  a  chain  of  reasoning.  It  occurs  in  Pindar  in 
the  general  sense  of  to  conquer  or  surpass.  '^  Having  descended 
into  the  naked  race  they  surpassed  (^Xeyfav)  the  Grecian  band 
in  speed  ("  Pythia,"  xi.,  75). 

In  the  New  Testament  it  is  found  in  the  sense  of  reprove 
(Luke  iii  19  ;  1  Tim.  v.  20,  etc.).  Convince  of  crime  or  fault 
(1  Cor.  xiv.  24 ;  Jas.  ii.  9).  To  bring  to  Ugkt  or  eapose  by  con- 
viction  (Jas.  iiL  20 ;  Eph.  v.  11,  13  ;  John  viii.  46 ;  see  on  that 
passage).  So  of  the  exposure  of  false  teachei*s,  and  their  ref- 
utation (Tit.  L  9, 13  ;  ii.  15).  To  test  and  eapose  with  a  view 
to  correction^  and  so,  nearly  equivalent  to  chasten  (Heb.  xii.  5). 
The  different  meanings  unite  in  the  word  convict.  Convic- 
tion is  the  result  of  examination^  testingy  argument.  The  test 
exposes  and  dem/mstrates  the  error,  and  refutes  it,  thus  convinc- 
ingy  convicting,  and  rebuking  the  subject  of  it  This  conviction 
issues  in  chasteningy  by  which  the  error  is  corrected  and  the 
erring  one  purified.  If  the  conviction  is  rejected,  it  carries 
with  it  condemnation  and  punishment.  The  man  is  thus  con- 
victed of  siny  of  rigkty  and  oi  judgment  (John  xvi.  8).  In  this 
passage  the  evil-doer  is  represented  as  avoiding  the  light  which 
tests,  that  light  which  is  the  offspring  of  love  (Apoc.  iii.  19), 
and  the  consequent  exposure  of  his  error.  Compare  Eph.  v. 
13 ;  John  L  9-11.    This  idea  of  loving  darkness  rather  than 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  103 

light  is  graphically  treated  in  Job  xxiv.  and  mns  through  w. 
13-17. 

21.  Doeth  the  truth  (tfomSv  rifv  hXi^Seiav).  The  phrase 
occars  only  here  and  in  1  John  i.  6.  Note  the  contrasted 
phrase,  doeth  evU  (ver.  20).  There  the  plural  is  used :  doeth 
evil  things;  evil  being  represented  by  a  number  of  bad 
works.  Here  the  singular,  the  tnUhy  or  truth;  truth  being  re- 
garded as  one,  and  ^^  including  in  a  supreme  unity  all  right 
deeds.''  There  is  also  to  be  noted  the  different  words  for  do- 
ing in  these  two  verses:  doeth  evil  {irpdaatov) \  doeth  truth 
{woiSav).  The  latter  verb  contemplates  the  object  and  end  of 
action ;  the  former  the  meafiSy  with  the  idea  of  continuity  and 
repetition.  Ilpdaatov  is  the  practice^  while  iroi&v  may  be  the 
doing  once  for  all.  Thus  iroieiv  elpi^vtjp  is  to  condvde  a  peace: 
wpdcaeiv  elp^vjjv,  to  negotiate  a  peace.  So  Demosthenes:  ^^He 
will  do  (irpiaiei)  these  things,  and  will  aocompUeh  them  (iroir 
i;<r6i).''  In  the  New  Testament  a  tendency  is  observable  to  use 
iroUiv  in  a  good  sense,  and  irpdaaew  in  an  evil  sense.  Compare 
the  kindred  word  irpa^i^,  deed  or  work^  which  occurs  six  times, 
and  in  four  out  of  the  six  of  evil  doing  (Matt.  xvi.  27 ;  Luke 
xxiii.  51 ;  Acts  xix.  18 ;  Rom.  viii.  13 ;  xii.  14 ;  Col.  iiL  9). 
With  this  passage  compare  especially  v.  29,  where  the  two  verbs 
are  used  with  the  two  nouns  as  here.  Also,  Rom.  vii.  15, 19. 
Bengel  says :  "  Evil  is  restless :  it  is  busier  than  truth."  In 
Rom.  i.  32  ;  ii  3,  both  verbs  are  used  of  doing  evil,  but  still  with 
a  distinction  in  that  irpdaam  is  the  more  comprehensive  term, 
designating  the  jrursuit  of  evil  as  the  aim  of  the  activity. 

21.  Cometh  to.  In  contrast  with  hcUeth  (ver.  20).  His 
love  of  the  light  is  shown  by  his  seeking  it 

In  God.  The  element  of  holy  action.  Notice  the  perfect 
tense,  ha/oe  been  vyroughJt  (as  Rev.)  and  abide. 

22.  The  land  of  Judaea  {jnv  ^lovBalav  y^v).  lit,  the  Ju- 
dasan  land.  The  phrase  occurs  only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


104  WORD  8TUDIBS  IN  THB  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

Tarried  (Bihpifiev).  The  verb  originally  means  to  rwJ, 
hence  to  wear  atoay^  consume/  and  bo  of  spending  or  pass- 
ing time. 

Baptized  {iffdirr^^ev).  The  imperfect  tense  agrees  with  the 
idea  of  tarrying.    He  continued  baptizing  daring  His  stay. 

23.  Was  baptizing  (^  fiairrl^tov).  The  substantive  verb 
with  the  participle  also  indicating  continuous  or  habitual 
action  ;  loas  engaged  in  baptizing. 

>Enony  near  to  Salim.  The  situation  is  a  matter  of  con- 
jecture. The  word  ^non  is  probably  akin  to  the  Hebrew 
dyin,  an  eye,  a  spring.    See  on  Jas.  iiL  11. 

Much  water  (J;Sara7roXX^).  Lity  many  waters.  Probably 
referring  to  a  number  of  pools  or  springs. 

Came— were  baptized.    Imperfects.    They  kept  coming. 

24.  Prison  (t^  ^vKok^).    See  on  Acts  v.  18,  21. 

25.  Then  (oSi/).  Not  a  particle  of  time  but  of  consequence ; 
therefore^  because  of  both  tfesus  and  John  baptizing. 

Question  {Sf/rqaist).  Rev.,  more  correctly,  questioning. 
Question  would  be  ^i]T7jfiay  always  in  the  sense  of  a  question  in 
debate.    The  word  here  represents  the  process  of  inquiry. 

Between  {iic).  Rev.,  conectly,  on  the  part  of.  Lit.,  pro- 
ceedvngfrom.  The  rendering  of  the  A.  V.  does  not  show  with 
which  party  the  discussion  originated.  The  Greek  distinctly 
states  that  the  question  was  raised  by  the  disciples  of  the 
Baptist. 

The  Jews.  The  best  texts  read  ^lovSaloVy  with  a  Jew.  Pos- 
sibly one  who  asserted  that  John's  baptism  might  now  be  dis- 
pensed with. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPBL  OF  JOHN.  106 

Purifying.  Probably  not  about  the  familiar  ceremonial 
porificationsy  bat  as  to  whether  the  baptism  of  Jesus  or  of  John 
had  the  greater  purifying  power. 

26.  Behold  {tBe).  Used  by  both  Matthew  and  Mark,  not  by 
Luke,  but  very  frequently  by  John. 

Baptizeth— come.  The  present  would  be  better  rendered 
by  t8  haptizingy  are  coming. 

27.  Receive.    Answering  to  given. 

Be  given  (^  hehonhov).  Bev.,  more  correctly,  ha/oe  been 
given. 

From  heaven.    Lit.,  (mt  ^heaven  {itc). 

29.  The  bride.  A  common  figure  in  the  Old  Testament 
prophecies,  of  the  relation  between  Jehovah  and  His  people 
(Ezek.  xvi. ;  BLos.  ii.  19 ;  Mai.  iL  11).  See  also  on  Matt.  i.  21, 
concerning  Rosea. 

Friend  of  the  bridegroom.  Or  groomsman.  The  term  is 
appropriate  to  Judsea,  the  groomsmen  not  being  customary  in 
Oalilee.  See  Matt.  ix.  15,  where  the  phrase  children  of  the 
hridechamher  is  used.  (See  on  Mark  ii.  19).  In  Judsea  there 
were  two'groomsmen,  one  for  the  bridegroom,  the  other  for  his 
bride.  Before  marriage  they  acted  as  intermediaries  between 
the  couple ;  at  the  wedding  tiiey  offered  gifts,  waited  upon  the 
the  bride  and  bridegroom,  and  attended  them  to  the  bridal 
chamber.  It  was  the  duty  of  the  friend  of  the  bridegi-oom  to 
present  him  to  his  bride,  after  marriage  to  maintain  proper 
terms  between  the  parties,  and  especially  to  defend  the  bride's 
good  fame.  The  Rabbinical  writings  speak  of  Moses  as  the 
friend  of  the  bridegroom  who  leads  out  the  bride  to  meet 
Jehovah  at  Sinai  (Ex.  xix.  17);  and  describe  Michael  and 
Gabriel  as  acting  as  the  friends  of  the  bridegroom  to  our  first 
parents,  when  the  Almighty  himself  took  the  cup  of  blessing 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


106  WORD  8TUDIB3  IN  TH£  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

and  spoke  the  benediction.    The  Baptist  represents  himself  as 
standing  in  the  same  relation  to  Jesus. 

Rejoiceth  greatly  (xVf  X^^^O-  ^^^-i  rejoiceth  with  joy. 
A  Hebrew  idiom.  See  on  Luke  tlxu.  15,  and  compare  Acts 
xxiii.  14;  Jaa.  v.  17.    Only  here  in  John's  writings. 

This  my  joy  (oCn;  ij  ^op^  ij  ifk^).  A  very  emphatic  ex- 
pression :  this,  the  joy  which  is  mine.  The  change  of  style  in 
the  following  verses  seems  to  indicate  that  the  words  of  the 
Baptist  break  ofF  at  this  point,  and  are  taken  np  and  com- 
mented upon  by  the  Evangelist 

81.  He  that  cometh  (o  ipx^fiepo;).  The  present  participle. 
The  coming  regarded  as  still  in  process  of  manifestation.  Com- 
pare vi.  33. 

From  above  {Aiw^).    See  on  iii  2. 

Above  {hrdvw).    Supreme. 

Of  the  earth  {ix  TJ79  7^).  Lit,  (mt  of  the  earth ;  of  earthly 
origin. 

Is  earthly.  The  same  phrase,  out  of  the  earth,  is  repeated, 
signifying  of  earthly  nature.  On  the  characteristic  phrase 
elvai  ix,  to  he  of,  see  on  L  46. 

Speaketh  of  the  earth.  Out  of  the  earth.  His  words  have 
an  earthly  source.    On  XotX^el,  speaketh,  see  on  Matt,  xxviii.  18. 

32.  Receiveth  (Kafjfidvei).  Once  only  John  uses  hkxpfuu 
for  receive,  of  the  GalilcBans  receiving  Christ  (iv.  45).  The 
distinction  between  the  two  is  not  sharply  maintained,  but 
heypiMU  commonly  adds  to  tlie  idea  of  taking,  that  of  welcom- 
ing. Thus  Demosthenes  says  that  the  Theban  elders  did  not 
receive  {ihi^avro)  i.e.,  with  a  welcome  pleasure,  the  money 
which  was  offered  them,  nor  did  they  take  it  {iKafiov).  Aafi- 
fidvei  also  includes  the  retaining  of  what  is  taken.    Hence  of 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OP  JOHN.  107 

receiving  Christ  (i.  12;  v.  43;  xiii.  20).    Tlie  phrase  receive 
the  wUneas  is  peculiar  to  John  (ver.  11 ;  v.  34 ;  1  Johu  v.  9). 

33.  Hath  set  to  his  seal  {i<Ti^p6riUT€v).  To  aet  tOj  is  to  affix. 
To  set  to  e^  seal  is  therefore  to  attest  a  docament.  The  expres- 
sion is  retained  from  Coverdale's  version  (1535).  So,  "Thej 
must  set  to  their  hands,  and  shall  set  to  their  hands."  Compare 
also  the  old  legal  formula:  "In  wittenesse  qwherof  I  haue  set 
to  mjfi  seele."  Bev.,  better,  hctth  set  his  seal  to  this.  The 
meaning  here  is,  has  solemnly  attested  and  confirmed  the  state- 
ment "God  is  true."  Only  here  in  this  sense.  Elsewhere  of 
closing  up  for  security;  hiding;  marking  a  person  or  thing. 
See  on  Apoc.  xxii.  10.  The  aorist  tense  here  denotes  an  accom- 
plished act. 

34.  The  words  {rh  {yqfiara).  Not  wordsj  nor  individual 
words,  but  the  words — the  complete  message  of  God.  See  on 
Luke  i.  37. 

God  giveth.  The  best  texts  omit  God.  Eev.,  Be  giveth. 
Rev.  also,  rightly,  omits  the  italicized  to  Him,.  The  personal 
object  of  the  verb  gvveth  is  indefinite.  Bender,  He  giveth  not 
the  Spirit  h/  m^easttre. 

In  order  to  convey  the  full  force  of  the  terms  gvveth  and  by 
measure,  it  will  be  necessary  to  attempt  an  explanation  of  the 
general  scope  and  meaning  of  this  very  difficult  and  much  dis- 
puted passage.  The  starting-point  of  the  exposition  must  be 
ver.  30,  the  Baptist's  noble  resignation  of  his  own  position  and 
claims  to  Jesus :  He  must  increase,  lut  I  must  decrease.  At 
this  point  the  Evangelist,  as  we  have  seen,  takes  up  the  dis- 
course. The  Baptist's  declaration  that  Jesus  "must  increase" 
— that  He  is  a  messenger  of  a  transcendently  higher  character, 
and  with  a  far  larger  and  more  significant  message  than  his 
own — furnishes  the  Evangelist  with  a  text.  He  will  show  why 
Jesus  "must  increase."  He  must  increase  because  He  comes 
from  above,  and  is  therefore  srjtprems  over  all  (ver.  31).  This 
statement  he  repeats ;  defining  from,  dbo^e  {avfoSev)  by  out  of 
heaven  {ix  tov  ovpavov),  and  emphasizing  it  by  contrast  with  a 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


108  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

mere  earthly  witness  (o  Ik  t^  7179)  whose  words  bear  the  stamp 
of  his  earthly  origin  {U  T179  7^  ysjiiKjA),  Being  from  heaven, 
He  testifies  of  heavenly  things,  as  an  eye-  and  ear-witness. 
^^  What  He  hath  %een  and  heard,  of  that  he  beareth  witness."  It 
is  indeed  true  that  men  reject  this  testimony.  ^'  No  man  re- 
ceiveth  His  witness"  (ver.  32).  None  the  less  it  is  worthy  of 
implicit  credence  as  the  testimony  of  God  himself.  He  that 
has  received  that  testimony  has  solemnly  attested  it  as  God's 
own  witness ;  ^^  hath  set  his  seal  to  this,  that  God  is  true."  To 
declare  Jesus'  testimony  untrue  is  to  declare  God  untrue  (ver. 
33).  For  He  whom  God  hath  sent  utters  the  whole  dwine  inee* 
Boge  (the  words  of  God,  ver.  34). 

Thus  far  the  reasoning  is  directed  to  the  conclusion  that 
Jesus  oughi,  to  increase,  and  that  His  message  ought  to  be  re- 
ceived. He  is  God's  own  messenger  out  of  heaven,  and  speaks 
God's  own  words. 

The  common  explanation  of  the  succeeding  clause  is  that 
God  bestows  the^  Spirit  upon  Jesus  in  His  fulness,  "not  by 
measure." 

But  this  is  to  repeat  what  has  already  been  more  than  im- 
plied. It  would  seem  to  be  superfluous  to  say  of  one  who  comes 
out  of  heaven,  who  is  supreme  over  all  things,  who  bears  wit- 
ness of  heavenly  things  which  He  has  seen  and  heard,  and  who 
reveals  the  whole  message  of  God  to  men — that  God  bestows 
upon  Him  the  Spirit  without  measure. 

Take  up,  then,  the  chain  of  thought  from  the  first  clause  of 
ver.  34,  and  follow  it  on  another  line.  The  Messenger  of  God 
speaks  the  words  of  God,  and  thus  shows  himself  worthy  of 
credence,  and  shows  this  further,  hy  dispensing  the  gift  of  the 
Spirit  vnfvU  measure  to  His  disciples.  "He  giveth  not  the 
Spirit  by  measure."  This  interpretation  adds  a  new  link  to  the 
chain  of  thought ;  a  new  reason  why  Jesus  should  increase,  and 
His  testimony  be  received ;  the  reason,  namely,  that  not  only 
is  He  himself  divinely  endowed  with  the  Spirit,  but  that  He 
proves  it  by  dispensing  the  Spirit  in  full  measure. 

Thus  ver.  35  follows  in  natural  sequence.  This  dispensing 
power  which  attests  His  claims,  is  His  through  the  gift  of  the 
divine  Father's  love.    "The  Father  loveth  the  Son,  and  hath 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OP  JOHIC.  109 

given  all  things  into  Sis  hand.^^  This  latter  phrase,  into  Sis 
/umd,  signifies  not  only  poaaessiony  but  the  power  of  disposal. 
See  Mark  ix.  31 ;  xiv.  41 ;  Luke  xxiii.  46 ;  Heb.  x.  31.  God 
has  given  the  Son  all  things  to  administer  according  to  His  own 
pleasure  and  rule.  These  two  ideas  of  Christ's  reception  and 
bestounnerU  of  divine  gifts  are  combined  in  Matt.  xi.  27.  "  All 
things  are  delivered  tmto  me  of  my  Father  /  and  no  man  know- 
eth  the  Son  but  the  Father,  neither  knoweth  any  man  the 
Father  save  the  Son,  and  He  to  whomsoever  the  Son  may  de- 
termine (JSovKfiToi)  to  reveal  Him." 

Therefore  John  the  Baptist  must  decrease,  and  Jesus  must 
increase.  A  measure  of  the  Spirit  was  given  to  the  Baptist, 
sufficient  for  his  preparatory  work,  but  the  Baptist  himself  saw 
the  Spirit  descending  in  a  bodily  form  upon  the  Son  of  God, 
and  heard  the  voice  from  heaven,  "  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in 
whom  I  am  well  pleased."  The  Spirit  is  thus  Christ's  own.  He 
dispenses^  gives  it  {St8a><riv)y  in  its  fulness.  Hence  Jesus  said, 
later,  of  the  Spirit  of  truth,  "  He  shall  glorify  Me,  for  He  shall 
reoevoe  of  mine,  and  shall  show  it  unto  you.  All  things  that 
the  Fatlier  hath  are  mine ;  therefore  said  I  that  He  shall  take 
of  mine  and  shall  show  it  unto  you  "  (John  xvi.  14,  15). 

36.  He  that  believeth  not  (o  airei^S&v).  More  correctly,  as 
Rev.,  oheyeth  not.  Disbelief  is  regarded  in  its  active  manifes- 
tation, disobedience.  The  verb  irel^oo  means  to  persxiade,  to 
cattse  belief  to  induce  one  to  do  something  by  persiMzdingy  and 
so  runs  into  the  meaning  of  to  obey,  properly  as  the  result  of 
persuasion.  See  on  Acts  v.  29.  Compare  1  Pet.  iv.  17 ;  Rom. 
ii.  8 ;  xi.  30,  31.  Obedience,  however,  includes  faith.  Com- 
pare Rom.  L  5,  the  obedience  of  faith. 

Shall  not  see  {ovk  Ih^ai).  Compare  the  future  tense  with 
the  present  ^^hath  eternal  life,"  and  the  simple  life  with  the 
fully  developed  idea  eternal  life.  He  who  believes  is  within 
the  circle  of  the  life  of  God,  which  is  essentially  eternal.  His 
life  "  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God."  Life  eternal  is  to  know  the 
only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  He  hath  sent.  Hence, 
to  such  an  one,  eteiiial  life  is  not  merely  something  yWt^r^.    It 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


110  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

is  a  present  possession.  He  /uzih  it.  The  nnbelieving  and  dis- 
obedient, instead  of  having  eternal  life,  shall  not  have  life: 
shall  not  even  see  it  (compare  see  the  kingdom  of  God,  iii.  8). 
He  shall  have  no  perception  of  life  simply  considered,  much 
less  of  eternal  life,  the  full  and  complex  development  of  life. 

The  wrath  of  God  {pp^  tov  Qeov).  Both  0/57^  and  ^vijl6^ 
are  used  in  the  New  Testament  for  wrath  or  anger,  and  with- 
out anjr  commonly  observed  distinction.  'Opy^  denotes  a  deeper 
and  more  permanent  sentiment,  a  settled  habit  of  mind  ;  while 
Svfi6<$  is  a  more  turbulent,  but  temporary  agitation.  Both 
words  are  used  in  the  phrase  v>rath  of  God,  which  commonly 
denotes  a  distinct  manifestation  of  God's  judgment  (Rom.  i. 
18 ;  iii.  5  ;  ix.  22  ;  xii.  19).  ^Opy)f  (not  !^vfi6si)  also  appears  in 
the  phrase  the  wrath  to  come  (Matt.  iii.  7 ;  Lnke  iii.  7 ;  1  Thess. 
ii.  16,  etc.).     Compare  wrath  of  the  La/mb  (Apoc.  vi.  16). 

Abideth  (jiivei).  The  present  tense.  As  the  believer  hath 
life,  so  the  unbeliever  hath  wrath  abiding  on  him.  He  lives 
continually  in  an  economy  which  is  alienated  from  God,  and 
which,  in  itself,  must  be  habitually  the  subject  of  Qod!s  dis- 
pleasure and  indignation. 


CHAPTER  IT. 

1.  Therefore.  Pointing  back  to  iii.  22,  and  the  controversy 
which  arose  about  the  two  baptisms. 

The  Lord.    See  on  Matt  xxi.  8. 

Knew  {iyvfo\  or percevoed.    See  on  ii.  24. 

Pharisees.  John  never  alludes  to  the  Sadducees  by  name. 
The  Pharisees  represented  the  opposition  to  Jesus,  the  most 
powerful  and  dangerous  of  the  Jewish  sects. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OP  JOHN.  Ill 

Made  and  baptized.  Both  verbs  are  in  the  present  tense. 
The  narrator  puts  himself  at  the  scene  of  the  story :  is  making 
and  haptizing. 

2.  Though  (tcalrovfe).  Lit.y  and  yet.  The  report  of  Jesus' 
baptizing  brought  to  the  Baptist  by  his  disciples  is  corrected. 

Baptized.  The  imperfect  tense :  it  was  not  HUpradioe  to 
baptize. 

3.  He  left  {a^icd).  The  verb  means  literally  to  send  awat/y 
dismiss.  It  is  used  of  forgiving  qffences  (Matt.  vi.  43 ;  Jas.  v. 
15) ;  of  yielding  up  (Matt,  xxvii.  50) ;  of  letting  alone  (Matt. 
xix.  14) ;  of  ailowvng  or  permitting  (Luke  vi.  12).  See  on 
these  passages.  Its  employment  here  is  peculiar.  Compare 
xvi.  28,  of  Christ's  leaving  the  world. 

Again.    See  i.  44. 

4.  Must  needs.  Because  this  was  the  natural  route  from 
Jerusalem  to  Galilee.  Possibly  with  a  suggestion  of  the  ne- 
cessity arising  from  the  Father's  will.  John  does  not  put  this 
as  a  mission  undertaken  to  the  Samaritans.  Jesus  observed  the 
law  which  He  imposed  on  His  disciples  (Matt.  x.  5). 

5.  Then  (oSi/).  Not  a  particle  of  time,  but  of  logical  con- 
nection.    Therefore^  going  by  this  route,  He  must  needs^  etc. 

City.  Not  implying  a  place  of  great  size  or  importance. 
Compare  xi.  54 ;  Matt  ii.  23. 

Sychar.  Commonly  identified  with  Schechem^  the  modem 
NablouSy  and  regarded  as  a  corruption  of  Sichem.  Some 
modern  authorities,  however,  argue  that  a  place  so  famous  as 
Schechem  would  not  be  referred  to  under  another  name,  and 
identify  the  site  with  AskoTj  about  two  miles  east  of  Nablous. 
The  name  Sychar  means  drunken-toion  or  lyvng-toum. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


112  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Parcel  of  ground  {x^P^^)'     -^  diminutive  from  ^c&pa  a 
region. 

6.  Well  (TTiTy^).  Strictly,  spring.  The  word  for  cistern  or 
well  is  <f>piap,  which  John  uses  at  vv.  11,  12.  Elsewhere  in  the 
New  Testament  always  of  a  pU.  See  Luke  xiv.  5  ;  Apoc.  ix. 
1,  2.  There  is  no  mention  of  Jacob's  Well  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment. The  traditional  well  still  remains.  "  At  the  mouth  of 
the  valley  of  Schechem  two  slight  breaks  are  visible  in  the 
midst  of  the  vast  plain  of  corn — one  a  white  Mussulman 
chapel ;  the  other  a  few  fragments  of  stone.  The  first  of  these 
covers  the  alleged  tomb  of  Joseph,  .  .  .  the  second  marks 
the  undisputed  site  of  the  well,  now  neglected  and  choked  up 
by  the  ruins  which  have  fallen  into  it ;  but  still  with  every 
claim  to  be  considered  the  original  well "  (Stanley,  "  Sinai  and 
Palestine  "),  Dr.  Thomson  says :  "  I  could  see  nothing  like  a 
well — nothing  but  a  low,  modem  wall,  much  broken  down,  and 
never,  apparently,  more  than  ten  feet  high.  The  area  enclosed 
by  it  is  fifty-six  paces  from  east  to  west,  and  sixty-five  from 
north  to  south.  The  surface  is  covei*ed  by  a  confused  mass  of 
shapeless  rubbish,  overgrown  with  weeds  and  nettles.  .  .  . 
The  well  is  near  the  southeastern  corner  of  the  area,  and,  to 
reach  the  mouth  of  it,  one  must  let  himself  down,  with  some 
risk,  about  ten  feet  into  a  low  vault "  ("Land  and  Book").  Dr. 
Thomson  also  remarks  upon  the  great  discrepancy  in  the  meas- 
urements of  the  well  by  different  tourists,  owing  to  the  ac- 
cumulations of  stones  and  debris  from  the  ruins  of  the  build- 
ings which  formerly  covered  it.  "  All  confirm  the  saying  of 
the  Samaritan  woman  that  *  the  well  is  deep.' "  Manndi-ell,  in 
1697,  makes  the  depth  one  hundred  and  five  feet,  with  fifteen 
feet  of  water.  Mr.  Calhoun,  in  1838,  found  nearly  the  same 
depth  of  water.  Dr.  "Wilson,  in  1841,  found  the  depth  only 
seventy-five  feet,  which  is  confirmed  by  the  later  measurements 
of  Captain  Anderson  in  1866,  and  of  Lieutenant  Conder  in 
1875. 

Wearied  {K€K(yn'ui/ca><;).     See  on  Luke  v.  5. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  113 

Thus.  Jast  a8  He  was;  or,  as  some  explain,  being  thas 
wearied. 

Sat.  The  imperfect  tense ;  tvcu  aMng^  when  the  woman 
came. 

Sixth  Hour.  According  to  the  Jewish  reckoning,  mid-day. 
According  to  the  Boman  mode,  between  5  and  6  p.m.  See  on 
i  39.    Evening  was  the  nsual  time  for  drawing  water. 

7.  A  woman.  Held  in  low  esteem  by  the  popnlar  teachers ; 
a  Samaritan,  and  therefore  despised  by  the  Jews ;  poor,  for 
drawing  water  was  not,  as  in  earlier  times,  performed  by  women 
of  station  (Gen  xxiv.  15 ;  xxix.  9). 

Of  Samaria.  lit,  cmi  of  Samaria  (^k).  Not  of  the  cnJIy  of 
Samaria,  which  was  some  six  miles  distant,  but  the  country.  A 
Samaritan  by  race  and  religion. 

To  draw.    See  on  ii.  8. 

9.  The  woman  of  Samaria  (ij  tw^  iJ  Safiapelnsi).  Differ- 
ently expressed  from  the  same  phrase  in  the  preceding  verse, 
lit,  the  woman  the  Samaritan.  Here  the  distinctive  character 
of  the  woman,  as  indicated  by  the  race,  is  emphasized. 

Askest  {atrek).    See  on  Matt.  xv.  23. 

Have  no  dealings  (ov  avyxp&vrai).  Have  no  familiar  or 
friendly  intercourse  with.  That  they  had  dealings  of  some 
kind  is  shown  by  the  disciples  going  into  the  city  to  buy  provi- 
sions. Some  authorities  omit  ybr  the  Jews  have  no  dealinge 
wUh  the  Samaritans.  The  Jews  treated  the  Samaritans  with 
every  mark  of  contempt,  and  accused  them  of  falsehood,  folly, 
and  irreligion.  The  Samaritans  sold  Jews  into  slavery  when 
they  had  them  in  their  power,  lighted  spurious  signals  for  the 
beacon-fires  kindled  to  announce  the  beginnings  of  months,  and 
waylaid  and  killed  pilgrims  on  their  road  to  Jerusalem. 
Vol.  IL— 8 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


114  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

10.  If  thou  knew^sty  etc.  Answering  rather  something 
latent  in  the  question  than  the  question  itself,  as  in  Jesus'  first 
answer  to  Nicodemus. 

The  gift  (Smpehv).  Only  here  in  the  Gospels,  though  Luke 
uses  it  in  Acts  four  times,  and  the  kindred  adverb,  Stopeitv, 
fredy^  is  found  once  in  Matthew.  The  word  carries  the  sense 
of  a  howfUifvl^freey  honorable  gift.  Compare  S&pfffta^  gifty  and 
see  on  James  L  17. 

Asked  (^rffa'a^).  Jesus  uses  the  same  word  for  oak  which 
the  woman  had  employed  of  his  asking  her,  the  word  express- 
ing the  asking  of  the  inferior  from  the  superior.  Here  it  is 
the  appropriate  word. 

Living  water  (UBiop  ^&v).  Fresh,  perennial.  A  familiar 
figure  to  the  Jews.  See  Jer.  ii.  13 ;  xvii.  13 ;  Zech.  xiv.  8. 
Not  necessarily  the  same  as  toater  qfUf6{iiS<op  ^mj^,  Apoc.  xxi. 
6 ;  xxii  1, 17). 

11.  To  draw  with  {avrX/rffia).  The  noun  means  wAai  is 
drawn^  ihe  act  of  drawing^  and  the  thing  to  d/roM  with.  Here 
the  'buckety  of  skin,  with  three  cross  sticks  at  the  mouth  to  keep 
it  open,  and  let  down  by  a  goat's-hair  rope.  Not  to  be  con- 
founded with  the  water-pot  (vSpia)  of  ver.  28.  The  word  is 
found  only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 

Well  {<t>piap).  See  on  ver.  6.  It  may  have  been  fed  by  liv- 
ing springs  {mfyai). 

That  living  water  {rb  S^p  rh  ^&v).  lit.,  ihe  water  ihe 
living. 

12.  Art  thou  greater  (jiii  <ri  fieC^v).  The  interrogative 
particle  indicates  that  a  negative  answer  is  expected :  Surely 
thou  art  not.  The  <ri>,  thouy  first  in  the  sentence,  is  emphatic^ 
and  possibly  with  a  shade  of  contempt. 

Our  father  Jacob.  The  Samaritans  claimed  descent  from 
Joseph,  as  representing  the  tribes  of  Ephraim  and  Manasseh. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  115 

Children  {viol).    Eev.,  correctly,  sans. 

Cattle  {SpifAfiara).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  From 
{Tpi<l)m)  to  nourish.  A  general  term  for  whatever  is  fed  or 
nursed.  When  nsed  of  animals — mostly  of  tame  ones — catUe, 
sheepy  etc.  It  is  applied  to  children,  fowls,  insects,  and  fish,  also 
to  domestic  slaves,  which,  according  to  some,  is  the  meaning 
here ;  bat,  as  Meyer  jnstly  remarks,  '^  there  was  no  need  specially 
to  name  the  servants ;  the  mention  of  the  herds  completes  the 
picture  of  their  nomadic  progenitor.*' 

13.  Whosoever  drinketh  {ira^  6  irlvwv).  lit,  every  one 
that  drinketh.    So  Rev. 

14.  Whosoever  drinketh  (89  8*41/ Tr/j;).  So  Rev.  TheA.V. 
renders  the  two  expressions  in  the  same  way,  but  there  is  a  dif- 
ference in  the  pronouns,  indicated,  though  very  vaguely,  by 
every  one  that  and  whosoever^  besides  a  more  striking  differ- 
ence in  the  verb  drinketh.  In  the  former  case,  the  article  with 
the  participle  indicates  something  habitual;  every  one  that 
drinks  repeatedly^  as  men  ordinarily  do  on  the  recurrence  of 
their  thirst.  In  ver.  14  the  definite  aorist  tense  expresses  a 
single  act — something  done  once  for  all.  Lit,  hs  who  may  home 
drunk. 

Shall  never  thirst  {ov  fiii  Zv^aei  eh  rhv  al&va).  The  double 
n^ative,  oi  /i^,  is  a  very  strong  mode  of  statement,  equiva- 
lent to  by  no  m^eans,  or  m  nowise.  It  must  not  be  understood, 
however,  that  the  reception  of  the  divine  life  by  a  believer 
does  away  with  all  further  desire.  On  the  contrary,  it  gener- 
ates new  desires.  The  drinking  of  the  living  water  is  put  as  a 
single  act,  in  order  to  indicate  the  divine  principle  of  life  as 
containing  in  itself  alone  the  satisfaction  of  all  holy  desires  as 
they  successively  arise ;  in  contrast  with  human  sources,  which 
are  soon  exhausted,  and  drive  one  to  other  fountains.  Holy 
desire,  no  matter  how  lai^e  or  how  varied  it  may  become,  will 
always  seek  and  find  its  satisfaction  in  Christ,  and  in  Christ  only. 
Thirst  is  to  be  taken  in  the  same  sense  in  both  clauses,  as  refer- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


116  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

ring  to  that  natural  craving  which  the  world  cannot  satisfy,  and 
which  is  therefore  ever  restless.  Drusins,  a  Flemish  critic,  cited 
by  Trench  ('* Studies  in  the  Gospels  "),  says:  **He  who  drinks 
the  water  of  wisdom  thirsts  and  does  not  thirst.  He  thirsts, 
that  is,  he  more  and  more  desires  that  which  he  drinks.  He 
does  not  thirst,  because  he  is  so  filled  that  he  desires  no  other 
drink."  The  strong  contrast  of  this  declaration  of  our  Lord 
with  pagan  sentiment,  is  illustrated  by  the  following  passage 
from  Plato : 

^^ Socrates:  Let  me  request  you  to  consider  how  far  you 
would  accept  this  as  an  account  of  the  two  lives  of  the  tem- 
perate and  intemperate :  There  are  two  men,  both  of  whom 
have  a  number  of  casks ;  the  one  man  has  his  casks  sound  and 
full,  one  of  wine,  another  of  honey,  and  a  third  of  milk,  besides 
others  filled  with  other  liquids,  and  the  streams  which  fill  them 
are  few  and  scanty,  and  he  can  only  obtain  them  with  a  great 
deal  of  toil  and  difficulty ;  but  when  his  casks  are  once  filled  he 
has  no  need  to  feed  them  any  more,  and  has  no  further  trouble 
with  them,  or  care  about  them.  The  other,  in  like  manner,  can 
procure  streams,  though  not  without  difficulty,  but  his  vessels 
are  leaky  and  unsound,  and  night  and  day  he  is  compelled  to 
be  filling  them,  and  if  he  pauses  for  a  moment  he  is  in  an  agony 
of  pain.  Such  are  their  respective  lives :  And  now  would  you 
say  that  the  life  of  the  intemperate  is  happier  than  that  of  the 
temperate!  Do  I  not  convince  you  that  the  opposite  is  the 
truth? 

"  OaUides:  Ton  do  not  convince  me,  Socrates,  for  the  one  who 
has  filled  himself  has  no  longer  any  pleasure  left ;  and  this,  as 
I  was  just  now  saying,  is  the  life  of  a  stone ;  he  has  neither 
joy  nor  sorrow  after  he  is  once  filled ;  but  the  life  of  pleasure 
is  the  pouring  in  of  the  stream. 

^^ Socrates:  And  if  the  stream  is  always  pouring  in, must  there 
not  be  a  stream  always  running  out,  and  holes  large  enough  to 
admit  of  the  discharge? 

"  CaUides:  Certainly. 

^^ Socrates:  The  life,  then,  of  which  you  are  nowspeaking  is 
not  that  of  a  dead  man,  or  of  a  stone,  but  of  a  cormorant;  you 
mean  that  he  is  to  be  hungering  and  eating? 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  117 

''CaUides:  Yes. 

^^ Socrates:  And  he  is  to  be  thirsting  and  drinking? 

^^  GaUiclea:  Yes,  that  is  what  I  mean ;  he  is  to  have  all  his 
desires  abont  him,  and  to  be  able  to  live  happily  in  tlie  gratifi- 
cation of  them*'  ("Qorgias,"  494).    Compare  Apoc.  vii.  16, 17. 

Shall  be  (yev^aeriu).  Rev.,  better,  shall  become^  expressing 
tiie  ever-developing  richness  and  fresh  energy  of  the  divine 
principle  of  life. 

In  Him.  A  supply  having  its  fountain-head  in  the  man's 
own  being,  and  not  in  something  ontside  himself. 

A  well  {trnyri).  The  Eev.  retains  well^  where  spring  would 
have  been  more  correct. 

Springing  up  (oXXo/iipoi;).  Lsa{pmg ;  thus  agreeing  with 
shaJl  heoome.  ^^  The  imperial  philosopher  of  Borne  uttered  a 
great  truth,  but  an  imperfect  one;  saw  much,  but  did  not  see 
all ;  did  not  see  that  this  spring  of  water  must  be  fed,  and  fed 
evermore,  from  the  ^  upper  springs,'  if  it  is  not  presently  to  fail, 
when  he  wrote :  ^  Look  within ;  within  is  the  fountain  of  good, 
and  ever  able  to  gush  forth  if  you  are  ever  digging ' "  (Plu^rch, 
"On  Virtue  and  Vice"). 

Unto  everlasting  life.  Christ  in  a  believer  is  Ufe.  This 
life  ever  tends  toward  its  divine  source,  and  issues  in  eternal 
life. 

Come  hither  {Spx^fuu  ipBdSe).  The  best  texts  read  BUp- 
Xf^iuut  the  preposition  Su£  having  the  force  of  ihr(yugh  the  in- 
tervening plain. 

16.  Husband  {SvBpa).    See  on  i.  30. 

17.  Well  {/caKw).  Aptly,  truly.  Compare  viii.  48 ;  Matt 
XV.  7;  Luke  xx.  39. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


118  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  KEW  TESTAMENT. 

19.  I  perceive  {l^€€9p&).  See  on  i.  18.  Not  immediate  per- 
ception, bat  rather,  Iperoewe  as  I  observe  thee  longer  and  more 
carefvUy. 

A  prophet.  See  on  Luke  vii.  26.  The  Greek  order  is  a 
prophet  art  thou;  the  emphasis  being  on  jnrophet. 

20.  Our  fathers.  Probably  meaning  the  ancestors  of  the 
Samaritans,  as  far  back  as  the  baildiug  of  the  temple  on  Mount 
Gherizim  in  the  time  of  Nehemiah.  This  temple  had  been  de- 
stroyed by  John  Hyrcanus,  129  b.o.,  but  the  place  remained 
holy,  and  to  this  day  the  Samaritans  yearly  celebrate  there  the 
feast  of  the  Passover.  See  the  graphic  description  of  Dean 
Stanley,  who  was  present  at  the  celebration  (^^  Jewish  Church," 
vol.  i.,  Appendix  III.). 

This  mountain.  Gerizim,  at  the  foot  of  which  lies  the 
well.  Here,  according  to  the  Samaritan  tradition,  Abraham 
sacrificed  Isaac,  and  met  Melchisedek.  By  some  convulsion  of 
nature,  the  central  range  of  mountains  running  north  and  south, 
was  cleft  open  to  its  base  at  right  angles  to  its  own  line  of  ex- 
tension, and  the  deep  fissure  thus  made  is  the  vale  of  !N&bluB, 
as  it  appears  to  one  coming  up  the  plain  of  £1  Miikhna  from 
Jerusalem.  The  valley  is  at  least  eighteen  hundred  feet  above 
the  level  of  the  sea,  and  the  mountains  on  either  hand  tower 
to  an  elevation  of  about  one  thousand  feet  more.  Mount  Ebal 
is  on  the  north,  Gterizim  on  the  south,  and  the  city  between. 
Kear  the  eastern  end  the  vale  is  not  more  than  sixty  rods  wide ; 
and  there,  I  suppose,  the  tribes  assembled  to  hear  the  ^'bles- 
sings and  cursings"  read  by  the  Levites  (Deut.  xxvii.,  xxviii.). 
The  panorama  seen  from  the  top  of  Gerizim  is  about  the  most 
extensive  and  imposing  in  all  Palestine.  The  summit  is  a  small 
level  plateau.  In  the  midst  of  the  southern  end  is  a  sloping 
rock,  said  by  the  Samaritans  to  be  the  site  of  the  altar  of  dieir 
temple,  and  on  approaching  which  they  remove  their  shoes.  At 
the  eastern  edge  of  the  plateau,  a  small  cavity  in  the  rock  is 
shown  as  the  place  on  which  Abraham  offered  up  Isaac.  Ebal 
is  three  thousand  and  seventy-nine  feet  above  the  sea-level, 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  119 

and  more  than  two  hundred  and  thirty  feet  higher  than 
GeriziuL* 

Ought  to  worship  (fie!).  Better,  tn/ust  worship.  She  puts 
it  as  a  divine  obligation.  It  is  the  anh/  true  holy  f\ace.  Com- 
pare yer.  24. 

21.  The  hour  cometh  (epx^^  &pa).  Rather  an  hoar. 
There  is  no  article.    Is  coming;  is  even  now  on  its  way. 

Shall  ye  worship  (wpoatcupi^eTe).  See  on  Acts  x.  25.  The 
word  was  used  indefinitely  in  ver.  20.  Here  with  the  Fatker^ 
thus  defining  true  worship. 

The  Father.  This  absolute  use  of  the  title  the  Father  is 
characteristic  of  John.  He  speaks  of  Gk)d  as  the  Father^  and 
my  Fattier^  more  commonly  the  former.  On  the  distinction 
between  the  two  Canon  "Westcott  observes :  "  Grenerally  it  may 
be  said  that  the  former  title  expresses  the  original  relation  of 
God  to  being,  and  specially  to  humanity,  in  virtue  of  man's 
creation  in  the  divine  image  ;  and  the  latter  more  particularly 
the  relation  of  the  Father  to  the  Son  incarnate,  and  so  indirectly 
to  man  in  virtue  of  the  Incarnation.  The  former  suggests  those 
thoughts  which  spring  from  the  consideration  of  the  absolute 
moral  connection  of  man  with  God;  the  latter  those  which 
spring  from  what  is  made  known  to  us,  through  revelation,  of 
the  connection  of  the  Incarnate  Son  with  God  and  with  man." 
See  vi  45 ;  x.  80 :  xx.  21 ;  viii  18, 19  ;  xiv.  ft-10 ;  xv.  8.  John 
never  uses  ovr  Father;  only  once  your  Father  (xx.  17),  and 
never  Father  without  the  article,  except  in  address. 

22.  Ye  know  not  what  (o  oifie  olZare),  Lit,  what  ye  know 
not.  Kev.,  rightly,  that  which  ye  know  not  Compare  Acts 
xvii.  23,  where  the  correct  reading  is  t,  whaty  instead  of  tv, 
whom:  ^^what  therefore  ye  worship  in  ignorance.**    This  wor- 

*  Condenaed  from  Dr.  Thomson's  <*  Oentral  Palestine  and  PhonioU,"  in 
"The  Land  and  the  Book."  An  interesting  description  of  the  ezoayationa 
made  on  the  snmmit  of  Gerisim,  bj  Lieutenant  Anderson,  wiU  be  found  in 
the  same  volume,  pp.  126-128. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


120  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

ship  of  the  unknown  is  common  to  vulgar  ignorance  and  to 
philosophic  coltare ;  to  the  Samaritan  woman,  and  to  the  Athe- 
nian philosophers.  Ciompare  John  vii.  28 ;  viiL  19|  27.  The 
neuter  expresses  the  unreal  and  impersonal  character  of  the 
Samaritan  worship.  As  the  Samaritans  received  the  Penta- 
teuch only,  thej  were  ignorant  of  the  later  and  larger  revela- 
tion of  Gtod,  as  contained  especially  in  the  prophetic  writings, 
and  of  the  Messianic  hope,  as  developed  among  the  Jews. 
They  had  preserved  only  the  abstract  notion  of  God. 

We.  Jesus  here  identifies  Himself  with  the  Jewish  people. 
The  essence  of  the  true  Jewish  worship  is  represented  by  Bim. 

Know  what  we  worship  {wpoc/cuvoOfAey  h  otSofiep).  Lit, 
and  as  Sev.,  v)e  warship  ikoat  which  we  know.  On  know,  see 
on  iL  24.  The  neuter  that  whichy  is  used  of  the  true  as  of  the 
unreal  object  of  worship,  perhaps  for  the  sake  of  correspond- 
ence with  the  preceding  clause,  or  because  the  object  of  wor- 
ship is  conceived  abstractly  and  not  personally.  Compare 
xiv.  9. 

Salvation  (i}  awrripU).  The  word  has  the  article:  the  salva- 
tion, promised  and  to  be  revealed  in  Christ 

Is  of  the  Jews.  Sev.,  rightly, /n?m  the  Jews  {iic).  ITot 
therefore  helonge  to^  hut  proceeds  from.  See  Gen.  xii. ;  Isa.  ii. 
3 ;  Mic.  iv.  2.  Even  the  Old  Testament  idea  of  salvation  is 
bound  up  with  Christ  See  Bom.  ix.  4,  5.  The  salvation  is 
from  the  Jews^  even  from  that  people  which  has  rejected  it 
See  on  i.  19.  On  the  characteristic  isfroroy  see  on  i.  46.  The 
passage  illustrates  John's  habit  of  confirming  the  divine  author- 
ity of  the  Old  Testament  revelation,  and  of  showing  its  fulfil- 
ment in  Christ 

28.  And  now  is.  This  could  not  be  added  in  ver.  21,  be- 
cause local  worship  was  not  yet  abolished ;  but  it  was  true  as 
r^arded  the  true  worship  of  the  Father  by  His  true  worship- 
pers, for  Jesus  was  already  surrounded  by  a  little  band  of  such, 
and  more  were  soon  to  be  added  (w.  39-42).     Bengel  says 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  121 

that  the  words  and  now  is  are  added  lest  the  woman  should 
think  that  she  most  seek  a  dwelling  in  Jadsea. 

True  {aKrf$uH>l).    JSealy  genuine.    See  on  L  9. 

Worshippers  (irpo<ncwnfrci).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. 

In  spirit  and  in  truth  {h  weifAaT&  ical  oKffStlif).  SpirU 
(wpevfio)  is  the  highest,  deepest,  noblest  part  of  our  humanity, 
the  point  of  contact  between  God  and  man  (Bom.  i  9) ;  while 
eaiU  (V't/X'O  ^  ^^  principle  of  individuality,  ^e  seat  of  personal 
impressions,  having  a  side  in  contact  with  the  material  element 
of  humanity  as  well  as  with  the  spiritual  element,  and  being 
thus  the  mediating  element  between  the  spirit  and  the  body. 
The  phrase  in  spirU  cmd  in  trvih  describes  the  two  essential 
characteristics  of  true  worship :  in  epiritj  as  distinguished  from 
place  or  form  or  other  sensual  limitations  (ver.  21) ;  in  inUh^ 
as  distinguished  from  the  false  conceptions  resulting  from  im- 
perfect knowledge  (ver.  22).  True  worship  includes  a  spiritual 
sense  of  the  object  worshipped,  and  a  spiritual  communion 
with  it ;  the  manifestation  of  the  moral  consciousness  in  feel- 
ings, motions  of  the  will,  ^^  moods  of  elevation,  excitements," 
etc.  It  includes  also  a  truthful  ooncq^ion  of  the  object.  In 
Jesus  the  Father  is  seen  (xiv.  9)  and  known  (Luke  x.  22). 
Thus  the  truthful  conception  is  gained.  He  is  the  Truih 
(xiv.  6).  Likewise  through  Him  we  come  to  the  Father,  and 
spiritually  commune  with  EKm.  No  man  can  come  in  any 
other  way  (xiv.  6).  To  worship  in  truth  is  not  merely  to  wor- 
ship in  sino&rityy  but  with  a  worship  corresponding  to  the 
nature  of  its  object. 

For  the  father  (/col  yhp  o  irarffp).  The  A.  V.  fails  to  ren- 
der teal  alsOy  and  Eev.  places  it  in  the  margin.  It  emphasizes 
the  conclusiveness  of  the  reason  assigned :  "  for  the  Father 
aleOy  an  Sis  part^  seeketh,"  etc.  For  a  similar  use  of  icaX^  see 
on  Matt.  viii.  9 ;  also  Matt  xxvi.  73 ;  Acts  xix.  40. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


132  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

Seeketh  such  to  worship  Him  (towvtoi;?  fiyrci  tov9  irpofr- 
KuvovvTWi  auTov).  A  ratlier  peculiar  coustruction.  lit,  seeketh 
such  as  those  wcrshvppmg  hvm :  as  His  worshippers.  Sv^ch :  i.e., 
those  who  worship  in  spirit  and  in  trath,  and  ai*e  therefore  real 
{akri^afol)  worshippers  of  the  real  Ood  {aXa^ivov  Gebvy  xviL  3). 

24.  God  is  a  Spirit  {wvevp^i  6  Geasi).  Or,  as  Rev.,  in  marg., 
God  is  Spirit.  Spirit  is  the  emphatic  word ;  Spirit  is  God. 
The  phrase  describes  the  natiM^e,  not  the  personality  of  God. 
Compare  the  expressions,  God  is  light  /  God  is  love  (1  John  L 
6 ;  iv.  8). 

25.  Messiah  cometh.  The  woman  uses  the  Jewish  name, 
which  was  known  in  Samaria.  The  Samaritans  also  ex]>ected 
the  Messiah,  basing  their  hopes  on  sach  Scriptares  as  G^n.  iiu 
15  ;  xlix.  10  ;  Num.  xxiv.  17 ;  Dent  xviii.  15.  They  looked 
for  Him  to  restore  the  kingdom  of  Israel  and  to  re-establish  the 
worship  on  Gerizim,  where  they  snpposed  that  the  tabernacle 
was  hidden.  They  called  Him  Hushah  or  Haihah^  meaning  iJie 
Converter^  or,  according  to  some,  the  lietuming  One.  The 
Samaritan  idea  was  less  worldly  and  political  than  the  Jewish. 

Which  is  called  Christ.  Added  by  the  Evangelist.  Com- 
pare i.  41. 

He  is  come  {iieetvof;).  Emphatic;  pointing  to  Messiah  as 
contrasted  with  all  other  teachers. 

He  will  tell  (aya776X€i).  JAi.y  proclaim  ot  announce.  The 
compounded  preposition  hvd,  the  radical  meaning  of  which  is 
%ipy  signifies  ihroughxmt^  from  hottom  to  top.  The  verb  is  used 
in  xvi.  13,  of  the  revelations  of  the  Comforter. 

26.  I — am  He  (^^/u).  Lit.,  lam.  The  less  political  con- 
ception of  the  Samaritan  Messiah  made  it  possible  for  Jesus  to 
announce  Himself  to  the  woman  without  fear  of  being  misun- 
derstood as  He  was  by  the  Jews.  Compare  Matt.  viii.  4 ;  xvi. 
20. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOBPBL  OF  JOHN.  123 

This  incident  farnishes  a  notable  illastration  of  onr  Lord^s 
love  for  hainan  souls,  and  of  His  skill,  tact,  and  firmness  in 
dealing  with  moral  degi*adation  and  ignorant  bigotry.  He  con- 
ciliates the  woman  bj  asking  a  favor.  Her  hesitation  arises 
less  from  prejudice  of  race  than  from  surprise  at  being  asked 
for  drink  bj  a  Jew  (compai*e  the  story  of  Zacchseus).  He 
seizes  upon  a  near  and  familiar  object  as  the  key-note  of  His 
great  lesson.  He  does  not  overwhelm  her  with  new  knowledge, 
but  stimulates  question  and  thought.  He  treats  her  sin  frank- 
ly, but  not  harshly.  He  is  content  with  letting  her  see  that  He 
is  aware  of  it,  knowing  that  through  Him,  as  the  Discemery  she 
will  by  and  by  reach  Him  as  the  Forgtver.  Even  from  her 
ignorance  and  coarse  superstition  He  does  not  withhold  the 
sublimest  truth.  He  knows  her  imperfect  understanding,  but 
He  assumes  the  germiuative  power  of  the  truth  itself.  He  is 
not  deterred  from  the  effort  to  plant  His  truth  and  to  rescue  a 
soul,  either  by  His  own  weariness  or  by  the  conventional  senti- 
ment which  frowned  upon  His  conversation  with  a  woman  in  a 
public  place.  Godet  contrasts  Jesus'  method  in  this  case  with 
that  employed  in  the  interview  with  Nicodemus.  "With 
mcodemus  He  started  from  the  idea  which  filled  every  Phari- 
see's heart,  that  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  deduced  therefrom 
the  most  rigorous  practical  consequences.  He  knew  that  He 
had  to  do  with  a  man  accustomed  to  the  discipline  of  the  law. 
Then  He  unveDed  to  him  the  most  elevated  truths  of  the  king- 
dom of  heaven,  by  connecting  them  with  a  striking  Old  Testa- 
ment type,  and  contrasting  them  with  the  corresponding  feat- 
ures of  the  Pharisaic  programme.  Here,  on  the  contrary,  with 
a  woman  destitute  of  all  scriptural  training,  He  takes  His  point 
of  departure  from  the  commonest  thing  imaginable,  the  water 
of  the  well.  He  suddenly  exalts  it,  by  a  bold  antithesis,  to  the 
idea  of  that  eternal  life  which  quenches  forever  the  thirst  of 
the  human  heart  Spiritual  aspiration  thus  awakened  in  her 
becomes  the  internal  prophecy  to  which  He  attaches  His  new 
revelations,  and  thus  reaches  that  teaching  on  true  worship 
which  corresponds  as  directly  to  the  peculiar  prepossessions  of 
the  woman,  as  the  revelation  of  heavenly  things  corresponded  to 
the  inmost  thoughts  of  Nicodemus.    Before  the  latter  He  un- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


124  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

▼eils  EUmself  as  the  only-begotten  Son,  but  this  while  avoiding 
the  title  of  ^^  Christ"  With  the  woman  He  boldlj  nses  this 
term ;  bat  he  does  not  dream  of  initiating  into  the  mysteries 
of  incarnation  and  redemption  a  sonl  which  is  yet  only  at  the 
first  elements  of  religions  life  and  knowledge  "  (^^  Ciommentary 
on  the  Gtospel  of  John  *^). 

27.  Came— marvelled  (^X9ai^— ^9a^/ia(;oy).  The  tense  of 
each  verb  is  different :  the  aorist,  came^  marking  as  in  a  single 
point  of  time  the  disciples'  arrival,  and  the  imperfect,  they  were 
wondering^  marking  something  continued :  they  stood  and  con- 
templated him  talkiAg  with  the  woman,  and  aU  the  while  voere 
wondering  at  it 

He  talked  (iK£K£i).  The  imperfect  tense,  he  woe  epedkmg. 
SoBev. 

The  woman.  Eev.,  correctly,  a  woman.  They  were  sur- 
prised, not  at  his  talking  with  that  woman,  but  that  their 
teacher  should  converse  with  cmy  woman  in  public  The  Rab- 
binical writings  taught  that  it  was  beneath  a  man's  dignity  to 
converse  with  women.  It  was  one  of  the  six  things  which  a 
Rabbi  might  not  do.  ^^  Let  no  one,"  it  is  written,  ^^  converse 
with  a  woman  in  the  street,  not  even  with  his  own  wife."  It 
was  also  held  in  these  writings  that  a  woman  was  incapable  of 
profound  religious  instruction.  ^^  Rather  bum  the  sayings  of 
the  law  than  teach  them  to  women." 

28.  Water.pot.    See  on  ii.  6. 

29.  All  things.  Jesus'  insight  in  the  one  case  convinced 
her  that  He  knew  everything,  and  to  her  awakened  conscience 
it  seemed  as  though  He  had  told  everything. 

Is  not  this  the  Christ  (jirp-^  i<rr$v)i  Rather,  as  Rev.,  can 
this  he.  The  particle  suggests  a  negative  answer.  Sv/rdy  this 
cannot  he^  yet  with  some  hope. 

30.  Then.    Omit 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


QOSPBL  OF  JOHN.  125 

Went  out— came  unto  Him  (^f9X9oI^— ^p^^rro  trpo^  tUmiv). 
Went  out  is  the  aorist  tense,  denoting  the  coming  forth  from 
the  city  as  a  single  act  at  a  point  of  time.  Came  is  the  imper- 
fect, denoting  action  in  progress.  The  observance  of  the  dis- 
tinction makes  the  narrative  more  graphic.  They  were  coming. 
Unto  should  be  toward {irpiisi).  The  imperfect  also  is  required 
by  the  following  words :  ^'  In  the  mean  while  "  (while  the  woman 
was  still  absent  and  the  Samaritans  were  coming  toward  Him) 
^^  the  disciples  were  praying  "  Him  to  eat.  This  last  imperfect 
is  overlooked  by  the  Sev. 

32.  Meat  OSpoHTu;).  Originally  ^oo^^^o^  (Col.  ii.  16), 
but  often  of  that  which  is  eaten.  A  parallel  is  found  in  tlie 
vulgar  phrase,  a  thing  is  good  or  poor  eaimg.  The  word  is 
always  used  by  Paul  in  its  original  sense. 

Know  not  of  {pific  dSare).  Incorrect  Sev.,  rightly,  ye 
know  not;  i.e.,  you  do  not  know  its  virtue. 

33.  Said  {SKeyop).  Imperfect  tense :  hegan  to  eatfj  or  were 
eaying.    The  question  was  discussed  among  them. 

One  to  another.    Fearing  to  ask  Jesus. 

34.  Meat  {/Sp&fui).  A  different  word  from  that  in  ver.  32, 
signifying  what  is  eaten. 

To  do  (&a  TToUi).  Lit.,  in  order  that  I  do.  Emphasizing 
the  end  and  not  the  process.  Frequently  so  used  in  John.  See 
on  iii.  19. 

Finish  (reXeM&crco).  Better,  as  Bev.,  accomplish.  Not  merely 
bring  to  an  end,  hut  perfect.  From  TiKeio9,  perfect.  The  verb 
is  characteristic  of  John,  and  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews. 
See  V.  36;  xvii  4;  xix.  28;  1  John  ii.  6;  iv.  12;  Heb.  ii.  10; 
V.  9,  etc. 

36.  Say  not  ye.  In  what  follows,  Jesus  is  contrasting  the 
natural  harvest-time  with  the  spiritual,  which  was  immediately 
to  take  place  in  the  ingathering  of  the  Samaritans.    Ye  is  em- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


126  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  HEW  TESTAMENT. 

phatic,  marking  what  the  disciples  expect  according  to  the 
order  of  natnre.  As  jon  look  on  these  green  fields  between 
Ebal  and  Gerizim,  ye  say,  it  is  yet  foor  months  to  harvest 

There  are  four  months  {rerpd§i/rpHw  itrrtp).  Properly,  U 
is  a  space  of  four  morUAe.    Only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 

Harvest  {SepurfAo^).     See  on  Lnke  z.  2. 

White  (KevKol).    See  on  Lnke  ix.  29. 

Already  unto  harvest.  Spiritnal  harvest  The  crowd  of 
Samaritans  now  pouring  ont  toward  the  well  was  to  Jesns  as  a 
ripe  harvest-field,  prefignring  the  larger  harvest  of  mankind 
which  would  be  reaped  by  His  disciples.  By  the  best  texts 
the  already  is  joined  with  the  next  verse,  and  the  xai,  and,  at 
the  beginning  of  that  verse  is  omitted :  Already  he  that  reapeth 
reoewethf  etc 

Wages  ifwrSiv).    See  on  2  Pet  ii.  13. 

Unto  life  eternal.  This  is  explained  either,  which  shall  not 
perish  hut  endure  unto  eternal  Ufe,  or  into  life  eternal,  as  into 
a  granary.    Compare  ver.  14^ 

Together  (ofuw).  The  construction  is  peculiar:  that  both 
the  sou>er  may  rejoice  together  and  the  reaper.  Together  signi- 
fies not  in  common,  but  simttltaneously.  So  quickly  does  the 
harvest  follow  the  gospel-seed  sown  among  the  Samaritans, 
that  the  sower  and  the  reaper  rejoice  together. 

37.  Herein  (^  roirnp).  Lit.,  in  this.  In  this  relation  be- 
tween sower  and  reaper. 

Is  that  saying  true  (o  X0709  iarlv  6  aXtf^^vosi).  Rev.,  prop- 
erly, the  saying ;  the  common  proverb.  True :  not  only  says 
the  truth,  but  the  saying  is  completely  fulfilled  according  to  the 
ideal  in  the  sowing  and  reaping  of  which  Jesns  speaks.  The 
literal  rendering  of  the  Greek,  as  given  above,  is,  ^^the  saying  is 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPBL  OP  JOHN.  127 

the  true  (saying) ; "  but  several  high  authorities  omit  the  article 
before  true, 

38.  I  sent  (^a>  airktrreCKd).  The  /is  emphatic.  The  aorist 
tense  points  back  to  the  mission  of  the  disciples  as  involved  in 
their  original  call. 

Other  men.  Jesns  himself  and  all  who  had  prepared  the 
way  for  Him,  such  as  John  the  Baptist 

Labored  {iceic(y!ri6xaai).  The  perfect  tdhse.  Bev.,  rightly, 
liave  labored^  their  labor  showing  its  effects  in  the  present  case. 
On  the  word  IdboVy  see  on  Luke  v.  6.     Compare  Josh.  xxiv.  13. 

39.  The  saying  {rhv  Xorfov).  Rev.,  better,  the  toord.  It 
does  not  refer  merely  to  the  woman's  statement,  Ss  told  mSy 
etc,  bat  to  her  whole  testimony  (juifyrvpownfii)  concerning  Christ. 

40.  To  tarry  {fjkeivcu).     Better,  as  Rev.,  to  abide. 

41.  Many  more  {iroXK^  irXeCovst).  Lit,  more  hy  much;  i.e., 
fa/r  more,  with  reference  to  the  simple  troXKoX^  mamy^  in  ver.  39. 

42.  Said  (eXjeyov).  The  imperfect  tense :  said  to  the  woman 
as  they  successively  met  her. 

Saying  (XaXiilv).  Another  word  is  designedly  substituted  for 
\6yovy  word  (vv.  39,  41).  In  ver.  39  X0709,  word^  is  used  of  the 
woman,  from  the  Evangelist's  standpoint,  as  being  a  testimony 
to  Christ  Here  the  Samaritans  distinguish  between  the  more 
authoritative  and  dignified  word  of  Jesus,  and  the  talk  of  the 
woman.  Rev.,  speaking.  Compare  the  kindred  verb  XoXico,  in 
vv.  26,  27;  also  viii.  43;  Matt  xxvi  73. 

The  Christ.    The  best  texts  omit. 

The  Saviour  (o  car^p).  John  uses  the  word  only  here  and 
1  John  iv.  14.  See  on  Jesus^  Matt.  i.  21.  It  is  significant  that 
this  conception  of  Christ  should  have  been  first  expressed  by  a 
Samaritan. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


128  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

44.  For — in  His  own  country  {yitp — eV  rg  ISia  irarpl^C). 
Far  assigns  the  reason  why  Jesus  went  into  Galilee.  By  His 
own  courUryy  Jadsea  seems  to  be  meant,  though  almost  the 
same  phrase,  His  country^"*  is  used  by  the  three  Sjnoptists  of 
Nazareth  in  Galilee.  John's  Gospel,  however,  deals  with  the 
Jndaean  rather  than  with  the  Galilean  ministry  of  Jesns,  and 
the  phrase,  Hi%  own  comUryy  is  appropriate  to  Judsea  as  "  the 
true  home  and  fatherland  of  the  prophets,  the  land  which  con- 
tained the  city  of  Messiah's  birth,  the  city  associated  with 
Him  alike  in  ancient  prophecy  and  in  popular  expectation.'' 
Hence,  at  Jerusalem,  the  people  said,  ^^  Hath  not  the  Scriptures 
said  that  Christ  cometh  of  the  seed  of  David,  and  out  of  the 
town  of  Bethlehem,  where  David  was  "  (vii.  42)  ?  In  vv.  1-3 
it  is  stated  that  Jesus  left  Judsea  because  of  a  controversy  ex- 
cited by  the  Pharisees,  whom  John  always  marks  as  the  leaders 
of  the  opposition  to  Jesus.  Further,  we  are  told  that  at  Jeru- 
salem, though  many  believed  on  His  name,  yet  Jesns  did  not 
trust  them  (ii.  23, 24).  According  to  this  explanation,  ^hp^for^ 
is  used  in  its  natural  and  most  obvious  sense  as  assigning  the 
reason  for  Christ's  departure  into  Galilee.  The  proverb  is 
naturally  suggested  by  the  reference  to  Galilee,  where  Jesus 
had  used  it  at  Kazareth  (see  Matt.  xiii.  57).  The  8t€  oiv,  when 
then  {tJien  indicating  logical  sequence  and  not  time)  of  ver.  46 
follows  naturally  upon  the  citation  of  the  proverb,  signifying 
a  correspondence  between  the  character  of  His  reception  in 
Galilee  and  the  motive  of  His  going  thither.  Finally,  if  we 
understand  by  3U  own  country^  Nazareth,  we  are  compelled 
to  explain  7^^,  for^  from  ver.  46 ;  Jesus  went  to  Cana  (north 
of  Kazareth)  without  passing  through  His  native  place,  for  the 
reason  mentioned.    This  seems  forced  and  arbitrary .t 


*In  Matt  ziii.  57,  Tisoliendorf  reads  as  here,  hrilH^  vorpTSi,  in  hk  own 
country,     Westoott  and  Hort,  iw  r$  vorpAc  aSnov. 

\  I  have  given  what  seems,  on  the  whole,  the  most  simple  and  natnral  ex- 
planation, though  against  a  host  of  high  anthorities.  The  yarioos  interpreta- 
tions form  a  bewildering  jnngle.  All  of  them  are  open  to  objection.  One 
of  the  most  clear  and  simple  discussions  of  the  passage  maj  be  f onnd  in 
SchaflPs  Popular  Gommentarj  on  the  Gonpel  of  John,  edited  bj  Professors 
Milligan  and  Moulton,  where  this  explanation  is  adopted,  though  Professor 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPBL  OF  JOHN.  129 

45.  Received  {iSi^avro).    See  on  iii  82. 

46.  Jesus.    The  best  texts  omit. 

Cana  {TffvKtwa).  Note  the  article  t/ie  Cana,  and  see  on  ii. 
1.    The  article  defines  the  Cana  previonslj  referred  to. 

Nobleman  (/ScunXixb^).  Properly  an  adjective,  meaning 
rat/alj  from  ffcuriXeif^,  king.  It  occurs  in  John  only,  here  and 
ver.  49 ;  and  in  all  other  passages  is  nsed  as  an  adjective  (Acts 
xiL  20,  21 ;  Jas.  ii.  8).  Literally  here,  a  king^s  officer.  Wye, 
UtUe  King. 

Was  sick  (ijcr^a^i).    See  on  inf/rmitieSj  Lnke  v.  15. 

47.  He  went  {anrijX^).  Lit,  went  cmay  {inrS).  Leaving 
his  son  for  the  time. 

Heal  {Idayp-iu).     See  on  Matt.  viii.  7,  and  Luke  vi.  19. 

At  the  point  of  death  {ijfjkeXKep  aTroSi^axeiv).  Lit.,  tocu 
about  to  die.  Compare  Mark's  unconth  phrase,  iKr^drao^  l^^ei, 
lieth  (U  the  jpoint  of  deaih^  v.  23,  on  which  see  note.  Compare 
also  John  xii.  33. 

48.  Said  unto  him.  Except  ye  see.  Addressing  the  noble- 
man (Am),  bnt  having  in  mind  the  Galilean  population  which 
he  represents  (y^). 

Signs  and  wonders  {<Tifiii>eia  mi  ripara).  See  on  Matt 
xxiv.  24.  Xrifuui^  signSj  and  Sfyya^  works,  are  John's  character- 
istic words  for  miracles.  See  v.  20 ;  vii.  21 ;  xiv.  10 ;  ii.  23 ; 
vL  2,  etc. 

Te  will  not  (ov/iif).  The  double  negative  is  correctly  given 
by  Sev.,  "ye  will  in  novnae.^^ 

Schaff  in  Lange  oeIIb  it  *'  far-f etched."  This  is  also  the  view  of  Canon  West- 
cott  Other  explanations  are  :  Galilee  generally;  Nazareth;  Lower  Galilee, 
in  which  Nazareth  was  situated,  as  distinguished  from  Upper  Galilee,  in  which 
was  Capernaum. 

Vol.  IL— fl 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


130  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

49.  Child  {'/rcuBiov).  Diminatiye.  Lit.^  my  litUe  one;  a 
touch  of  tenderness* 

50.  Went  his  way  (hropeiero).  Bat  thns  the  force  of  the 
imperfect  is  lost,  which  harmonizes  with  the  succeeding  sen* 
tence :  he  wasjproceeding  on  his  way,  and  as  he  was  now  going 
dovrn^  etc. 

61.  Servants  (SoOXoi).  Properly,  honi-mroamU.  See  on 
Matt  zx.  26 ;  Mark  ix.  35. 

Thy  son  liveth  (o  viS^  <rou  (^).  The  best  texts,  however, 
read  avrov,  his.  So  Bev.,  that  his  son  limcL  Christ  uses  vlo^, 
son^  instead  of  iraiBlov,  Utile  onSy  expressing  the  worth  of  the 
child  as  representing  the  family.     See  on  i.  12. 

52.  Then  {otni).  Not  a  particle  of  time,  bnt  of  sequence. 
Bev.,  so  he  inquired. 

Began  to  amend  {icoii^^tpaif  hrypi).  A  peculiar  phrase^ 
occurring  only  here  in  the  New  Testament  Lit.,  had  himself 
better.  Ko/jA^epov  is  from  leofiy^,  weUrchressedy  weOroa/rfd- 
for^  elegoM;  and  this  from  KoiAim,  to  take  care  of.  The  idea 
of  the  phrase  is  conveyed  in  the  familiar  English  expression : 
He  is  doing  weU,  or  nicely y  or  bravely.  A  parallel  is  cited  by 
the  commentators  from  Arrian :  ^^  When  the  doctor  comes  in, 
you  must  not  be  afraid  as  to  what  he  will  say ;  nor  if  he  says, 
*  You  are  doing  bravely '  (/cofi^^w^  hc^^h  T^^^t  you  give  way  to 
excessive  joy.^^ 

At  the  seventh  hour  (Spav  i/SSofi/tpi).  The  accusative  ease 
denotes  not  a  point  of  time,  but  duration  :  during  the  seventh 
hour. 

Fever  (wvperis).  From  wvp^f/re.  So  the  Latin^^^im,  which 
is  torferbriSf  fromferveOj  to  glow  with  heat. 

Left  {&^ic€if).    lit,  sent  him  away.    See  on  ver.  8. 

64.  This  is  again  the  second  miracle,  etc.    lit,  ihis  did 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  131 

JesuB  again,  as  a  aeoand  sign.  The  pleonasm  in  agam^  the  seo- 
ondj  is  only  apparent  Other  miracles  had  indeed  been  wrought 
between  these  two ;  but  John  emphasizes  these  two  as  marking 
Jesus'  coming  from  Judsea  to  Gtililee.  The  healing  of  the 
nobleman's  child  was  the  second  miracle,  only  in  respect  of  its 
taking  place  upon  Jesus'  withdrawal  from  Judsea  into  Galilee. 
Hence  the  again.  He  wrought  a  miracle  again,  when  He 
again  came  into  Galilee,  and  this  miracle  was  the  second,  as 
marking  His  second  coming. 


CHAPTER   r. 

1.  A  feast  {iofrrif).  Or  festmdl.  What  festival  is  uncer- 
tain. It  has  been  identified  with  the  Passover,  Pentecost,  and 
the  Feast  of  Tabernacles ;  also  with  the  Day  of  Atonement,  the 
Peast  of  Dedication,  and  the  Feast  of  Purim. 

2.  Sheep-market  (t$  irpo/Sarucff).  The  word  is  an  adjec- 
tive jpertaining  to  sheep,  which  requires  to  be  completed  with 
another  word,  not  with  afyop^,  market,  but  with  irvK'p,  gate.  This 
gate  was  near  the  temple  on  the  east  of  the  city.  See  Keh.  iiu 
1,  32 ;  ziL  39.  Some  editors  join  the  adjective  with  the  fol- 
lowing KoKupfiijSpa,  pool,  making  the  latter  word  KoXvfifiiiSp^ 
(the  dative  case),  and  reading  the  sheep-pool.  Wye,  a  standing 
water  of  leasts. 

Pool  {ieo\ufil3ifBpa).  In  the  New  Testament  only  in  this 
chapter  and  ix.  7, 11.  Properly,  a  pool  for  swimming,  from 
KoXv/jifido^,  to  dim.  In  Eccl.  ii.  6  (Sept.)  it  is  used  of  a  reser- 
voir in  a  garden.  The  Hebrew  word  is  from  the  verb  to  kneel 
doum,  and  means,  therefore,  a  kneeUng-plsLce  for  cattle  or  men 
when  drinking.  In  ecclesiastical  language,  the  laptismal  fontj 
and  the  baptistery  itself. 

Called  {hrCKerfoiAtvrj).  Strictly,  sufmamed,  the  name  having 
perhaps  supplanted  some  earlier  name. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


132  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Bethesda  (Bfi$€<rBh).  Commonly  interpreted  Howe  of 
Mercy;  others  Houee  of  the  Portico.  The  readings  also  vary. 
Tischendorf  and  Westcott  and  Hort  give  BrfS^cM,  Bethzathaj 
Houee  of  ike  Olive.  The  site  cannot  be  identified  with  any 
certainty.  Dr.  Robinson  thinks  it  may  be  the  Fomitain  of  the 
Virgin,  the  upper  fountain  of  Siloam.  See  Thomson's  ^^  Land 
and  Book,''  ^^  Soathem  Palestine  and  Jerusalem/'  pp.  468-461. 

Porches  (<rro^).    Cloisters,  covered  porticoes. 

3.  Great  multitude.    The  best  texts  omit  great 

Impotent  {aa^evovmwv).  Bev.,  sick.  Yet  the  A.  Y.  gives 
the  literal  meaning,  j>d(>^  toithotU  strength.  Wye,  languishr 
ing. 

Withered  {inp^Y    I^t.,  dry.    So  Wye 
The  following  words,  to  the  end  of  ver.  ^  are  omitted  by 
the  best  texts. 

6.  Had  an  infirmity  thirty  and  eight  years.  lit.,  hcmng 
thiaiy  and  eight  years  in  his  infirmity. 

6.  Had  been  now  a  long  time  {nroXbp  ^  xP^vov  ^ei). 
Lit.,  he  hath  already  much  tmte. 

Wilt  thou  {BiKev;).  Not  merely,  do  you  wish,  but  are  you  in 
earnest  t  See  on  Matt.  1.  19.  Jesus  appeals  to  the  energy  of 
his  will.  Kot  improbably  he  had  fallen  into  apathy  through 
his  long  sickness.    Compare  Acts  iii  4 ;  John  viL  17. 

Whole  (vy*^).    Sound. 

7.  Put  09aXi7).  Lit,  cast;  indicating  the  hasty  movement 
required  to  bring  him  to  the  water  before  its  agitation  should 
have  ceased.    See  on  Mark  viL  30 ;  Luke  xvL  20. 

8.  Bed  {tcpdpparov).  Used  by  both  Mark  and  Luke.  See  on 
Mark  ii  4,  and  compare  Acts  v.  16 ;  ix.  33. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPKL  OF  JOHN.  133 

10.  Cured  {reSepwirevfUv^).  See  on  ]\£att  viiL  7;  Lukev. 
15 ;  Acts  xvii.  25. 

To  carry  (^pcu).  Sev.,  more  correctly,  to  take  up.  It  is 
Jesus'  own  word  in  ver.  8. 

11.  He  that  made— the  same  (o  iroUiaa^ — hceum).  The 
demonstratiye  pronoun  points  with  emphasis  to  the  subject  of 
the  preceding  clause.  A  characteristic  usage  of  John.  See  L 
18,  33;  ix.  37 ;  X.  1;  xii.  48,  etc 

12.  Then.    Omit 

What  man  is  he,  etc.  ^*See  the  cunning  of  malice.  They 
do  not  say,  ^  Who  is  he  that  healed  thee? '  but,  ^  Who  bade  thee 
take  up  thy  bed  f ' "    (Qrotius,  in  Trench,  "  Miracles.") 

Take  up  thy  bed.    Omit  led.    lit,  take  up  and  walk. 

13.  He  that  was  healed  (taSek).  Compare  ver.  10,  and 
note  the  different  word  for  healing.    See  references  there. 

Who  it  was  {rk  i<mv).    The  present  tense,  who  it  te* 

Had  conveyed  Himself  away  (^fei^cuo-ey).  The  verb  means, 
literally,  to  turn  the  head  asidej  in  order  to  avoid  something. 
Hence,  generally,  to  retire  or  toUhdrcnv.  Only  here  in  the  New 
Testament 

14.  Findeth — said.  Note  the  lively  interchange  of  the 
tenses,  as  in  yer.  13. 

Sin  no  more  (jivKiri  i/idpTave).  No  longer  continue  to  sin. 
See  on  Matt.  i.  21.  Jesus  thus  shows  His  knowledge  that  the 
sickness  was  the  result  of  sin. 

A  worse  thing.  Than  even  those  thirty-eight  years  of  suf- 
fering. 

Come  unto  thee  {aoi  yhnrrat).  Bev.,  better,  lefaU  thee. 
lit,  came  to  pose. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


134  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  KBW  TESTAMENT. 

15.  Told  {avijyye&Kev).  See  on  iv.  25.  The  best  texts,  how- 
eyer,  read  ehrev,  said. 

16.  Did  the  Jews  persecute.  The  imperfect  tense  {iBio^- 
Kov)  might  be  rendered  hegcm  to  peraecuUj  as  this  is  an  open- 
ing of  hostilities  against  Jesus,  or,  more  probably,  corresponds 
with  the  same  tense  in  hroUt^  he  didy  or  better,  was  vx>nt  to  do. 
Jifitew,  to  jperseciUej  is  originally  to  run  qfter^  to  jmrsue  wUh 
hostile  pwrposSy  and  thence  to  ha/rass. 

And  sought  to  kill  Him.    The  best  texts  omit. 

He  did.  See  above.  GKxlet  observes:  ^'the  imperfect  ma- 
lignantly expresses  tlie  idea  that  the  violation  of  the  Sabbath 
has  become  with  Him  a  sort  of  maxim." 

17.  Worketh.  The  discnssion  tamed  on  work  on  the  Sab- 
bath. The  Father's  work  in  maintaining  and  redeeming  the 
world  has  continued  from  the  creation  until  the  present  mo- 
ment {^apri) :  unJtiil  nowj  not  interrupted  by  the  Sabbath. 

And  I  work  {xarii^  ipyd^^i).  Or,  I  also  work.  The  two 
clauses  are  co-ordinated.  The  relation,  as  Meyer  observes,  is 
not  that  of  imitation^  or  excrniptsj  but  of  equaUty  ofwiU  and 
procedure,  Jesus  does  not  violate  the  divine  ideal  of  the  Sab- 
bath by  His  holy  activity  on  that  day.  ^^  Man's  true  rest  is  not 
a  TQStJrom  human,  earthly  labor,  but  a  rest  for  divine,  heavenly 
labor.  Thus  the  merely  n^ative,  traditional  observance  of  the 
Sabbath  is  placed  in  sharp  contrast  with  the  positive,  final  ful- 
filment of  spiritual  service,  for  which  it  was  a  preparation" 
(Westcott). 

18.  Had  broken  (fkue).  lit,  toas  loosing:  the  imperfect 
tense.  See  on  Se  did,  ver.  16.  Not,  broke  the  Sabbath  in 
any  particular  case,  but  was  annulh'ng  ike  law  and  duty  of  Sab- 
bath observance. 

His  Father  {waripa  JBiov).  Properly,  His  onm  Father.  So 
Rev. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  135 

19.  Verily,  verily.    See  on  i.  51. 

But  what  He  seeth.  Bef erring  to  can  do  nothmgj  not  to 
of  himsdf.  JesuSy  being  one  with  God,  can  do  nothing  apart 
from  Him. 

The  Father  do  ijhv  iraripa  woiovPTa).  Bev.,  rightly,  doing. 
The  participle  brings  out  more  sharply  Uie  ooincidenoe  of  action 
between  the  Father  and  the  Son  :  ^'  the  inner  and  immediate 
intuition  which  the  Son  perpetually  has  of  the  Father's  work" 
(Meyer). 

Likewise  {ofioitosi).  Better,  as  Bev.,  in  like  manner.  Like- 
wise  ia  popularly  understood  as  equivalent  to  also ;  but  the 
word  indicates  identity  of  action  based  upon  identity  of  nature. 

20.  Loveth  (^iXc!).  To  love  is  expressed  by  two  words  in 
the  New  Testament,  ^CKkto  and  arfomixo.  ^A^anrdto  indicates  a 
reasoning,  discriminating  attachment,  founded  in  the  conviction 
that  its  object  is  worthy  of  esteem,  or  entitled  to  it  on  account 
of  benefits  bestowed.  iCKAco  represents  a  warmer,  more  in- 
stinctive sentiment,  more  closely  allied  to  feeling,  and  imply- 
ing more  passion.  Hence  arfanr6ja  is  represented  by  the  Latin 
diligoj  the  fundamental  idea  of  which  is  selection^  the  deliberate 
choice  of  one  out  of  a  number,  on  sufficient  grounds,  as  an  object 
of  regard.  Thus  ^X€a>  emphasizes  the  affectional  element  of 
love,  and  arfomoM  the  intelligent  element.  Socrates,  in  Xeno- 
phon's  "Memorabilia,"  advises  his  friend  Aristarchus  to  allevi- 
ate the  necessities  of  his  dependents  by  furnishing  means  to 
set  them  at  work.  Aristarchus  having  acted  upon  his  advice, 
Xenophon  says  that  the  women  in  his  employ  loved  {iif^tKow) 
him  as  their  protector,  while  he  in  turn  loved  {^dwa)  them 
because  they  were  of  use  to  him  ("  Memorabilia,"  ii.,  7,  §  12). 
Jesus'  sentiment  toward  Martha  and  Mary  is  described  by 
fiydira,  John  xi.  5.  Men  are  bidden  to  love  {hrfairav)  God 
(Matt  xxii.  37 ;  1  Cor.  viii.  3)  ;  never  if>CKuif,  since  love  to  God 
implies  an  intelligent  discernment  of  His  attributes  and  not 
merely  an  affectionate  sentiment.     Both  elements  are  combined^ 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


186  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

in  the  Father's  love  for  the  Son  (Matt.  iii.  17 ;  John  iii.  35  ;  v. 
20).  *A'>/6,irfi  is  used  throughout  the  panegyric  of  love  in  1  Cor. 
xiii,  and  an  examination  of  that  chapter  will  show  how  large  a 
part  the  discriminating  element  plays  in  the  Apostle's  concep- 
tion of  love.  The  noun  atfami  nowhere  appears  in  classical 
writings.  As  Trench  remarks,  it  "  is  a  word  born  within  the 
bosom  of  revealed  religion."  *Epda>,  in  which  the  idea  of  sen- 
sual passion  predominates,  is  nowhere  used  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. Trench  has  some  interesting  remarks  on  its  tendency 
toward  a  higher  set  of  associations  in  the  Platonic  writings 
("  Synonyms,"  p.  42). 

Greater  works  will  He  show  Him.  As  Jesus  does  wha^ 
ever  He  sees  the  Father  do  (ver.  19),  the  showing  of  greater 
works  will  be  the  signal  for  Jesus  to  do  them.  On  worksy  as  a 
characteristic  word  in  John,  see  on  iv.  47. 

Ye  may  marvel.  The  ye  is  emphatic  {vfieh)  and  is  ad- 
dressed to  those  who  questioned  His  authority,  whose  wonder 
would  therefore  be  that  of  astonishment  rather  than  of  admir- 
ing faith,  but  might  lead  to  faith.  Plato  says,  ^  Wonder  is  the 
feeling  of  a  philosopher,  and  philosophy  begins  in  wonder " 
("  Theaetetus,"  155);  and  Clement  of  Alexandria,  cited  by 
Westcott,  ^'He  that  wonders  shall  reign,  and  he  that  reigns 
shall  rest"    Compare  Acts  iv.  13. 

21.  Raiseth — quickeneth.    Physically  and  spiritually. 

The  Son  quickeneth.  Not  raiseth  and  quickeneth.  The 
quickening^  however  {lj»oiroi€ly  inaketk  alive),  includes  the 
raising,  so  that  the  two  clauses  are  coextensive.  In  popular 
conception  the  raising  precedes  the  quickening ;  but,  in  fact, 
the  snaking  alive  is  the  controlling  fact  of  the  raising.  ^Eyelpei, 
raiseth,  means  primarily  awaketh. 

22.  For  the  Father  {ovSk  yi^  6  irariip).  The  A.  V.  misses 
the  climax  in  oi^ ;  not  even  the  Father,  who  might  be  expected 
to  be  judge. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPBL  OF  JOHN.  137 

Hath  committed  {Bi&aicev).  Bev.,  given.  The  habitual 
word  for  the  bestowment  of  the  privileges  and  functions  of  the 
Son.    See  ver.  36 ;  iii.  35 ;  vi.  37,  39 ;  x.  29,  etc 

All  judgment  (r^y  xplaiv  TrSUrav).  lit,  the  judgtrierU 
wholly, 

23.  Which  sent  Him.  A  phrase  peculiar  to  John,  and  used 
only  by  the  Lord,  of  the  Fatiier.  See  iv.  34 ;  vi  38,  39 ;  viL 
16,  28,  33,  eta 

24.  Heareth.    Closely  connected  with  heliefoelh. 

Hath  eternal  life.    See  on  iiL  36. 

Shall  not  come  into  condemnation  (ew  Kplaw  ovk  ifx^aC). 
The  present  tense,  cometh  not  So  Sev.  Not  oondemnaiiony 
but  jtulffment,  as  Eev.  See  on  iii.  17.  Wye.,  oameth  not  into 
doom.  The  present,  oomethj  states  the  general  jprincyole  or 
order. 

From  death  {ix  Savdrov).  Eev.,  correctly,  ottt  of  death, 
pointing  to  the  previous  condition  in  which  he  was.  * 

Life  (t^  ^v).     The  life ;  the  ideal  of  perfect  life. 

25.  The  dead.    Spiritually. 

26.  As — 80  {&inrep — oi^oo?).  The  correspondence  is  that  of 
facty  not  of  degree. 

Hath  he  given  {i^ieev).  Bev.,  more  strictly,  gan)ej  the 
aorist  tense  pointing  back  to  the  eternal  past 

27.  Authority.    See  on  L  12. 

Also.    Omit. 

The  Son  of  man.  Better,  a  son  of  man.  The  article  is 
wanting.   The  authority  is  assigned  to  Him  as  being  very  man. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


138  WORD  STUDIB8  IN  THB  NBW  TESTAMRNT. 

John  osea  the  article  everywhere  with  this  phrase,  except  here 
and  Apoc.  i.  13 ;  xiv.  14.    See  on  Luke  vi.  22. 

28.  The  graves  (roi?  iiwifielov;).  Rev.,  better ;  tamhs.  Two 
words  are  used  in  the  New  Testament  for  the  place  of  burial, 
rdifx)^,  and  fivtjfietov  or  fonj/jta.  The  former  emphasizes  the 
idea  of  burial  {Sdwrm^  to  hwry) ;  the  latter  of  preserving  the 
memory  of  the  dead ;  from  fkifipi^aicm,  to  remind. 

29.  Have  done  good— have  done  evil.  Note  again  the 
use  of  the  different  verbs  for  doing  with  good  and  evil.  See 
on  iiL  21.    On  the  word  for  evil  (^t)Xa),  see  on  iii.  20. 

Resurrection  of  life  {cofdarcurip  ^mjsi).  The  phrase  occurs 
only  here  in  the  New  Testament :  so  resurrection  of  judgmenit 
{ivdcrrao'ip  xpUrem). 

30.  Of  the  Father.    Omit    Hev.,  of  Sim  that  sent. 

31.  If  I  {iiv  iyi>).    The  /expressed  for  emphasis:  I  alone. 

True  {iXrfSii^).    As  distinguished  trom  false.    See  on  L  9. 

33.  Ye  sent.  Bev.,  rightly,  have  sent.  The  perfect  tense, 
with  allusion  to  something  abiding  in  its  results.  Similarly, 
hare  toilness  should  be  hath  borne.  Note  the  expressed  ye 
(u/iei?),  emphatically  marking  the  contrast  between  the  human 
testimony  which  the  Jews  demanded,  and  the  divine  testimony 
on  which  Jesus  relies  (ver.  34). 

84.  But  I  {iyci>  Si).    Emphatic,  in  contrast  with  ye  (ver.  33). 

Receive  (KofjLfidtw).    See  on  iii.  82. 

Testimony  {rifv  luaprrvplav).  Bev.,  properly  the  witness. 
The  restoration  of  the  article  is  important.  It  has  the  force  of 
myj  marking  the  witness  as  characteristic  of  Christ's  work. 
The  only  testimony  which  I  accept  as  proof. 

From  man.    Or  from  a  man^  with  a  primary  reference  to 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  139 

the  Baptist    Rev.  renders,  the  vntness  which  I  receive  is  not 
from  man* 

These  things.    With  reference  to  the  Baptist. 

Ye  may  be  saved.  The  ye  {vfJLek\  marking  them  as  those 
who  might  be  influenced  by  the  inferior,  human  testimony, 
though  they  did  not  apprehend  the  divine  testimony. 

35.  A  burning  and  shining  light  (o  \6xyo^  6  Muofievo^  /cal 
ifxilvwv).  Bev.,  correctly,  the  lamp  that  humeth  and  ehvneth. 
Avyvo^,  lamj[>j  as  contrasted  with  the  light  (^£9).  See  L  5,  7, 
8,  9 ;  and  compare  viiL  12 ;  ix.  5 ;  xii.  46.  Wye,  lantern. 
The  Baptist  did  not,  like  Jesus,  shine  by  his  own  light.  The 
definite  article  with  lamp^  points  to  it  as  a  familiar  household 
object  Buminff  hints  at  the  fact  that  the  lamp  gives  but  a 
transitory  light    In  burning  the  oil  is  consumed. 

Ye  were  willing.    Again  the  emphatic  vfiek,  ye. 

To  rejoice  {ofydKKiaaSfjvai).  The  word  signifies  eamUafit, 
Uvdyjoj.  See  Matt  v.  12;  Luke  L  47;  x.  21;  1  Pet  i.  6. 
The  interest  in  the  Baptist  was  a  frivolous,  superficial,  and 
short-lived  excitement.  Bengel  says,  ^^  they  wore  attracted  by 
his  hrightneeSy  not  by  his  warmJthP 

36.  Greater  witness  {j^v  luipTvplav  fi^Oju)*  The  article, 
omitted  in  A.  Y.,  has  the  force  of  my^  as  in  ver.  34.  Bev.,  the 
ttntnees  which  Iha/oe  is  greater. 

Hath  given.    See  on  ver.  22. 

To  finish  (&»  rcXcic&m)).  lit,  in  order  thai  I  should  ac- 
complish.   Bev.,  accomplish.    See  on  iv.  34. 

The  same  works  {airrh  rk  ipya).  Bev.,  more  correctly,  the 
very  works. 

37.  Himself  (avr^).  The  best  texts  substitute  i/esufo^j  he; 
reading,  ^  the  Father  which  sent  me,  Ee  hath  borne  witness." 
So  Bev. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


140  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Voice— shape.  Not  referring  to  the  descent  of  the  dove 
and  the  voice  from  heaven  at  Jesus'  baptism,  but  generally  and 
figuratively  to  Gkxl's  witness  in  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures. 
This  is  in  harmony  with  the  succeeding  reference  to  the  word. 

38.  His  word.  Emphatic,  commencing  the  sentence.  Com- 
pare xviL  6  sqq. ;  1  John  i.  10 ;  ii.  14. 

39.  Search  {ipeware).  Sev.,  rightly,  ye  search.  Jesus  is 
appealing  to  a  familiar  practice  of  which  for  in  them  ye  think 
is  explanatory.  See  1  Fet  i  11 ;  Bom.  viii.  27 ;  1  Cor.  ii  10 ; 
Apoc.  ii  23. 

The  scriptures  (r^  ^pa^).  Lit,  the  wrUinge;  possibly 
with  a  hint  at  the  contrast  with  the  word  (ver.  38). 

They  {hcumC).    Those  very  scriptures. 

40.  And.  More  than  a  simple  copula.  Bather  cmd  yeL 
See  on  Luke  xviii  7: 

Ye  will  not  (ou  ^iXere).  Indicating  stubborn  determination. 
See  on  Matt.  i.  19. 

41.  I  receive  not  honor  from  men.  The  Greek  order  is: 
glory  from  men  Ireoevoe  not  Compare  ver.  34.  His  glory 
consists  in  his  loving  fellowship  with  God.  Men  who  do  not 
love  God  are  not  in  sympathy  with  Him. 

42.  I  know  {Syvmtca).     See  on  ii.  24. 

The  love  of  God.  Love  toward  God.  This  was  the  sum- 
mary of  their  own  law.  The  phrase  occurs  elsewhere  in  the 
Gospels  only  in  Luke  xi.  42. 

In  you  {h  iavToU).  Bev.,  rightly,  in  youreelvee.  Compare 
vi.  53 ;  1  John  v.  10 ;  Mark  iv.  17. 

44.  Ye  believe.  Again  the  emphatic  ye,  the  reason  for  the 
emphasis  being  given  in  the  succeeding  clause. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


606FBL  OF  JOHlf.  141 

Which  receive  (^fifidiHnrre^).  Lit,  receiving  (as  ye  do): 
seeing  that  ye  receive. 

Seek  net  the  hcncr  that  cometh  from  God  only  {teal  rifv 
So^op  Tfiv  tropin  rov  ijl6vov  Oeov  ov  {fi/rcirc).  The  Bev.  gives  it 
capitally,  following  the  Greek  order :  and  the  glory  that  cometh 
from  the  only  God  ye  seek  not.  Not  God  only^  which  entirely 
overlooks  the  force  of  the  definite  article ;  bnt  the  only  God. 
Compare  1  Tim.  vi.  15, 16 ;  John  xviL  3 ;  Bom.  xvi.  27. 

45.  I  will  accuse  {fcarfjyopij(r(o).  From  xard,  againstj  and 
&yopewDf  to  speak  in  the  assembly  (arfopd).  Hence,  properly,  to 
iring  an  accusation  in  court.  John  uses  no  other  verb  for 
accuse^  and  this  only  here,  viii.  6,  and  Apoc.  xii.  10.  Once  in 
the  New  Testament  hiafidXKM  occurs  (Lake  zvL  1,  on  which 
see  note),  signifying  malicioiis  accusation,  and  secrety  as  distin- 
guished from  jfmbliCf  accusation  {Karryyopla).  Alridofjuu  occurs 
once  in  the  compound  Trpofrruurdfu^  we  before  laid  to  the 
charge  (Rom.  iii.  9).  This  has  reference  especially  to  the  ground 
of  accusation  {alrid).  ^Ey/caXita  occurs  only  in  Acts,  with  the 
exception  of  Bom.  viiL  33.  It  means  to  accuse  jndUdy,  but 
not  necessarily  before  a  tribunal.  See  Acts  xxiii.  28,  29; 
xxvL  2,  7. 

In  whom  ye  trust  {ek  hv  v^h  ^trUare).  A  strong  expres- 
sion. Lit.,  into  whom  ye  hwve  hoped.  Bev.,  admirably,  on 
whom  ye  home  set  your  hope. 

47.  Writings  {^pdfAiJLoaw).  It  is  important  to  understand 
the  precise  sense  of  this  word,  because  it  goes  to  determine 
whether  Jesus  intended  an  antithesis  between  Moses'  writings 
and  His  own  wordsy  or  simply  between  Moses  {i/cslvov)  and 
Himself  (ifioK). 

TpdiufjM  primarily  means  what  is  written.  Hence  it  may  de- 
scribe either  a  single  character  or  a  documenL  From  this 
general  notion  several  forms  develop  themselves  in  the  New 
Testament  The  word  occurs  in  its  narrower  sense  of  cha/raO' 
tersy  at  Luke  xxiii.  38;  2  Cor.  iii.  7;  Gal.  vi.  11.  In  Acts 
xxviii.  21,  it  means  official  communications.    Paul,  with  a  sin- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


142  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

gle  exception  (2  Cor.  iii.  7),  nses  it  of  the  letter  of  Bcriptnre  as 
contrasted  with  its  spirit  (Rom.  ii.  27,  29 ;  viL  6 ;  2  Cor.  iii  6). 
In  Luke  xvi.  6,  7,  it  denotes  a  debtar^s  hand  (A.  V.,  biU).  In 
John  vii.  15,  Acts  xxvL  24,  it  is  nsed  in  the  plural  as  a  general 
term  for  ecripCural  and  BaJbbimoal  learning.  Compare  Sept 
Isa.  xxix.  11, 12,  where  a  learned  man  is  described  as  hrurrdr 
fA€va^  ypdfjLfLara,  acquainted  with  letters.  Once  it  is  used  col- 
lectively of  the  sacred  wrUvnge — the  scrijptttree  (2  Tim.  iii.  15), 
though  some  give  it  a  wider  reference  to  Babbinical  exegesis, 
as  well  as  to  scripture  itself.  Among  the  Alexandrian  Greeks 
the  term  is  not  confined  to  elementary  instruction,  but  includes 
expoeitiony  based,  however,  on  critical  study  of  the  text  The 
tendency  of  such  exegesis  was  often  toward  mystical  and  alle- 
gorical interpretation,  degenerating  into  a  petty  ingenuity  in 
fixing  new  and  recondite  meanings  upon  the  old  and  familiar 
forms.  This  was  illustrated  by  the  Neo-Platonists'  expositions 
of  Homer,  and  by  the  Babbinical  exegesis.  Men  unaqquainted 
with  such  studies,  especially  if  they  appeared  as  public  teach- 
ers, would  be  regarded  as  ignorant  by  the  Jews  of  the  times  of 
Christ  and  the  Apostles.  Hence  the  question  respecting  our 
Lord  Himself :  How  knoweth  this  man  letters  {ypdfXfiaTa,  John 
vii.  15)  t  Also  the  comment  upon  Peter  and  John  (Acts  iv. 
13)  that  they  were  unlearned  (arfpa/ifuiToi),  Thus,  too,  those 
who  discovered  in  the  Old  Testament  scriptures  references  to 
Christ,  would  be  stigmatized  by  Pagans,  as  following  the  in- 
genious and  fanciful  method  of  the  Jewish  interpreters,  which 
they  held  in  contempt  Some  such  feeling  may  have  provoked 
the  words  of  Festus  to  Paul :  Much  learrnng  (iroXKd  ypdfi^ra) 
doth  make  thee  mad  (Acts  xxvi.  24).  It  is  well  known  with 
what  minute  care  the  literal  transcription  of  the  sacred  writ- 
ings was  guarded.  The  Scribes  (ypofifiaTek)  were  charged  with 
producing  copies  according  to  the  letter  {icath  ro  yp&p.pd). 

The  one  passage  in  second  Timothy  cannot  be  urged  in  favor 
of  the  general  use  of  the  term  for  the  scrypturesy  especially  since 
the  best  texts  reject  the  article  before  Uph  ypdfi/juiTCh  so  that 
the  meaning  is  apparently  more  general :  "  thou  hast  known 
sacred  writings.^  The  familiar  formula  for  the  scriptures  was 
at  ypa^  &f((u.    A  single  book  of  the  collection  of  writings 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  143 

was  known  as  fiifiKlov  (Luke  iv.  17),  or  fiifikcyi  (Luke  xx.  42) ; 
never  ^pa^^  which  was  the  term  for  a  particular  ^jto^so^^  See 
on  Mark  xii.  10.^ 

It  seems  to  me,  therefore,  that  the  antithesis  between  the 
writings  of  Moses,  snperstitiouslj  reverenced  in  the  letter,  and 
minutely  and  critically  searched  and  expounded  by  the  Jews, 
and  the  living  words  (^fuiaw,  see  on  Luke  i.  37),  is  to  be  rec- 
ognized. This,  however,  need  not  exclude  the  other  antith- 
esis between  Moses  and  Jesits  personally. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

1-14.    Compare  Matt  xiv.  13-21;  Mark  vi.  30-44;  Luke 
ix.  10-17. 

1.  The  sea.    See  on  Matt  iv.  18. 

2.  Multitude  (^Xo9).    See  on  L  19. 

Followed  {fiKoKov^C).  Imperfect  tense,  denoting  not  merely 
the  following  on  this  occasion,  but  generally. 

Saw  {i&fHov).    Sev.y  leheld.    See  on  i.  18. 

His  miracles.    Omit  his.    Bender,  as  Eev.,  the  signs. 

He  did  {hroUC).    Imperfect,  was  doing j  from  time  to  time. 

8.  A  mountain  (ri  6po^).  Strictly,  the  mountaui.  The 
writer  speaks  as  one  familiar  with  the  district 

He  sat  {i/cdSfiTo).  Imperfect:  was  sitting,  when  he  saw  the 
multitude  approaching  (yer.  6). 

*  Bishop  Lightfoot  (Ck)mmentar7  on  Galatians  iii  22)  urges  with  muoh 
force  that  this  is  invariabty  its  meaning.  The  passages  oited  in  opposition  to 
this  view  bj  Professor  Thajer  (Lexicon  of  the  New  Testament),  John  yii  88 ; 
X  85;  Rom.  ir.  8 ;  6aL  iii.  22  ;  ir.  80 ;  Jas.  ii.  8  ;  1  Pet  ii.  6 ;  2  Pet.  i.  20, 
do  not  appear  to  me  to  be  oonolnsire  ;  on  the  contrary,  seyeral  of  them  seem 
to  make  rather  for  Bishop  LightfooVs  yiew. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


144  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

4.  A  feast  {^  iopri^).  With  the  definite  article,  the  feast; 
pointing  to  something  well  known. 

5.  Come  (ifyxi^at).  Better,  is  coming.  Unto  Him  (vpisi)  is 
rather  toward. 

Bread  {aprov^).    Properly,  loaves.    See  on  Matt.  iv.  1. 

6.  To  prove  {Treipd^).  lAtjjproving.  See  on  Matt.  vL  13. 
Wye,  tempting. 

7.  Pennyworth  (SffvapCtov).  See  on  Matt.  xx.  2.  Two  hun- 
dred pennyworth  would  represent  between  thirty  and  thirty- 
five  dollars. 

That  every  one  may  take  a  little.    Peculiar  to  John. 

9.  A  lad  (ira^Bdpiov).  Diminutive.  Only  here  in  the  New 
Testament.^    Only  John  mentions  the  lad. 

Barley  {KpiBlvov^).  A  detail  peculiar  to  John.  The  word 
occurs  in  the  New  Testament  only  here  and  ver.  13.  An  in- 
ferior sort  of  bread  is  indicated  by  the  term.  Pliny  and  some 
of  the  Jewish  writers  describe  barley  as  food  fit  for  beasts. 
Suetonius  speaks  of  a  turgid  rhetorician  as  a  barley  oratoTj  in- 
flated like  barley  in  moisture :  and  Livy  relates  how  cohorts 
which  had  lost  their  standards  were  ordered  barley  for  food. 

Fishes  (oy^dpui).  The  word  occurs  only  here  and  at  xxi.  9. 
The  Synoptists  use  Ix^vi^.  The  A.  Y.,  smKiUJisheSy  is  intended 
to  render  the  diminutive.t  The  word  means  anything  that  is 
eaten  with  bread,  and  may  apply  to  meat  generally,  or  to  what 
is  eaten  with  bread  as  a  relish.  Homer  speaks  of  an  onion  as  a 
relish  (Sy^v)  for  drink  ("Iliad,"  xi.,  630).  The  term  was  applied 

*  The  correct  reading  in  Matt  xL  16  is  wmSlois, 

f  Bdersheim  (*'  Life  of  Jeans  ")  says  that  the  Talmnd  names  certain  kinds  of 
fish,  speciallj  designated  as  mnaUfiihe$^  which  might  be  eaten  without  cook- 
ing: that  small  fishes  were  recommended  for  health,  and  that  the  lake  of 
Galilee  was  partioularl  j  rich  in  these,  the  salting  and  pickling  of  which  was 
a  special  industry  among  the  fishermen. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  146 

to  fisher  excellence.  Fish  became  among  the  Greeks  a  chief 
dainty  to  gonrmands,  so  that  Demosthenes  describes  a  glntton 
and  spendthrift  as  one  who  is  extravagant  in  fish. 

But  what  are  they  among  so  many  9  Peculiar  to  John, 
though  the  idea  is  implied  in  Luke  ix.  13. 

10.  Sit  down  {avanreceiv).    Lit,  recline. 

Grass  (x^prosi).  Originally  an  enclosure.  Thus  Homer 
speaks  of  Peleus  ofiFering  a  sacrifice,  avKr}^  h  xiprtp,  in  the  enr 
do9v/re  of  the  court  ("Iliad,''  xi.,  774).  Hence  a  feeding-jplace^ 
and  so  grasSy  provender.  The  sense  is  merely  that  of  our  ab- 
stract pasture.  Matthew  and  Mark  mention  the  grass,  Mark 
with  the  epithet  green.    Wye,  hay. 

11.  Given  thanks.  All  the  Synoptists  relate  his  looking  up 
to  heaven  and  blessing.  Perhaps  he  used  the  familiar  formula, 
"  Blessed  art  thou  Jehovah  our  Gkxl,  King  of  the  world,  who 
causes  to  come  forth  bread  from  the  earth." 

To  the  disciples,  and  the  disciples.  The  best  texts  omit. 
Bender,  as  Bev.,  Se  distributed  to  them  that  were  set  down. 

Likewise  of  the  fishes.    So  also  Mark. 

As  much  as  they  would.    Peculiar  to  John. 

12.  Fragments  {teXdaftara).  From  tekdo^.  to  break.  Bey., 
brokenpieces. 

That  remain  {'jrepuraewrcarra).  Bev.,  remain  over.  Lit, 
exceed  the  necessary  supply.  Only  John  gives  the  Lord's  com- 
mand to  collect  the  fragments,  and  the  reason  for  it,  that 
nothing  be  lost. 

13.  Baskets  {kwIUvow).    See  on  Matt.  xiv.  20.  Wye.,  coffins. 

With  the  fragments,  etc.    John  goes  into  fuller  detail  than 
the  Synoptists.    Mark  alone  notes  the  gathering  of  the  remains 
Vol.  IL— 10 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


146  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

of  the  fishes.    John  also  nses  irfifAuravyfUedj  for  tbej  took  up, 
or  were  taken  up^  of  the  Sjnoptists. 

Five  barley  loaves.  A  detail  peculiar  to  John,  emphasizing 
the  identity  of  the  fragments  with  the  original  loaves. 

Unto  them  that  had  eaten  {fi€l3pcMc6aiv),  Only  here  in 
the  Kew  Testament 

14.  That  should  come  (o  ipx^iAeiw;).  Dt,  the  one  coming. 
Bev.y  that  eometh. 

Vv.  16-21.    Compare  Matt  xiv.  22-36;  Mark  vL  45-52. 

15.  Would  come  (jASKKovaw  ifyxecBeu).  lit,  are  about  to 
come. 

Take  by  force  (apwd^tv).    See  on  Matt.  xL  12. 

A  king.    Better,  as  Bev.,  Hng;  over  themselves. 

Himself  alone  {aM^:  fiSvosi).  Matthew  has  tcai^  IBlav, pri- 
vatefyj  and  both  Matthew  and  Mark  add,  to  pray. 

16.  Even  (o^^).  An  adjective;  Sy^w^,  late^  with  &pa,  honry 
understood. 

17.  Ship  (TrKotov).  Bev.,  boat  See  on  Lnke  v.  2.  The 
best  texts  omit  the  article. 

Went  i^pxovTo).    The  imperfect,  were  going.    So  Bev. 

Capernaum.    Mark  has  BethsoAda. 

It  was  now  dark  {ateorla  ijSrf  iyeySvei).  Lit,  darkness  had 
alreadg  come  on.    On  darkneaSy  see  on  i.  5. 

18.  Arose  {BirjyeipeTo).  It  is  lamentable  how  the  A.  Y. 
misses  the  graphic  force  of  these  imperfects.  Bev.,  rightlj, 
was  rising.  Lit,  toas  being  awakened.  The  imperfects  convey 
the  sense  of  gathering  danger,  and  throw  into  stronger  relief  the 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  147 

fact  of  Jeans'  appearance.    They  were  going  ;  the  darkness  had 
already  fallen,  the  sea  was  rising^  and  Jesns  had  not  jet  come. 

That  blew  (Tn/^oin-ov).  Lit.,  hlowing.  That  woe  Uowing 
wonld  be  better.  John's  narrative  at  this  point  is  more  detailed 
and  graphic  than  the  others. 

19.  Had  rowed  {iKriKoucAr^si).  lit,  had  drvoen  or  propelled 
(the  boat). 

Five  and  twenty,  etc.  The  lake  being  abont  forty  fur- 
longs, six  miles,  at  its  broadest,  they  had  gone  only  a  little 
more  than  half-way. 

They  see  (Bempova).  Bev.,  hehold;  with  an  intent  gaze. 
See  on  i.  18.    Both  Luke  and  John  nse  this  word  frequently. 

Drawing  nigh.  Lit.,  heooming  nigh.  Wye.,  to  he  made  next 
to  the  hoot.  Mark  adds,  Se  would  ha/ve  passed  ly  them^  and 
Luke  that  they  thought  Him  a  phantom. 

21.  They  willingly  received  {IjSeKov  Xafietv).  Wrong. 
Rev.,  correctly,  they  were  willing  to  receim;  after  being  re- 
assured by  His  voice.  The  imperfect  denotes  a  continuous 
state  of  feeling,  not  a  mere  impulsive  and  temporary  wish. 

Immediately  (eu9^a>9).  Whether  Jesus  actually  entered  the 
boat  or  not,  John  does  not  say.  The  more  natural  inference  is 
that  he  did.  Both  Matthew  and  Mark  say  so.  Their  immedi- 
ate and  miraculous  arrival  at  the  shore  was  simultaneous  either 
with  their  entertaining  the  wish  to  receive  Him,  or  with  His 
actually  coming  on  board.  Only  John  mentions  this  incident. 
Matthew  and  Mark  say  that  the  wind  ceased 

They  went  (vwiffov).  Imperfect:  were  going.  Lit.,  toere 
going  away.  The  verb  has  the  sense  of  retiring  from  some- 
thing. Compare  ver.  67 ;  vii.  38,  on  which  see  note ;  xii.  11 ; 
zviii.  8. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


148  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT/ 

22.  Which  stood  (o  iartiKm).  Having  remained  during 
the  night  near  the  scene  of  the  miracle,  and  being  there  still. 

Boat  (wKoidpiov).    Diminutive :'  liUle  boat. 

That— where! nto  His  disciples  were  entered.  Omit, 
and  read  as  Bev.,  sa/ve  one. 

23.  Howbeit  there  came  other  boats  (oXXa  Si  ^XScy 
irXoiApia).  Some  editors  omit  Sk,  howb&Uj  change  SXXa,  others 
into  aXA4»  hiU^  and  read,  htU  there  came  boats. 

26.  The  miracles  (trrffji^ia).  Both  the  insertion  of  the  defi- 
nite article  and  the  translation  miracles  in  the  A.  Y.  tend  to 
obscure  the  true  sense  of  the  passage.  Jesus  says :  You  do  not 
seek  me  because  you  saw  aiffns.  What  you  saw  in  my  works 
was  only  marvels.  You  did  not  see  in  them  tokens  of  my 
divine  power  and  mission. 

Were  filled  (ixofyrdaSfire).  See  on  Matt.  y.  6;  Luke  zv. 
16. 

27.  Meat  (fipSHrhv).  See  on  iv.  32.  In  Matt  vi  19, 20,  and 
there  only,  it  is  used  in  the  sense  of  rustj  that  which  eats  or 
corrodes.     Similarly,  corrode  is  from  rodOy  to  gnaw. 

Him  hath  God  the  Father  sealed.  The  Eev.  makes  the 
sentence  culminate  properly  in  God:  "for  Him  the  Father, 
even  Ood^  hath  sealed."  According  to  the  strict  Greek  order  it 
is :  for  Sim  the  Father  sealed,  even  God.  On  sealed  {ia'<l>p6ry^ 
aep)  see  on  iii.  33.    Wye,  betokened  Sim. 

28.  What  shall  we  do  ?  (rl iroiovfjLai).  Lit.,  what  do  we  do  f 
The  best  texts  read  wol&fiev^  what  are  we  to  do  f 

Works.  The  question  is  from  the  legal  stand-point,  works 
being  regarded  as  the  condition  of  obtaining  the  living  bread. 

2d.  Believe.  Faith  is  put  as  a  moral  act  or  work.  The 
work  of  God  is  to  believe.    Faith  includes  all  the  works  which 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  149 

God  requires.  The  Jews'  question  contemplates  numerous 
works.  Jesus'  answer  directs  them  to  one  work.  Canon  West- 
cott  justly  observes  that  ^^this  simple  formula  contains  the 
complete  solution  of  the  relation  of  faith  and  works." 

30.  Therefore*    Since  He  had  claimed  to  be  the  One  sent . 
of  God. 

31.  Manna.  Properly,  the  manna,  referring  to  the  familiar 
historic  fact.  A  passage  is  cited  from  a  Hebrew  commentary 
on  Ecclesiastes,  as  follows :  ^^  As  the  first  Bedeemer  made  the 
manna  to  descend,  as  it  is  written,  ^  Behold  I  will  rain  bread 
from  heaven  f 6r  yon ' ;  so  the  later  Bedeemer  also  shall  make 
the  manna  to  descend,  as  it  is  written,  ^  May  there  be  abun- 
dance of  com  in  the  earth.' " 

32.  Moses  gave  you  not  (ov  Mour^  Hhc^iceif  vfuv).  The 
antithesis  is  between  Mo9ea  and  my  Father.  So  Bev.,  rightly, 
"it  was  not  Mosee  that  gave  you,"  etc. — "but  my  Father 
giveth,"  etc  Some  editors  change  the  perfect  tense,  hiiiOKev^ 
hath  gi/oen^  to  the  aorist,  eSc^tcev,  ga/oe. 

The  true  bread  from  heaven  {jov  dprov  i/e  rov  ovpopoO  rhv 
aKff$ip6v).  The  translation  would  gain  by  following  the  Greek 
order,  "  the  bread  out  of  heaven,  the  real  hread.^^ 

83.  He  which  cometh  down  (o  icarafialvwv).  So  it  may 
be  rendered;  but  also  that  whichy  referring  to  apro^;,  hread: 
and  so,  better,  as  Bev.,  since  Jesus  does  not  identify  Himself 
with  the  bread  until  ver.  35. 

35.  I  am  the  bread  of  life.  A  form  of  expression  peculiar 
to  John.  See  vv.  41,  48,  51 ;  viiL  12 ;  x.  7,  9, 11, 14;  xi  25 ; 
xiv.  6 ;  XV.  1,  5. 

Cometh — believeth.  Faith  in  its  actwe  aspect  and  in  its 
r««^^  aspect 

Never  (ov  /i^).  Bather,  in  notcise^  or  by  no  means.  Bev., 
shall  not 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


150  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

36.  But.  Though  yon  have  seen  as  yon  asked,  I  repeat 
what  I  said  to  you  that  yoa  have  seen  and  do  not  believe. 

87.  All  that  {'ir&if  ft).  The  neuter  singular  of  the  adjective 
and  pronoun.  All  believers  are  regarded  as  one  complete 
whole.  Compare  xviL  24,  according  to  the  correct  reading, 
*^thcU  which  Thou  hast  given  me." 

Shall  come  {fl^ei).  Emphasizing  the  idea  of  reaching  or 
€trrvvinff, 

Cometh  (ipxofJi^vov).  A  different  verb,  emphasizing  the  j>ro- 
oes8  of  coming. 

38.  From  heaven  {i/c  rov  ovpavov).  But  the  best  texts  read 
anrb.fTomy  instead  of  im^  out  ofj  the  idea  being  rather  that  of 
departv/re  {I  came  down)  than  of  origin,  I  came  down  should 
be  as  Eev.  (/  am  cams  down).    The  tense  is  the  perfect. 

89.  The  Father's  will.  Omit  the  Father' 8.  Bender,  the 
wiUof  Himj  etc. 

That  of  all  which  He  hath  given  me  {Xva  iray  ft  Uhfoiei 
fici).  The  construction  is  a  peculiar  and  broken  one.  All 
which  He  hath  gvven^  stands  alone  as  an  absolute  nominative ; 
a  very  emphatic  and  impressive  mode  of  statement.  Literally 
it  reads,  that  aJl  which  He  hath  given  me  I  should  lose  nothing 
oiUqfit, 

At  the  last  day  (&  rg  iirxdrg  ^fUpa).  The  phrase  occurs 
only  in  John. 

40.  And  this  (Si),  The  best  texts  read  yhp./or.  There  is  a 
logical  connection  between  the  last  sentence  and  the  following. 
The  Father's  will  in  preserving  and  raising  up  that  which  he  has 
given  to  the  Son,  includes  in  its  fulfilment  the  believing  con- 
templation of  the  Son  and  its  issue  in  eternal  life. 

Of  Him  that  sent  me.  The  best  texts  substitute  irarpo9 
fLov,  of  my  Father. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHK.  161 

Seeth  (Ihmp&v).  The  word  is  designedly  used.  The  sav- 
ing vision  of  Christ  is  not  mere  seeingj  but  earnest  oantemjich 
tion.  Bev.,  heholdeih.  See  on  i  18.  Compare  ye  have  seen 
me,  and  believe  not  (ver.  36). 

41.  Then  (o&/).  Eev.,  rightly,  therefore:  because  of  His 
words. 

Murmured  (iyyiyv^ov).  See  on  Jade  16,  and  compare  1 
Cor.  X.  10 ;  Philip,  ii.  14.  The  word  is  constantly  used  in  the 
Septnagint  of  the  murmuring  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness.  Wye, 
grudged  of  Him.  So  Chaucer,  "Judas  gruoched  agens  the 
Maudeleyn  whan  sche  anoynted  the  hed  of  oure  Lord  "  ("  Par- 
son's Tale  ") ;  and  Shakespeare, 

"Served 
Withoat  or  gradge  or  grmnbling.** 

"Tempest,"!,  2,  240. 

At  Him  {irepl  avrov).  Implying  that  they  addressed  their 
remonstrances  to  Him.  But  irepl  means  aboiU  or  ooneeming. 
So  Rev.,  properly,  concerning. 

42.  We  know.  Not  implying  necessarily  that  Joseph  was 
still  alive,  but  merely  the  fact  that  Joseph  was  recognized  as 
the  father  of  Jesus. 

44.  Draw  (eXxwrrf).  Two  words  for  draioing  are  found  in 
tlie  New  Testament,  cvpw  and  eTucvm.  The  distinction  is  not 
habitually  observed,  and  the  meanings  often  overlap.  Svpm  is 
originally  to  drag  or  trail  along,  as  a  garment  or  torn  slippers. 
Both  words  are  used  of  haling  to  justice.  (See  Acts  viii  3 ; 
xvii.  6 ;  xvi.  19.)  In  Acts  xiv.  19,  otJ/mo,  of  dragging  Paul's 
senseless  body  out  of  the  city  at  Lystra.  In  John  xxi.  6,  8, 11, 
both  words  of  drawing  the  net.  In  John  xviiL  10,  iXjciimy  of 
drawing  Peter's  sword.  One  distinction,  however,  is  observed : 
avpw  is  never  used  of  Christ's  attraction  of  men.  See  vL  44 ; 
xii.  32.  *E\jcw  occurs  only  once  outside  of  John's  writings 
(Acts  xvi.  19).  Luther  says  on  this  passage :  "  The  drawing  is 
not  like  that  of  the  executioner,  who  draws  the  thief  up  the 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


152  WORD  STUDIBS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

ladder  to  the  gallows ;  but  it  is  a  gracious  allarement,  such  as 
that  of  the  man  whom  everybody  loves,  and  to  whom  every- 
body willingly  goes." 

45.  Taught  of  God  {StScuerol  rov  OeoS).  The  idea  is 
thrown  into  a  componnd  adjective,  SeoSiSoKTOi,  in  1  Thess.  iv.  9. 

46.  Hath  seen.  As  contrasted  with  hearing  and  learning, 
(ver.  45).  The  Father  is  not  seen  immediately,  but  throngh 
the  Son.    Compare  L  18 ;  adv.  9 ;  1  John  iii  2 ;  Matt  xL  27. 

Of  God  (Tropi  rov  Oeov).  More  correctly,  as  Rev.,  from, 
with  an  idea  of  association  with :  from  with  God.  Hapd  is 
nsed  of  procession  from  Sk  personal  object,  indicating  it  gen- 
eraUy  as  the  starting-point. 

49.  Are  dead  {am-H^avov).  The  aorist  points,  not  to  their 
present  condition  but  to  the  historical  fact ;  they  died.    So  Bev. 

61.  The  living  bread  (o  apro^  6  i&v).  Lit,  the  hread  the 
Uvtng  {bread).    Wye,  quick  bread. 

I  will  give.  The  iyii>,  I^  is  emphatic,  in  contrast  with  Moses 
(ver.  32). 

Flesh.    See  on  i.  14. 

Which  I  will  give.  The  best  texts  omit  Bead,  as  Bev., 
my  flesh  for  the  life  of  the  world. 

52.  Strove  {ifuixovro).  The  murmiirinff  (ver.  41)  now 
breaks  out  into  open  contention  among  the  Jews  themselves. 

58.  Eat  the  flesh.  Appropriate  the  life.  Compare  Gal.  ii. 
20;  Eph.iii.l7. 

Drink  His  blood.  Appropriate  the  saving  merit  of  His 
death.  The  passover  was  approaching,  and  the  reference  may 
well  have  been  to  the  flesh  and  blood  of  the  paschal  lamb. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  153 

Have  no  life  in  you  {oxfK  exere  foo^y  h  kavroU).  Not  accord- 
ing to  the  Greek.  Bightlj,  as  flev.,  ye  home  not  life  in  your- 
9eioe%.    All  true  life  most  be  in  Christ.    Compare  Col.  iii.  3. 

64.  Eateth  {rpfi^v).  Another  verb  for  eating  is  used. 
With  the  exception  of  Matt.  xxiv.  38,  it  is  found  only  in  John, 
and  always  in  connection  with  Christ  No  special  significance 
can  be  fairly  attached  to  its  use  here.  It  seems  to  be  taken  as 
a  current  word,  and  i^<v>fov  is  resumed  in  ver.  58. 

55.  Indeed  {akn^w).  Lit,  truly.  The  best  texts  read 
ikkq^il^,  true:  true  meaty  true  drink, 

56.  Dwelleth  (jiipei).  Kender,  as  Rev.,  oMdeth.  The  word  is 
a  favorite  one  with  John,  occurring  more  frequently  than  in  all 
the  rest  of  the  New  Testament 

57.  The  living  Father  (o  ^&p  irariip).  A  phrase  found  no- 
where else  in  the  New  Testament.    On  Ivoing  and  live^  see  i  4. 

By  the  Father  (S^  rhv  'n-aripa).  Wrong.  Eender,  because 
ofy  as  Eev.  Because  the  Father  is  the  living  One.  So,  because 
of  me,  instead  of  by  me. 

59.  In  the  synagogue  {h  awatft^).  But  the  definite 
article  is  wanting;  so  that  we  must  either  understand  in  a 
synagogue^  or  in  an  assembly.  See  on  Jas.  ii.  2.  Among  the 
ruins  at  TeU  Hii^iny  the  probable  site  of  Capernaum,  have  been 
found  among  the  remains  of  a  synagogue  a  block  of  stone, 
perhaps  the  lintel,  carved  with  the  pot  of  manna,  and  with  a 
pattern  of  vine  leaves  and  clusters  of  grapes.  See  a  full  account 
of  these  ruins  in  Thomson's  ^^  Land  and  Book,  Central  Pales* 
tine  and  Phcenicia,"  pp.  417-419. 

60.  Hard  (a-tekripSsi).  See  on  Matt.  xxv.  24;  Jude  14.  Ao« 
cording  to  the  Greek  order,  hard  is  this  saying. 

Hear  it  {airrov  cucoveai).  Avrov  may  be  rendered  Einij  but 
this  is  not  probable.   JBear  means  a  docile  hearing,  with  a  view 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


154  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

to  receiving  what  is  heard.     Compare  x.  3, 16,  27 ;   xii.  47 ; 
xviii.  37. 

61.  Offend  (a-tcavSoKi^ei).  Rev.,  cause  to  sturnhle.  See  on 
Matt.  V.  29.    Wye.,  slandereth  you. 

62.  What  and  if  ye  shall  see  (O^v  oup  Seap^e).  The 
question  is  marked  by  an  aposiqpesisy  i.e.,  a  breaking  off  of  the 
sentence  and  leaving  the  hearer  to  complete  it  for  himself. 
Lit.,  if  then  ye  should  behold^  etc. — the  completion  would  be, 
would  not  this  still  more  ocmse  you  to  stwirMe  f 

Ascend  {ikvafiaivovTii).  Bev.,  properly,  renders  the  participle, 
ascending. 

I  speak  (\aX£).  But  the  correct  reading  is  XeXaXi^/co,  the 
perfect  tense,  Iha/oe  spo&enj  or  I  have^t^  spoken,  referring  to 
the  preceding  discourse. 

64.  Should  betray  (irapaSaxroiv).  See  on  Matt  iv.  12; 
Mark  iv.  29.  Judas  is  once  in  the  New  Testament  designated 
by  the  noun  irpoBorrf^,  traitoVj  Luke  vL  16. 

66.  From  that  time  {iic  tovtov).  Render,  as  Rev.,  ttpon 
this.     As  a  result  proceeding  out  of  {ix)  this.    Compare  xix.  12. 

Went  back  {amipj^p  ek  rh  oirlaw).  The  Greek  expresses 
more  than  the  English.  They  went  away  (dwo)  from  Christ, 
lit,  to  the  things  hehindy  to  what  they  had  left  in  order  to  fol- 
low the  Lord. 

Walked  {wepien-drowi).  Lit.,  walked  abouty  with  Jesus  in 
His  wanderings  here  and  there. 

67.  The  twelve.  John  assumes  that  the  number  is  known. 
It  is  implied  in  the  twelve  baskets  of  fragments.  As  in  so 
many  other  instances  in  this  Gospel,  facts  of  the  synoptic  nar- 
rative are  taken  for  granted  as  familiar. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


G06PBL  OF  JOHN.  155 

Will  ye  also  go  away  ?  (jiif  teal  vfuk  l^iKere  tmarfeiv).  The 
interrogative  particle  /^^  shows  that  a  negative  answer  is  ex- 
pected. &urdy  ye  will  not.  WUl  ye  go  is  not  the  f  ature  tense 
of  the  verb  to  gOy  bnt  is  expressed  by  two  words,  do  ye  wiU 
(^Xere),  to  go  away  {inr^eof).  Eev.,  wovld  ye.  On  the  verb 
to  go  a/wayy  see  on  they  went  (ver.  21). 

68.  Simon  Peter.  *  Assailants  of  the  authenticity  of  John's 
Gospel  have  asserted  that  it  reveals  an  effort  on  the  part  of  the 
writer  to  claim  for  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved  a  pre-emi- 
nence above  Peter.  The  assertion  is  effectually  contradicted 
by  the  narrative  itself.  See  i.  42 ;  vi.  68 ;  xiii.  6 ;  xviii.  10, 16 ; 
XX.  2,  7;  xxi.  3,  7, 11,  and  notes  on  those  passages.  Peter's 
replying  for  the  twelve,  in  this  passage,  is  a  case  in  point. 

The  words  of  eternal  life  {prifiara  ^mi^  auoviov).  There  is 
no  article.  Thou  hast  words.  Words  of  life  are  words  which 
carry  life  with  them.  Compare  the  phrases  bread  of  life,  light 
oflife^  water  oflife^  tree  of  life. 

69.  Are  sure  {^yvdKOfjbev).  Lit.,  have  come  to  know.  The 
order  of  the  words  believe  and  know  is  reversed  in  xvii.  8 ;  1 
John  iv.  16.  In  the  case  of  the  first  disciples, /bt^A,  produced 
by  the  overpowering  impression  of  Jesus'  works  and  person, 
preceded  intellectual  conviction. 

That  Christy  the  Son  of  the  living  God.  The  best  texts 
substitute  o  SrfU}<;  rod  Oeov,  the  holy  one  of  God.  The  other 
reading  has  resulted  from  the  attempt  to  bring  Peter's  confes- 
sion here  into  accord  with  that  in  Matt.  xvi.  16.  The  two  con* 
fessions  differ  in  that  ^^  here  the  confession  points  to  the  inward 
character  in  which  the  Apostles  found  the  assurance  of  life ; 
there  the  confession  was  of  the  public  office  and  theocratic 
person  of  the  Lord"  (Westcott). 

70.  A  devil  {Bui/SoXo^).  See  on  Matt.  iv.  1.  The  word  is 
an  adjective,  meaning  elanderotiSj  but  is  almost  invariably  used 
in  the  New  Testament  as  a  noun,  and  with  the  definite  article. 
The  article  is  wanting  only  in  1  Pet.  v.  8 ;  Acts  idii.  10 ;  Apoc. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


156  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

ziL  9 ;  and  perhaps  Apoc.  xx.  2.     It  is  of  the  very  essence  of 
the  devilish  nature  to  oppose  Christ    Compare  Matt.  xvi.  23. 

71.  Judas  Iscariot  the  son  of  Simon  (^lov&m  StfMvo^ 
^la-fcapuornivy  The  correct  reading  is  ^la-tcapuorov,  Iscariot^ 
agreeing  in  the  genitive  case  with  SlfMvo^t  of  Simon,  Ren* 
der,  as  Rev.,  Judas,  the  son  of  Simon  Isoariot.  Iscariot  denotes 
the  name  of  Simon's  town :  a  man  ofKorioth.  See  on  Matt 
X.  5. 


CHAPTER  TIL 

1.  The  Jews'  feast  of  tabernacles.  The  Rev.  brings  ont 
the  defining  force  of  the  two  articles :  the  feast  of  the  Jews,  the 
feast  of  tabernacles.  This  feast  occarred  in  the  early  antamn 
(September  or  early  October),  and  lasted  for  seven  days.  Its 
observance  is  commanded  in  Exod.  xxiiL  16;  xxxiv.  22;  Lev. 
xxiii.  39,  42,  43 ;  Dent.  xvi.  13.  Its  significance  was  twofold. 
It  was  a  harvest-home  festival,  and  hence  was  called  the  Feast 
of  Ingaihervng^  and  it  commemorated  the  dwelling  of  Israel  in 
tents  or  booths  in  the  wilderness.  Hence  the  name  Feast  of 
Booths  or  Tabernacles.  The  association  of  the  latter  event 
with  harvest  was  designed  to  remind  the  people  in  their  pros- 
perity of  the  days  of  their  homeless  wandering,  that  their  hearts 
might  not  be  lifted  np  and  forget  God,  who  delivered  them 
from  bondage  (Deut  viii.  12-17).  Therefore  they  were  com- 
manded to  qnit  their  permanent  homes  and  to  dwell  in  booths 
at  the  time  of  harvest.  The  festival  was  also  known  as  the 
Feast  of  Jehovah^  or  simply  the  Festvval  (Lev.  xxiii.  39 ;  1  Kings 
viii.  2),  because  of  its  importance,  and  of  being  the  most  joyf nl 
of  all  festivals.  At  the  celebration  of  the  feast  at  Jerusalem 
booths  were  erected  in  the  streets  and  squares  and  on  the 
housetops.*  The  Qreek  word  for  this  feast,  cKfjvomjylaf  con' 
struction  of  tahemadeSy  occurs  only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. 

♦  For  a  fuU  description  see  the  article  **  Feaat  of  Tabernacles,"  in  MoClin- 
took  and  Crooks'  Cjrclop»dia,  voL  x.,  and  Bdersheim,  *«The  Temple/'  oh.  xiv. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  157 

3.  Thy  disciples.  Both  those  who  had  been  gained  by 
former  teaching  in  Judsaa  and  Jerusalem,  and  others  from 
other  parts. 

4.  Openly  {ip  'ira^pffcUf).  Lit.,  in  boldness.  The  reasoning 
is :  no  man  can  assert  the  jposition  which  Christ  claims,  and  at 
the  same  time  keep  secret  the  works  which  go  to  vindicate  it. 

5.  Neither  {ov^i).    Better,  as  Rev.,  not  even. 

Did  believe  {hrUrreuov),  The  imperfect,  t/?«rtf  believing;  re- 
ferring not  to  a  single  act  of  faith,  bnt  to  faith  as  habitiud  and 
eon^oUing. 

6.  Time  (Kcupos:),  See  on  Matt.  xii.  1 ;  Lnke  i.  20 ;  Acts 
zii.  1.    The  appropriate  season  or  juncture. 

A I  way  ready.  The  disciples  might  at  any  time  associate 
with  the  world,  with  which  they  were  still  in  sympathy.  Not 
so  Jesus,  who  was  in  essential  antagonism  to  the  world. 

7.  Cannot.  Frequent  in  John,  and  expressing  an  inherent 
impossibility.  See  iii.  3,  5 ;  v.  19 ;  vi.  44 ;  viL  34,  36 ;  viii.  21, 
43 ;  xiL  39 ;  xiv.  17,  etc. 

Evil  {irovrjpd).     See  on  Luke  iii.  19 ;  vii.  21. 

8.  This  feast.  For  this,  read  the^  the  first  time,  but  not  the 
second. 

Full  come  (^ewXiy/Koro*).  Lit,  has  beenfuifXLed.  So  Kev., 
is  not  yetfuLfiled. 

11.  Then  {piv).  Better ,  therefore;  because  He  did  not  come 
up  with  the  Galileans. 

Sought  {i^^ow).  The  imperfect:  kept  seeking;  jpersist- 
entHy  sought  for  Him. 

He  {iieeiwy;).  Emphatic:  that  one  of  whom  we  have  heard, 
and  whom  we  once  saw. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


158  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

12.  Murmuring.    See  on  vi.  41. 

The  people  {Toi<;  SxKoi/i).    See  on  L  19. 

Said  {SKeyov).    Imperfect :  were  saying. 

Deceiveth  {irXavS).  Kev.,  better,  leadeth  astray.  See  on 
Mark  xiL  24 ;  Jnde  13. 

13.  Openly  {wap^rfo'ltf).  The  word  may  mean  either  wUhaut 
reserve  (x.  24 ;  xL  14),  or  vAUwutfear  (xi.  54). 

14.  About  the  midst  of  the  feast  (r^  koprrfi  fiemtfory;). 
A  peculiar  form  of  expression  fonnd  only  here.  The  midst  is 
expressed  by  a  participle  from  the  verb  fuaJw,  to  be  in  the 
middle.    Lit.,  the  feast  being  midway. 

Taught  {ihlSacKev).    Or  began  to  teach.    Imperfect  tense. 

15.  Letters  (ypofifuiTa).    See  on  y.  47. 

16.  Doctrine  (8*&»x^).  Better,  teaching^  as  Eev.  Doctrine 
has  acquired  a  conventional  sense  which  might  mislead. 

17.  Will  do  his  will  (.9^27  rh  SiKtffia  airrov  iromv).  This  is 
a  notable  illustration  of  the  frequent  blunder  of  the  A.  V.  in 
rendering  ^iKsiv,  to  wUl  or  determine^  as  a  mere  auxiliary  verb. 
By  overlooking  the  distinct  meaning  of  the  verb  to  loilly  and 
resolving  wiUeth  to  do  into  wiU  doy  it  sacrifices  the  real  force 
of  the  passage.  Jesus  says,  if  it  be  onis  wiU  to  do;  i£  his 
moral  purpose  is  in  sympathy  with  the  divine  wilL 

He  shall  know.  Sympathy  with  the  will  of  God  is  a  con- 
dition of  understanding  it. 

Of  God  {itc  Tov  0€ov).    Better,  from;  proceeding  out  of. 

Of  myself  {(onr  ifuwrov).  Of  myself  is  misleading,  being 
commonly  understood  to  mean  concerning  myself.  Rev.,  cor- 
rectly,/rom  myself;  without  union  with  the  Father.  Com- 
pare V.  30. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


QOSPBL  OF  JOHN.  159 

18.  His  own  glory  (t^v  So^av  rffv  iSUv).  Lit,  the  glory 
which  is  Hi%  own ;  the  second  article  throwing  Hib  own  into 
sharp  contrast  with  JUa  that  sent  Sim.  On  JSis  own^  see  on 
Acts  i.  7 ;  Matt  xxii.  5 ;  xxv.  15. 

The  same  (piro^).  Notice  the  characteristic  nse  of  the  pro- 
noun taking  np  and  emphasizing  the  principal  subject  of  the 
sentence. 

Unrighteousness  {aSueia).    See  on  2  Pet  iL  13. 

19.  Did — give  {BiS(oK€v).  Some  texts  read  the  aorist  tense 
iScDK€v,  in  which  case  this  rendering  is  correct  If  with  others 
we  read  the  perfect,  we  should  render  hath  not  Moses  given  yon 
the  law,  which  yon  still  profess  to  observe. 

Keepeth  (Tro^eZ).  Rev.,  rightly,  doeth.  Compare  do  in  ver. 
17. 

Go  ye  about  (ISn^elre).    Properly,  seek  ye.    So  Rev. 

20.  A  devil  {8(u/i6pu)v).  Or  more  correctly,  a  demon.  See 
on  Mark  i.  34.  The  name  was  applied  to  Jesus  by  the  muUi- 
tilde  {ix^)  ^"d  ^^^  ^7  those  whom  He  was  addressing  in  ver. 
19,  because  of  the  gloomy  suspicions  which  they  thought  He 
entertained,  and  in  entire  ignorance  of  the  design  of  the  Jews 
which  Jesus  had  penetrated.  The  same  term  was  applied  to 
John  the  Baptist,  the  ascetic,  as  one  who  withdrew  from  social 
intercourse  (Matt.  xi.  18). 

21.  One  woric  (Iv  ^pyov).  The  healing  on  the  Sabbath  (y. 
1-8). 

23.  Are  ye  angry  (xoy^re).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment From  x^^V»  ff^  Strictly,  the  verb  means  to  be  full  of 
bUej  hence  to  be  mdancholy  mad. 

Every  whit  whole  {SKov  vytfi).  Strictly,  /  made  a  whole 
man  sounds  in  contrast  with  the  rite  of  circumcision  which  af- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


160  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

fects  only  a  single  member,  but  which,  nevertheless,  they  prac- 
tise on  the  Sabbath. 

24.  Appearance  (Hy^iv).  Primarily,  seemg  or  sight.  In  xi. 
44 ;  Apoc.  i.  16,  facey  and  hence  external  appearcmce.  The 
word  occurs  only  in  the  three  passages  cited. 

Righteous  judgment  (t^  S^tcalav  KpCaw).  Properly,  tfie 
righteous  judgment;  that  which  is  appropriate  to  the  casein 
hand. 

25.  Them  of  Jerusalem  (lepoa-oXufur&v).  Lit,  of  the  Je- 
rusalemiteSj  who  knew  better  than  the  multitude  the  designs 
of  the  priesthood.    The  word  occurs  only  here  and  Mark  L  5. 

26.  Do  the  rulers  know  Indeed  ?  The  interrogative  par- 
ticle fiiproTC  may  be  rendered  by  the  familiar  expression  they 
do  noty  do  they  f  Bev.,  can  it  he  thai  the  rulers^  etc.  Indeed 
{a\f)$m) ;  lit.,  trtUy. 

The  very  (aXiy^w).    Omit. 

27.  Howbeit  (aXX^).  But^  it  cannot  be  that  the  rulers 
have  made  such  a  discovery,  for  we  know  whence  this  man  is. 

We  know  {otBafiep).  The  knowing  of  the  rulers  is  expressed 
by  lyvtaaav ;  ha/ve  they  ascertained  hy  searching  and  watching. 
The  people's  knowledge,  otBafievt  is  that  of  settled  conviction. 

Whence  {ir6$€v).    Referring  to  His  parentage  and  family. 

i  No  one  knoweth  whence  He  is.  Opinions  differ  as  to 
the  precise  reference  of  these  words.  Some  explain  by  a  popu- 
lar idea  that  the  Messiah  would  not  be  known  until  anointed  by 
Elias,  when  he  would  suddenly  appear.  Others  refer  to  Isa. 
liii.  8 ;  or  to  Dan.  vii.  13.  Meyer  says  that  while  the  popular 
belief  that  the  immediate  ancestry  of  the  Messiah  would  be  un- 
known when  He  came  cannot  further  be  historically  proved, 
it  is  credible,  partly  from  the  belief  in  His  divine  origin,  and 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSFBL  OF  JOHN.  161 

partly  from  the  obscurity  into  which  the  Davidic  family  had 
sank. 

28.  Then  (otv).  Key.,  rightly,  therefore,  giving  the  reason 
for  the  succeeding  words  in  Jesus'  emotion  awakened  by  the 
misconceptions  of  the  people. 

Cried  {eicpa^af).    See  on  Mark  y.  5 ;  ix.  24. 

As  He  taught  {]ikhdaK<ov).  Better,  Bey.,  teachmg.  The 
expression  cried  teaching  implies  speaking  in  a  peculiarly  sol- 
emn manner  and  with  an  elevation  of  voice. 

Me — whence  I  am.  Conceding  the  truth  of  the  people's 
statement  in  ver.  27,  we  Jcnow  this  man  whence  heisy  bo  far  as 
His  outward  person  and  His  earthly  origin  were  concerned. 
He  goes  on  to  show  that  they  are  ignorant  of  His  divine  rela- 
tionship. 

True  {iT^ffSivosi).  True  to  the  ideal  of  a  sender :  a  genuine 
sender  in  the  highest  sense  of  the  teim.    See  on  L  9. 

29.  From  him  {irap^  airrov).    See  on  vi  46. 

30.  Then.  Another  of  the  frequent  instances  in  which  the 
A«  Y.  of  this  Oospel  renders  the  logical  particle  as  a  particle  of 
time.  Translate  as  Bev.,  therefore;  because  of  His  claim  to  be 
sent  from  God. 

To  take  {'n-idaai).    See  on  Acts  iii.  7. 

31.  Will  he  do  (juiri  irotijaei).  Lit,  etirelg  he  will  not  at  aU 
do. 

32.  OfTicers  {{nrqpira/^).    See  on  Matt  v.  26 ;  Luke  L  2. 

33.  Unto  them.    Omit 

I  go  (vTrdrfoi).    I  withdraw.    See  on  vi  2L 
Vol.  n.-ll 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


162  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

.    34.  Ye  shall  seek  me.     Not  as  now,  for  dispatation  or 
violence,  but  for  help. 

Where  I  am.  In  absolute,  eternal  being  and  fellowship 
with  the  Father.  /  wm  {iya>  elfii)  is  the  formnla  of  the  divine 
existence  (viii.  58).  The  phrase  carries  a  hint  of  the  essential 
nature  of  Jesas,  and  thns  prepares  the  way  for  ye  cannot  come 
(see  on  ver.  7).  The  difference  in  character  will  make  it  essen- 
tially impossible. 

85.  Will  He  go  (oSro^  fAi\Xe$  wopeiea^aC),  Lit.,  whither 
does  thi^  man  intend  to  gOj  or  whither  is  He  thinking  of  going  f 
The  A.  Y.  misses  the  contemptnons  insinuation  in  1hi%  man 
(Eev.). 

We  shall  not  find  him  {^fA€k).  The  pronoun  is  emphatic ; 
we,  the  religions  leaders,  the  wise  men,  who  scrutinize  the 
claims  of  all  professed  teachers  and  keep  a  watchful  eye  on  all 
impostors. 

The  dispersed  among  the  Gentiles  (t^  Suunropiuf  r&v 
^EXKijvcap).  Lit.,  the  dispersion  of  the  Oreeks.  The  Jews 
who  remained  in  foreign  lands  after  the  return  from  the 
Captivity  were  called  by  two  names :  1.  I%e  CaptvoUyj  which 
was  expressed  in  Greek  by  three  words,  viz.,  airoucta,  a  settle- 
fnent  far  from  home,  which  does  not  occur  in  tlie  New  Testa- 
ment ;  fieroucea-ia,  change  of  ahode^  which  is  found  in  Matt.  i. 
11, 12,  17,  and  always  of  the  carrying  into  Babylon  ;  aiyyjor 
IsjwTia^  a  taking  at  the  point  of  the  jspea/r  ;  Eph.  iv.  8  ;  Apoc. 
xiii.  10.  2.  The  Dispersion  {huunrop£).  See  on  1  Pet  i.  1 ; 
Jas.  i.  1.  The  first  name  marks  their  relation  to  their  own 
land ;  the  second  to  the  strange  lands. 

The  Gentiles  C^XXnua^).  Lit,  ths  Greeks.  So  Bev.  See 
on  Acts  vi.  1. 

36.  What  manner  of  saying  is  this  {rk  i(rr$v  o£to9  o 
X4pyo9)t    Bev.,  more  simply  and  literally,  tchat  is  this  word? 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHK  163 

37.  The  last  day.  The  eighth,  the  close  of  the  whole 
festival,  and  kept  as  a  Sabbath  (Lev.  xxiii.  36).  It  was  called 
the  Day  of  the  Cheat  Hosanna,  because  a  circuit  was  made 
seven  times  round  the  altar  with  ''  Hosanna ;"  also  the  Day  of 
WiUoipSj  and  the  Day  of  Beating  the  Branches^  because  all  the 
leaves  were  shaken  off  the  wUlow*  boughs,  and  the  palm- 
branches  beaten  in  pieces  by  the  side  of  the  altar.  Every 
morning,  after  the  sacrifice,  the  people,  led  by  a  priest,  repaired 
to  the  Fountain  of  Siloam,  where  the  priest  filled  a  golden 
pitcher,  and  brought  it  back  to  the  temple  amid  music  and 
joyful  shouts.  Advancing  to  the  altar  of  burnt-offering,  at 
the  cry  of  the  people,  "  Lift  up  thy  hand  I "  he  emptied  the 
pitcher  toward  the  west,  and  toward  the  east  a  cup  of  wine, 
while  the  people  chanted,  "  With  joy  shall  ye  draw  water  out 
of  the  wells  of  salvation."  It  is  not  certain  that  this  libation 
was  made  on  the  eighth  day,  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
tlie  following  words  of  the  Lord  had  reference  to  that  cere- 
mony. 

Stood  (eumitcei).  The  imperfect,  was  etamdi/ng;  watching 
the  ceremonies.    Both  A.  Y .  and  Kev.  miss  this  graphic  touch. 

38.  The  scripture  hath  said.  There  is  no  exactly  corre- 
sponding passage,  but  the  quotation  harmonizes  with  the  general 
tenor  of  several  passages,  as  Isa.  Iv.  1 ;  Iviii.  11 ;  Zech.  xiii.  1 ; 
xiv.  8 ;  Ezek.  xlvii.  1 ;  Joel  iii.  18.     . 

Belly  (/coiXitK).  The  word  is  often  used  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment for  the  iimermoat  part  of  a  many  the  soul  or  hearL  See 
Job  XV.  36  ;  xxxii.  19 ;  Prov.  xviii.  8 ;  xx.  27,  30.  The  rite  of 
drawing  and  pouring  out  the  water  pointed  back  to  the  smitten 
rock  in  the  desert  In  Exod.  xvii.  6,  ^'  there  shall  come  water 
out  of  t^,"  is  literally,  "  there  shall  come  water  from  within 
hvm^  The  word  helZy  here  means  the  inmost  heart  of  the 
believer,  which  pours  forth  spiritual  refreshment  Compare 
1  Cor,  X.  4 ;  John  iv.  14. 

Shall  flow  (pewrovcw).  The  word  occurs  only  here  in  the 
New  Testament 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


164  WORD  STUDIEB  IN  THH  KBW  TBSTAMBNT. 

Rivers.    A  type  of  abundance.    Compare  Kam.  zx.  11. 
Living  water.    Compare  iv.  10. 

39.  The  Spirit.    The  Holy  Spirit,  personally. 

The  Holy  Ghost  {irvevfia  Sryiov).  The  best  texts  omit  Sryiov, 
holyj  and  the  definite  article  is  not  in  the  text,  so  that  the  strict 
rendering  is  simply  spirit.  Lit.,  spirit  was  not  yet.  Owen^  in 
A.  Y.  and  Kev.,  is  added  to  guard  against  a  possible  misconcep- 
tion, which,  as  Alford  observes,  "  no  intelligent  reader  could 
fall  into."  The  word  spiriiy  standing  thus  alone,  marks,  not 
the  personaL  Spirit^  but  His  operation  or  gift  or  manifeeUi- 
lion.  Canon  Westcott  aptly  says :  '^  It  is  impossible  not  to 
contrast  the  mysteriousness  of  this  utterance  with  the  clear 
teaching  of  St.  John  himself  on  the  ^unction'  of  believers 
(1  John  ii.  20  sqq.),  which  forms  a  commentary,  gained  by  later 
experience,  upon  the  words  of  the  Lord." 

Was  glorified  (iSofiicr.9i7).  We  have  here  one  of  John's 
characteristic  terms,  even  as  the  idea  is  central  to  his  Gospel — 
to  show  forth  Jesus  as  the  manifested  glory  of  God  (i.  14).  The 
beginning  of  our  Lord's  miracles  was  a  manifestation  of  His 
glory  (ii.  11).  His  glory  was  the  expression  of  the  Father's 
will  (viii.  64).  By  His  work  He  glorified  the  Father  upon 
earth  (xii.  28 ;  xvii.  4),  and  in  this  was  Himself  glorified  (xvii. 
10).  The  sickness  and  resurrection  of  Lazarus  were  for  the 
glory  of  God  (xi.  4).  The  consummation  of  His  work  was 
marked  by  the  words,  "  Now  was  the  Son  of  man  glorified, 
and  God  was  glorified  in  Him"  (xiii.  31).  His  glory  He  had 
with  the  Father  before  the  world  was  (xvii.  5).  It  is  consum- 
mated at  His  ascension  (vii.  39 ;  xii.  16).  The  passion  is  the 
way  to  glory  (xii.  23,  24;  xiii.  31).  The  fruitfulness  of  be- 
lievers in  Him  is  for  the  glory  of  God  (xv.  8),  and  the  oflSce  of 
the  Spirit  is  to  glorify  Christ  (xvi.  14). 

40.  Many.    The  best  texts  omit    Bead  as  Kev.,  eome. 

This  saying  (r^y  yJo^ov).  The  best  texts  substitute  t&v 
TUrpov  Tovrmv,  these  v)ord8.    So  Bev. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSI^L  OF  JOHN.  166 

The  prophet.    See  on  i.  21. 

41.  Shall  Christ,  etc.  (jiif  7^  o  Xpurr6si).  The  Bev.  gives 
better  the  force  of  the  interrogatiye  particle  with  7^,  far : 
Whaiy  doth  the  Christ  oame^  etc.  The  idea  in  full  is,  ^^yoa  can- 
not (jiijD  BSLj  iti&tyfor  {yiLp)  doth  the  Christ,  etc." 

Shall — come  (Ifyxi^ai).  The  present  tense.  Bev.,  rightly, 
doth — come. 

43.  There  was  a  division  {nrxla-fAa  iyivero).  More  correctly, 
as  Bev.,  ^^  there  arose  a  division."    See  on  i.  8. 

44.  Would  have  taken  (^Xoy  irtdatu).     See  on  viL  17. 

Bather,  toere  disposed  or  wished  to  take  him. 

46.  Like  this  man.    Some  of  the  best  texts  omit 
Deceived  (7re7rX<iyi;<r3€).    TieY.f  led  astray.    Seeonver.  12. 

48.  Of  the  rulers  or  of  the  Pharisees.  The  Greek  order, 
as  followed  by  Bev.,  is  more  suggestive :  JlcUh  any  of  the  rtd- 
ers  believed  on  J3imy  or  (to  appeal  to  a  larger  circle)  of  the 
Pharisees  f 

49.  This  people  (0  ^Xo9  oiro^y  Better,  muUitudeyBB  con- 
trasted  with  the  orthodox  Jews.     See  on  i.  19. 

Cursed.  As  specimens  of  Babbinical  utterances  concerning 
this  class  may  be  cited  the  expressions  venninj  people  of  the 
earth,  and  the  saying,  ''the  ignorant  is  impions;  only  the 
learned  shall  have  part  in  the  resurrection."  Even  more 
abusive  and  abominable  is  this :  ''He  shall  not  take  a  daughter 
of  the  people  of  the  earth,  because  they  are  an  abomination, 
and  their  wives  are  an  abomination,  and  concerning  their 
daughters  it  is  said,  Deut  xxviL  21 " 1 

60.  He  that  came  to  Him  by  night  {0 iX^vvvKih^ irpit^ 
avTov).    The  texts  vary,  either  substituting  irpirepov,  heforey 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


166  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THK  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

for  wKTo^;,  by  nigJUy  or  omitting  the  whole  claase,  and  reading, 
Nioodemvs  saith  unto  themy  being  one  of  them. 

61.  Any  man  {jov  avBpwrov).  Lit.,  the  man,  whoever  he 
may  be,  that  comes  before  them. 

Before  it  hear  him  {ii^v  /^^  axovtrQ  ircLp  avrov).  Kev.,  more 
correctly,  except  Uji/rst  hear.  Hem*  him  is  an  inadequate  ren- 
dering of  irap  avTov,  which  is,  as  'Rev.yjrom  himself;  irapd, 
implying  from  beeide^  i.e.,  from  his  side  of  the  case. 

52.  Search.    Compare  v.  39. 

Look  (ZSe).  Some  render  seey  and  translate  the  following 
Srit  ihaty  instead  of  for.  So  Bev.  The  difiEerence  is  miimpor- 
tant. 

63.  This  verse,  and  the  portion  of  Chapter  Vlil.,  as  far  as 
ver.  12,  are  generally  pronomiced  by  the  best  critical  anthori- 
ties  not  to  belong  to  John's  Gospel. 


CHAPTER  YIIL 

12.  The  light  of  the  world  {jo  ^m  rov  icStrfiov).  Kot 
Xv^yo^,  a  lam^f  as  John  the  Baptist  (v.  36).  Light  is  another 
of  John's  characteristic  terms  and  ideas,  playing  a  most  import- 
ant part  in  his  writings,  as  related  to  the  manifestation  of 
Jesns  and  His  work  upon  men.  He  comes  from  Gk)d,  who  is 
light  (1  John  i.  6).  "  In  Him  was  life,  and  the  life  was  the 
light  of  men"  (i.  4).  The  Word  was  among  men  as  light  before 
the  incarnation  (i.  9 ;  ix.  6),  and  light  came  with  the  incarna- 
tion (iii.  19-21 ;  viii.  12 ;  xii.  46).  Christ  is  light  through  the 
illnminating  energy  of  the  Spirit  (xiv.  21,  26 ;  xvi.  13 ;  1  John 
ii.  20,  27),  which  is  received  through  love  (xiv.  22,  23).  The 
object  of  Christ's  work  is  to  make  men  sons  of  light  (xii.  36, 
46),  and  to  endow  them  with  the  light  of  life  (viil  12). 

In  ver.  20,  we  are  told  that  Jesus  spake  these  words  in  the 
Treasury.    This  was  in  the  Court  of  the  Women,  the  most 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  167 

public  part  of  the  temple.  Four  golden  candelabra  Btbod 
there,  each  with  four  gplden  bowls,  each  one  filled  from  a 
pitcher  of  oil  by  a  youth  of  priestly  descent.  These  were 
lighted  on  the  first  night  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  It  is  not 
unlikely  that  they  may  have  suggested  our  Lord's  figure,  but 
the  figure  itself  was  familiar  both  from  prophecy  and  from 
tradition.  According  to  tradition.  Light  was  one  of  the  names 
of  the  Messiah.  See  Isa.  ix.  1 ;  xliL  6 ;  zlix.  6 ;  Ix.  1-3 ; 
Mai.  iv.  2 ;  Luke  ii.  32. 

Walk  in  darkness  {'jrepim-anjaei  h  t§  aKorrla).  This  phrase 
is  peculiar  to  the  Gospel  and  First  Epistle. 

Shall  have  (^fe^)*  Not  only  shall  see  it,  but  shall  possess  it 
Hence  Christ's  disciples  are  the  light  of  the  world  (Matt  v.  14). 
Compare  lights^  or,  properly,  luminaries  (^0Hrr^/7€9),  a  name, 
applied  to  believers  in  Philip,  ii.  16. 

13.  Thou  barest  record  of  thyself.  Rev.,  witness.  A 
technical  objection,  evading  the  real  purport  of  Jesus'  declara- 
tion. The  Kabbinical  writings  declared  that  no  man  could  give 
witness  for  himself. 

14.  Though  {ichv).    Lit,  even  if. 

I  know  (oZSa).  With  a  clear  inward  consciousness.  See 
on  ii  24. 

Whence  I  came  and  whither  I  go.  Two  essential  facts  of 
testimony,  viz.,  origin  and  destiny.  ''  The  question  was  one  about 
His  own  personal  consciousness,  of  which  only  Himself  could 
bear  witness "  (Lange).  '^  If  the  sun  or  the  day  could  speak, 
and  should  say:  ^I  am  the  sun  I'  and  it  were  replied,  'No, 
thou  mayest  be  the  night,  for  thou  bearest  witness  of  thyself  I ' 
how  would  that  sound  I  Argue  it  away  if  thou  canst  ^'  (**  Ber* 
lenburg  Bible,"  cited  by  Stier,  "Words  of  the  Lord  Jesus"). 

And  whither  I  go.    The  best  texts  read,  fj,  or. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


168  WORD  STXTIHBB  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

16.  True  {iKqSii^).  The  beet  texts,  however,  read  oKa^iv^* 
tme  to  the  perfect  ideal  of  judgment 

17.  In  your  law  {ip  r^  v6/jl^  r^  vfAeripf).  Lit.,  in  the  IoMj 
that  vahich  is  yours.  Tours  has  an  emphatic  force :  of  which 
jou  daim  a  monopoly.    See  viL  49. 

It  Is  written  (yiyp€nrr<u).  The  perfect  tense :  ii  has  been 
written,  and  stands  written.  The  common  form  of  citation 
elsewhere,  but  used  by  John  of  the  Old  Testament  scriptures 
only  here.  His  usual  form  is  jeypafifUvov  itrrlv,  the  participle 
with  the  finite  verb,  lit,  it  is  having  been  written. 

The  witness  of  two  men.    See  Dent.  xix.  15. 

The  Father— beareth  witness  of  me.  Thus  there  are 
two  witnesses,  and  the  letter  of  the  law  is  fulfilled. 

19.  Where.  The  testimony  of  an  unseen  and  unheard  wit- 
ness would  not  satisfy  them. 

20.  The  Treasury  (7afo^Xa/c/ip).  From  70^  treasure^  a 
Persian  word,  occurring  only  once  in  the  New  Testament  (Acts 
Tiii.  27),  and  <f>vXaKiif  gua/rd.  Used  by  John  only  here.  The 
Treasury  was  in  the  Court  of  the  Women,  so  called,  not  because 
it  was  appropriated  to  the  worship  of  women  exclusively,  but 
because  they  were  not  allowed  to  proceed  further,  except  for 
sacrificial  purposes.  The  court  covered  a  space  upwards  of  two 
hundred  feet  square,  and  was  surrounded  by  a  colonnade,  within 
which,  and  against  the  wall,  were  the  thirteen  trumpet-shaped 
chests,  called  "trumpets"  from  their  shape,  for  charitable  con- 
tributions.   This  court  was  the  most  public  part  of  the  temple. 

And  no  man  laid  hands  on  Him  {jmIX  ovBeUhriaaep  avrov). 
Notice  the  connection  with  the  previous  sentence  by  the  simple 
andf  where  another  writer  would  have  said  and  yet:  the  sense 
being  that  though  Jesus  was  teaching  where  He  might  easily 
have  been  apprehended,  yet  no  one  attempted  to  arrest  Him. 
See  on  i.  10.    Zaid  hands  on  is  better  rendered,  as  elsewhere. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOBPEL  OF  JOHN.  169 

took  (compare  vii.  30).  The  inconBiBtencj  of  the  A.  Y.  in  the 
renderings  of  the  same  word,  of  which  this  is  only  one  of  many 
instances,  is  noteworthy  here  from  the  fact  that  in  the  only  two 
passages  in  which  John  nses  the  phrase  laid  hands  on  (vii.  30 ; 
▼ii  44)j  he  employs  the  common  formula,  i7nl3<SXKeip  r^9  x^V^» 
or  rijv  xelp€k^  and  in  both  these  passages  the  word  iri^ai,  is 
rendered  taJcs.  The  use  of  this  latter  word  is  confined  almost 
exclusively  to  John,  as  it  is  found  only  three  times  elsewhere 
(Acte  iiL  7;  xii*;  2  Cor.xi.  32). 

21.  Then  (o&).  Properly,  therefore^  connecting  the  fact  of 
Jesus'  continuing  to  speak  with  His  freedom  from  arrest. 

Said  Jesus.    Omit  Jevas^  and  read.  He  said  therefore. 

Go  away  {\nr6rfw).  Withdraw  myself  from  you ;  this  sense 
being  emphasized  by  the  succeeding  words,  ye  shall  seek  me. 
In  expressing  one's  departure  from  men  or  from  surrounding  ob- 
jects, we  may  emphasize  merely  the  ^oo^  of  renuyoal^  in  which 
case  a'irifyxpii4ih  to  go  avm/j  would  be  appropriate ;  or  we  may 
emphasize  the  removal  as  affecting  some  relation  of  the  person 
to  that  from  which  he  removes,  as  in  vi.  67,  where  Jesus  says 
to  the  disciples,  ^^  will  ye  also  go  away^  or  toithdraw  from  me," 
in  which  case  inr6rfw  is  the  proper  word.* 

In  your  sin  {h  if  afiaprla  vfiAv).  See  on  Matt.  i.  21.  Note 
the  singular,  sin,  not  sins.  It  is  used  collectively  to  express  the 
whole  condition  of  estrangement  from  God. 

22.  Will  He  kill  Himself  (jJi^n.  a'troKrofei  iamov)%  The 
mockery  in  these  words  is  alike  subtle  and  bitter.  The  inter- 
rogative particle,  ^i^ri,  signifies  surely  He  vnU  not  by  any  chance 
kill  Himself ;  and  the  sense  of  the  whole  clause  is.  He  will  not 
surely  go  where  we  cannot  reach  Him,  unless  perchance  He 
should  kill  Himself ;  and  as  that  would  insure  His  going  to 

*  I  Am  inclined,  howerer,  to  think  ihst  the  diitinotion  between  these  two, 
and  also  between  these  and  vopc^ofiai,  which  Canon  Westoott  claims  is  obserred 
by  John,  will  not  bear  too  strict  pressing.  See  his  commentarj  on  John  rii. 
88. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


170  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Gehenna,  of  course  we  conld  not  go  to  Him  there.  The  remark 
displajs  alike  the  scorn  and  the  self-righteousness  of  the 
speakers. 

23.  Ye  are  from  beneath  (i/c  r&v  xdrw  itrri).  A  phrase 
peculiar  to  John  and  to  his  Gospel.  Jesus  states  the  radical 
antagonism  between  His  opposers  and  Himself,  as  based  upon 
difference  of  origin  and  nature.  They  spring  from  the  lower, 
sensual,  earthly  economy ;  He  from  the  heavenly.  Compare 
Jas.  iii.  15  sqq. 

From  above  {iic  t&v  S»a).  Also  peculiar  to  John's  Gk>speL 
Compare  CoL  iii.  1.  On  the  phrase  to  he  of  {ehnu  ix)  see  on 
i.46. 

Ye  are  of  this  world  {itc  rov  tc6a-fAov  toutov  itrri).  Peculiar 
to  John,  and  occurring  in  the  First  Epistle.  On  icocfiov, 
worlds  see  on  L  9.     Te  are  of  this  earthly  order  or  economy. 

24.  I  am  he  d^d^  elfu).  He  is  inserted  in  the  versions  and 
is  not  in  the  text.  By  retaining  it,  we  read,  I  am  the  Messiah. 
But  the  words  are  rather  the  solemn  expression  of  His  absolute 
divine  being,  as  in  ver.  58 :  "  K  ye  believe  not  that  /  am." 
See  Deut.  xxxii.  39  ;  Isa.  xliii.  10 ;  and  compare  vv.  28,  58  of 
this  chapter,  and  xiiL  19. 

25.  Even  the  same  that  I  said  unto  you  from  the  be- 
ginning (t^i'  o,fr)^v  S  Ti  Koi  \aXA  vfup).  A  very  difficult  pas- 
sage, on  which  the  commentators  are  almost  hopelessly  divided. 
There  are  two  main  classes  of  interpretations,  according  to  one 
of  which  it  is  to  be  read  interrogatively^  and  according  to  the 
other,  affirmatvody.  The  two  principal  representatives  of  the 
former  class  are  Meyer,  who  renders  "  Do  you  ask  that  which 
aU  along  {ttiv  hfy^ifv)  I  am  even  saying  to  you  I "  and  West- 
cott,  "  How  is  it  that  I  even  speak  to  you  at  all  {r^v  afrx^v) "  f 
So  also  Milligan  and  Moulton.  This  latter  rendering  requires 
the  change  of  S  r«,  the  relative,  that  whichj  into  the  conjunction 
OT^,  that. 

The  second  class  of  interpreters,  who  construe  the  passage 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


606PBL  OP  JOHN.  171 

affirmatvoely^  vary  in  their  explanations  of  riiv  apx^Vf  which  they 
render  severally,  dUogetheTy  essentianyjf/rst  of  M^  in  the  heffin- 
nmg.  There  is  also  a  third  class,  who  take  riiv  ipxv^  ^^  & 
nonn,  and  explain  according  to  Apoc.  xxL  6,  '^  lam  iJie  hegin^ 
ningj  that  which  I  am  even  saying  tvnto  youP  This  view  is 
represented  mostly  by  the  older  commentators,  Angnstine, 
Bede,  Lampe,  and  later  by  Wordsworth. 

I  adopt  the  view  of  Alford,  who  renders  esserUiaUyy  explain- 
ing by  generally^  or  traced  up  to  its  j/rinciple  {apx^).  Shad- 
ing off  from  this  are  Godet,  ahaohUely;  Winer,  throughout; 
Thayer,  wholly  or  precisely.  I  render,  /  am  essentially  that 
which  I  even  speak  to  you.  If  we  accept  the  explanation  of  / 
amy  in  ver.  24,  as  a  declaration  of  Jesus'  absolute  divine  being, 
that  thought  prepares  the  way  for  this  interpretation  of  His 
answer  to  the  question.  Who  art  thout  His  words  are  the 
revelation  of  Himself.  ^'  He  appeals  to  His  own  testimony  as 
the  adequate  expression  of  His  nature.  They  have  only  to 
fathom  the  series  of  statements  He  has  made  concerning  Him- 
self, and  they  will  find  therein  a  complete  analysis  of  His  mis- 
sion and  essence  "  (Godet).* 

26.  I  have  many  things,  etc.  The  connection  of  thought 
seems  to  be  as  follows :  ^^  I  being  such  as  my  words  show  me 
to  be,  I  must  declare  the  whole  message  of  Him  by  virtue  of 
my  essential  union  with  whom  I  speak.  Many  things  I  have 
to  declare  and  judge,  and  you  may  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  them ; 


*  I  Am  aware  of  the  objeotion  to  this  rendering  based  on  the  canon  that 
T^  iLf)Av  has  this  meaning  onlj  in  negative  sentences,  an  objeotion  which  is 
oertainlj  not  parried  bj  Qodet's  attempt  to  explain  this  passage  as  essentially 
negative.  Bat  this  rale  is  not  absolatelj  nniversal  (see  Thajer's  Lexioon,Apx^» 
1,  b.),  and  this  explanation  seems  to  me,  on  the  whole,  to  fall  in  better  than 
anj  other  with  the  general  sense  of  the  passage  as  I  understand  it.  I  alwajs 
differ  from  Canon  Westoott  with  reluctance ;  bnt  without  going  so  far  as  to 
saj,  with  Alford,  that  his  interpretation  is  ungrammaiiealf  I  must  confess  that 
it  seems  to  me  artificial  and  forced,  as  also  does  Mejer*s  rendering,  which  is 
open  besides  to  serious  criticism  on  grammatical  grounds.  The  student  will 
find  the  different  interpretations  well  summed  up  and  classified  in  Schaff*s 
Lange,  and  also  more  brieflj  in  Westoott's  additional  note  to  oh.  viiL  See 
also  Mejer. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


172  WORD  STUDIBB  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

nevertbelese,  I  mast  speak  the  whole  trath,  the  things  which  I 
have  heard  from  Him  who  sent  me  and  who  is  true." 

I  speak  to  the  world  (}Jy<o  el^  roy  teoa-fAbv).  The  best  texts 
read  XaKA,  which  emphasizes  not  what  Christ  says  (which  would 
be  Xiyea)y  but  the  fad  that  He  speaks.  See  on  Matt,  xxviii.  18. 
The  use  of  the  preposition  m  here  is  peculiar.  Lit.,  ^^I  speak 
into  the  world;"  so  that  my  words  may  reach  and  spread 
through  the  world.  See  for  a  similar  construction  1  Thess.  iL 
9 ;  iv.  8 ;  Heb.  ii.  3.  So  Sophocles,  where  Electra  says,  ic^fwa-ai 
fi  ek  iiravra^, proclaim  me  to  oil:  so  that  the  report  of  me  may 
reach  all  ears  C'Electia,"  606). 

27.  They  understood  (Jyiwcrw).    Peroeivedy  as  Rev. 

He  spake.    Imperfect.  Was  ttpedki/ng  would  be  much  better. 

28.  Lifted  up.    See  on  iii.  14. 

Ye  shall  know  (yvo^aea^).  Sender,  jpercdve^  here  as  in 
ver.  27. 

I  am  He.    As  in  ver.  24,  on  which  see  note. 

Of  myself  {hif  i/uwroO).  Properly,  from  myself,  as  Bev., 
at  vii.  17,  but  not  here.    See  on  vii  17. 

Hath  taught  (iSiSafev).  Bev.,  more  correctly,  tatight.  The 
aorist  tense,  regarding  the  teaching  as  a  single  act  Compare 
ijseovo'a,  I  heard,  iii.  32. 

I  speak  these  things  {ravra  \aK&).  Not  equivalent  to  so 
I  speak  {i.e.y  as  the  Father  taught  me),  but  an  absolute  declara- 
tion with  reference  to  these  present  revelations. 

29.  The  Father.    The  best  texts  omit. 

Alone.    See  ver.  16. 

Thos«  things  that  please  Him  (r^  hpecrh  avr^.  Lit.,  as 
Bev.,  the  things  that  are  pleasing  to  Him.    Always  {irdtrrore) 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOBFEL  OF  JOHN.  178 

dosing  the  sentence,  is  emphatic.    Jesus'  holy  activity  is  habU- 
iMl  and  contintunM.    See  iv.  34. 

30.  Believed  on  {iirUntvaav eU).  See  on  L  12,  and  compare 
"believed  Him^  ver.  31. 

31.  Believed  on  Him  {ireinarevKiyriVi  axn^).  Note  the  dif- 
ferent phrase,  distinguishing  the  Jews  from  the  mixed  com- 
pany in  ver.  30.    Rev.,  rightly,  believed  Hiin. 

If  ye  continue  {ihv  vfieU  fieti^jre).  The  emphasis  is  on  the 
yej  addressed  to  those  whose  faith  was  rudimentary ;  who  be- 
lieved ^im,  but  did  not  yet  believe  on  Sim.    Be  v.,  alide. 

In  my  word  (iv  r^  Xrfyy  tjS  ifi^).  Lit,  in  the  toord  which 
is  mine:  peculiarly  mine,  characteristic  of  me.  The  expres- 
sion is  intentionally  stronger  than  my  toord.  Compare  my 
love  (xv.  9). 

Indeed  (aXofS&si).  Lit,  ^rt%,  as  Bev.  As  those  who  believe 
on  me,  not  as  those  who  are  moved  by  temporary  excitement 
to  admit  my  claims. 

33.  Were  never  in  bondage  (Se8ovX€t;«ca/Aev9W7roT€).  Kev., 
better,  have  never  yet  been  in  bondage;  thus  giving  the  force 
of  the  perfect  tense,  never  up  to  this  time^  and  of  the  ird,  yet. 
In  the  light  of  the  promises  given  to  Abraham,  Qen.  xvii.  16 ; 
xxii.  17, 18,  the  Jews  claimed  not  only  freedom,  but  dominion 
over  the  nations.  In  their  reply  to  Jesus  they  ignore  alike  the 
Egyptian,  Babylonian,  and  Syrian  bondage,  through  which  the 
nation  had  successively  passed,  as  well  as  their  present  subjec- 
tion to  Bome,  treating  these  merely  as  bondage  which,  though 
a  factj  was  not  bondage  by  rights  or  bondage  to  which  they 
had  ever  willingly  submitted,  and,  therefore,  not  bondage  in 
any  real  sense.  Beside  the  fact  that  their  words  were  the 
utterance  of  strong  passion,  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  the 
Bomans,  from  motives  of  policy,  had  left  them  the  semblance 
of  political  independence.  As  in  so  many  other  cases,  they 
overlook  the  higher  significance  of  Jesus'  words,  and  base  their 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


174  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

reply  on  a  technicality.  These  are  the  very  Jews  who  Idieved 
Him  (ver.  31).  Stier  remarks :  "  These  poor  believers  soon 
come  to  the  end  of  their  faith."  The  hint  of  the  possible 
inconstancy  of  their  faith,  conveyed  in  the  Lord's  words  if  ye 
abide  in  my  wordy  is  thus  justified. 

34.  Whosoever  committeth  (tto?  o  iroi&v).  Rev.,  more 
correctly,  every  one  that  committeth. 

Sin  (rifv  afAoprlop),  The  definite  article,  the  sin,  shows  that 
Jesus  does  not  mean  merely  a  simple  act,  but  a  life  of  sin. 
Compare  1  John  iii.  4-8,  and  doeth  the  truth  (John  iii.  21); 
doeth  the  righteousness  (1  John  ii  29). 

The  servant  (Bovkosi).  Or,  a  servant.  Properly,  a  hond- 
servant  or  slave.    See  on  Matt.  xx.  26. 

Of  sin.  A  few  authorities  omit,  and  read  whosoever  com- 
miUeth  sin  is  a  bond-servant.     Compare  Bom.  vi.  17,  20. 

35.  Abideth  not  in  the  house  forever.  A  slave  has  no 
permanent  place  in  the  house.  He  may  be  sold,  exchanged,  or 
cast  out.  Compare  Gen.  xxi.  10;  Gal.  iv.  30.  Souse.  See 
Heb.  iii.  6 ;  John  xiv.  2.  The  elder  son  in  the  parable  of  the 
prodigal  (Lukexv.  29),  denies  his  sonship  by  the  words,  '^  These 
many  years  do  I  serve  thee  {BovXewoy^ 

36.  Indeed  (Sinws).  Used  by  John  only  here.  It  means 
essentially. 

37.  Hath  no  place  (ov  x^opeT).  Bev.,  hath  not  free  course^  or 
maTceth  no  way.  This  rendering  is  in  harmony  with  w.  30, 
31,  concerning  those  who  believedj  but  did  not  believe  on  Him, 
and  who  showed  by  their  angry  answer,  in  ver.  33,  that  the 
word  of  Jesus  had  made  no  advance  in  them.  The  rendering 
of  the  A.  V.  is  not  supported  by  usage,  though  Field  ("  Otium 
Norvicense")  cites  an  undoubted  instance  of  that  sense  from 
the  Epistles  of  Alciphron,  a  post-Christian  writer,  who  relates 
the  story  of  a  parasite  returning  gorged  from  a  banquet  and 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  175 

applying  to  a  physician,  who  administered  an  emetic.  The 
parasite,  describing  the  effect  of  the  medicine,  says  that  the 
doctor  wondered  where  sach  a  mess  had  place  {ix^PV^^)'  ^^^ 
the  rendering  of  the  Rev.,  compare  Aristophanes :  irm  oiv  ov 
X^p^i  Toipyop ;  "  How  is  it  that  the  work  makes  noprogreae  t " 
("Peace,"  472).  Plutarch,  ix^pei.  8*A  t^  iroKew  o  X6709, 
"  the  word  (or  report)  spread  (or  advanced)  through  the  city  " 
("CiBsar,"712). 

38.  Ye  have  seen.   The  best  texts  read  ^/covaare,  ye  heard. 

89.  Children  (rhcva).    See  on  i.  12. 

40.  A  man  {Sv^pwrov).  Used  only  here  by  the  Lord  of 
Himself.  To  this  corresponds  His  calling  the  Devil  a  manr 
slayer  at  ver.  44.  Perhaps,  too,  as  Westcott  remarks,  it  may 
suggest  the  idea  of  the  human  sympathy  which,  as  a  man.  He 
was  entitled  to  claim  from  them. 

This  did  not  Abraham.  In  the  oriental  traditions  Abraham 
is  spoken  of  as  "  full  of  loving-kindness." 

41.  Ye  do.    Or,  a^re  doing. 

Fornication  (iropveUv;).    From  wippij/u,  to  sell. 

42.  I  proceeded  forth— from  God  {itc  rov  Beov  i^Xdov). 
Eev.,  came  forth.  The  phrase  occurs  only  here  and  in  xvi.  28. 
^E^XSelv  hiro  is  found  in  ziii.  3 ;  xvi.  30,  and  emphasizes  the 
idea  of  separation ;  a  going  from  God  to  whom  He  was  to  re- 
turn {and  goeth  unto  God).  ^E^XSeiv  irapd  (xvi.  27 ;  xvii.  8), 
is  going  from  beside^  implying  personal  fellowship  with  God. 
^E^ekJ^iP  ix,  here,  emphasizes  the  idea  of  essential  community 
of  being:  "  I  came  forth  out  ofP 

And  am  come  (f|^.    As  much  as  to  say,  and  here  I  am. 

Of  myself  (ail'  ^/iai/roi)).  Of  my  own  self-determination, 
independently,  but  my  being  is  divinely  derived.  See  on  viL 
17. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


176  WORD  STUDIBB  IN  THB  ITBW  TESTAMENT. 

43.  Speech — word  (XoXi^y — Xiyov).  The  former  word  re- 
fers to  the  Jbrmj  the  latter  to  the  aiibetanoe  of  disconrse.  So 
Matt.  xxvi.  78,  of  Peter,  "  thy  speech  (Xalud)  bewrayeth  thee ;  *' 
thy  mode  of  speaking.  If  Uiey  had  nnderstood  the  sabstauce, 
they  would  have  nnderstood  the  form. 

Cannot.    See  on  viL  7. 

44.  Ye  {vfiek).  Emphatic,  in  contrast  with  i^/ack*  we,  of  ver. 
41. 

Of  your  father  (itc).  Very  suggestive,  implying  community 
of  nature,  as  in  ver.  42.    Compare  1  John  iii.  8, 10. 

The  Devil.  See  on  Matt.  iv.  1.  John  uses  Satan  only  once 
in  the  Gospel  (xiii.  27),  frequently  in  the  Apocalypse,  and  no- 
where in  the  Epistles.  A  few  critics  have  adopted  the  very 
singular  rendering,  which  the  Greek  will  bear,  ye  are  of  {kef a^ 
ther  of  the  devil.  This  is  explained  by  charging  John  with 
Gnosticism,  and  making  him  refer  to  the  Demiv/rgey  a  mysteri- 
ous and  inferior  being  descended  from  God,  by  whom  God,  ac- 
cording to  the  Gnostics,  created  the  universe,  and  who  had 
rebelled  against  God,  and  was  the  father  of  Satan.  It  is  only 
necessary  to  remark  with  Meyer  that  such  a  view  is  both  un- 
biblical  and  un-Johannine. 

Lusts  {hri^viulw:).    See  on  Mark  iv.  19. 

Ye  will  do  (^cXere  iroi&f).  Wrong.  Properly,  ye  wiU  to  do. 
Eev.,  it  is  yov/r  will  to  do.    See  on  vii.  17. 

Murderer  {cof^pmroKrovosi).  Only  here  and  1  John  iii.  15. 
Lit.,  a  manelayer ;  from  &v!^pcrn'o<;,  many  and  icTelpfa,to  kUL 
The  epithet  is  applied  to  Satan,  not  with  reference  to  the  mur- 
der of  Abel,  but  to  the  fact  of  his  being  the  author  of  death 
to  the  race.    Compare  Bom.  vii.  8, 11 ;  Heb.  ii.  14. 

From  the  beginning.    Of  the  human  race. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OP  JOHN.  177 

Stood  not  {oifK  Sanjteev).  This  may  be  explained  in  two  ways. 
The  verb  may  be  taken  as  the  perfect  tense  of  Sm^/a,  which  is 
the  form  for  the  English  present  tense,  I  stand.  In  that  case 
it  wonid  describe  Satan's  present  standing  in  the  element  of 
falsehood  :  he  etandeth  not  in  the  truth.  Or  it  may  be  taken 
as  the  imperfect  tense  of  anj/em,  I  keep  rwy  etandmg^  or  simply, 
/  etcMd^  in  which  case  the  f  onn  will  be  iim^Kep,  and  it  will  mean 
that  even  before  his  fall  he  was  not  true,  or  that  he  did  not  re- 
main true  to  God,  bat  fell.  Meyer,  who  takes  it  in  the  former 
sense,  observes :  ''  Truth  is  the  domain  in  which  he  has  not  his 
footing;  to  him  it  is  a  foreign,  heterogeneous  sphere  of  life. 
.  .  •  The  lie  is  the  sphere  in  which  he  holds  his  place."  So 
Mephistopheles  in  Ooethe's  ^^  Faust" : 

<<I  Am  the  spirit  that  denies  t 
And  joBtlj  so ;  for  all  things  from  the  void 
Called  forth,  deserre  to  be  destroyed ; 
'Twere  better,  then,  were  naoght  created. 
Thus,  all  which  jou  as  sin  have  rated, — 
Deetmction, — anght  with  eril  blent, — 
That  is  mj  proper  element." 

When  he  speaketh  a  lie  (Stop  XaX^  t^  feSSosi).  More 
strictly,  whenever — the  lie,  as  opposed  to  the  truth,  regarded  as 
a  whole.  Two  interpretations  are  given.  According  to  one, 
the  Devil  is  the  subject  of  speaketh :  according  to  the  other, 
the  subject  is  indefinite;  '^when  one  speaketh;"  stating  a 
general  proposition. 

Of  his  own  {iic  t£v  ISlmv).  Lit,  out  of  the  things  which  are 
his  own.  "  That  which  is  most  peculiarly  his  ethical  nature  ^ 
(Meyer). 

For  he  is  a  liar,  and  the  father  of  It  (*ri  ifteitmr:  i<n\  mA 
o  irariip  avrov).  Three  interpretations  are  given.  1.  That  of 
the  A.  V.  and  Rev.  "  He  is  a  liar,  and  the  father  of  the  Ue."^ 
8.  ^<  He  is  a  liar,  and  the  father  of  the  liar  (since  of  ii  may 
also  be  rendered  qfhim).^  8.  Making  6  irariip  atrrov,  his  fa- 
ther^  the  subject  of  the  sentence,  and  referring  his  to  one^  the 
indefinite  subject  of  speaketh  ("  when  one  speaketh  a  lie "). 
Vol.  n.— is 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


178  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Thus  the  rendering  will  be,  Because  Me  father  ie  a  liar.  As 
to  Jesus'  course  of  thought — ^if  we  accept  either  of  the  first 
two  renderings,  it  tnms  on  the  character  of  Satan.  After  stat- 
ing that  the  Jews  are  children  of  the  Devil,  He  goes  on  to  de- 
scribe the  Devil  as  a  morderer  and  a  liar,  and  enlarges  on  the 
latter  characteristic  bj  saying  that  falsehood  is  his  natural  and 
peculiar  element  Whenever  he  lies  he  speaks  out  of  his  own 
false  nature,  for  he  is  a  liar,  and  the  father  of  the  lie  or  of  the 
liar.  If  we  accept  the  third  rendering,  the  thought  turns  rather 
on  ike  character  of  the  Jews  as  children  of  Satan.  He  utters 
first,  the  general  chai^  ye  are  the  children  of  the  DevUy  and 
aa  such  will  do  his  works.  Hence  you  will  be  both  mvrderers 
and  liars.  He  was  a  murderer,  and  je  are  seeking  to  kill  me. 
He  stood  not  in  the  truth,  neither  do  je ;  for,  when  one  speak- 
eth  a  lie,  he  speaketh  out  of  his  own  false  nature,  bj  a  birth- 
right of  falsehood,  since  his  father  also  is  a  liar.^ 

45.  And  because  I  (^  S^  iri).  Bender  hut^  instead  of 
ani.  You  would  believe  falsehood  if  I  should  speak  it,  hut 
because  I  tell  you  the  truth,  you  do  not  believe.  The  /  is 
eqiphatic    Ij  because  I  tell  you,  etc 

46.  Convinceth  {ikiyx^i).    See  on  iii  20.    Eev.,  convicteth. 

,  Sin  {ofiaprlm).  Kot  fauU  or  error ^  but  sin  in  general,  as 
everywhere  in  the  Kew  Testament 


*  I  adopt  this  rendering,  thongli  wlUi  some  hesitation,  as  best  representing 
what  aeems  to  me  the  line  of  thought  in  the  whole  passage,  and  as  avoiding 
most  of  the  grammatioal  difficalties.  1,  though  grammatioallj  defensible, 
neoessitates  the  awkwardness  of  rendering  vHntfi  as  neater,  bj  inference  or 
derivation  from  the  masculine  ^^96anit,  It  is  much  more  natural  to  take  it  as 
iaiasouline.  Both  1  and  2  require  6  mn^p  to  be  taken  as  the  predicoite^  where- 
as^  having  the  article,  it  would  naturally  be  expected  to  be  the  subject  The 
maiii  objection  to  8,  is  the  omission  of  the  subject  with  XoXg,  which  is  harsh. 
^rofeMor  Kendrick  (American  edition  of  Mejer)  cites  as  a  parallel  ^i|0i,  in 
2  Cor.  X.  10,  and  very  justlj  observes  that  *'  if  anj  objection  maj  lie  against 
this  construction,  it  does  not  approach  in  harshness  to  that  which  makes  k 
wviV  o^Tov  a  predicate  in  the  sense  ordinarilj  assigned  to  it.  It  is  adopted 
\fj  Wiestoott,  and  MiUigan  and  Monlton. 


Digitized  by  (jOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  179 

The  truth  (AXifScow).  Without  the  article,  and  therefore 
not  the  whole  truth,  but  that  which  i$  true  as  to  any  part  of 
divine  revelation. 

47.  He  that  is  of  (o  tkp  itc).  The  familiar  oonstmction.  Bee 
on  i.  46. 

48.  Say  we  not  well.  Indicating  a  current  reproach.  Well 
{fcaXm)  is  literally,  ^/En^^y,  heautifuUy.  Sometimes  ironical,  as 
Mark  vii.  6. 

Thou  art  a  Samaritan  {Xaikap^tnn  et  cH).  lit.,  a  Sameuri- 
tan  art  thou :  the  <r^,  thou,  terminating  the  sentence  with  H 
bitter  emphasis :  ihou  who  prof essest  such  reverence  for  Qod 
and  His  law,  art  only  a  Samaritan,  hostile  to  the  true  law  and 
kingdom  of  God. 

49.  I  have  not  a  devil.  He  ignores  the  chai^  of  being  a 
Samaritan,  refusing  to  recognize  the  national  distinction.  For 
devil  read  demon. 

50.  There  is  one  that  seeketh.  That  seeks  my  honor  and 
judges  between  me  and  my  opposers. 

51.  Keep  (Ti/pi^).    See  on  1  Pet  i.  4. 

.    Saying  (X^ov).    Better,  vxyrd,  as  Bev.    See  on  ver.  48. 

He  shall  not  see  death  {BAhhitov  ov  ft^i  ^€wpi^).  The 
phrase  Seetpelp  IMvarov,  to  see  death,  occurs  only  here  in  the  New 
Testament  The  double  n^ative  signifies  vn  notoiee,  hy  no 
means,  BmDpifi<rQ,  see,  denoting  steady,  jnvtracted  vision,  is  pur- 
posely used,  because  the  promise  contemplates  the  entire  course 
of  the  believer's  life  in  Christ  It  is  not,  shaU  not  die  forever, 
but  shall  live  eternally.  Upon  this  life,  which  is  essentially  the 
negation  and  contradiction  of  death,  the  believer  enters  from 
the  moment  of  his  union  with  Christ,  and  moves  along  its  entire 
course,  in  time  no  less  than  in  eternity,  seeing  only  life,  and 
with  his  back  turned  on  death.  The  reverse  of  this  truth,  in 
connection  with  the  same  verb,  is  painfully  su^estive.    The 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


180  WORD  8TUDIHB  IN  THR  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

qaestion  is  pertinent  why  the  EeriBers  have  retained  $eej  and 
have  not  sabstitated  heholdj  as  in  ao  many  instances. 

52.  Now.  Looking  back  to  ver.  48.  If  we  were  too  hasty 
then  in  saying  that  yon  have  a  demon,  yonr  words  now  f nlly 
justify  ns.  l^ey  understood  Him  to  be  speaking  of  natural 
death. 

Is  dead  (anriBa»€).  Better,  died:  referring  to  the  historical 
fact 

Taste  of  death.  They  change* the  form  of  Jesus'  statement. 
The  Lord  himself  touted  of  deattL  See  Heb.  ii.  9.  The  phrase 
taete  cf  death  does  not  occur  in  the  Old  Testament,  but  is  com- 
mon in  Babbinic  writings.  ^^The  angel  of  death,"  say  the 
Babbis,  ^^  holdeth  his  sword  in  his  hand  at  the  bed's  head, 
having  on  the  end  thereof  three  drops  of  gall.  The  sick  man, 
spying  this  deadly  angel,  openeth  his  mouth  with  fear;  and 
then  those  drops  fall  in,  of  which  one  killeth  him,  the  second 
maketh  him  pale,  the  third  rotteth." 

53.  Art  thou  {p^  ai>).  Thou,  emphatic,  and  the  n^ative 
interrogative  particle  implying  a  n^ative  answer,  thou  art  not 
surely  greater. 

Which  is  dead  (S^m^),  The  compound  pronoun  Sart^y  iohich^ 
is  used  eooplicatvoelj/j  according  to  a  familiar  New  Testament 
usage,  instead  of  the  simple  relative.  The  sense  is,  seeing  that 
he  is  dead.  The  compound  relative  properly  indicates  the  dase 
or  kind  to  which  an  object  belongs.  Art  thou  greater  than 
Abraham,  who  is  himself  one  of  the  dead  t  So  Col.  iii.  5. 
"  Mortify  covetousness,  seeing  it  is  (^*9  iarlv)  idolatry."  See 
on  Matt  ziii.  52 ;  xxi.  41 ;  Mark  xii.  18 ;  Luke  xiL  1 ;  Acts  viL 
68;  X.  41;  1  Pet  ii.  11. 

55.  Saying  (Kiyov).    Properly,  ward,  as  ver.  51.    So  Bev. 

56.  Rejoiced  (^aXXui^aTo).  With  emtUant  joy.  See  on 
1  Pet  i  6. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOBPBL  OF  JOHN.  181 

To  see  {ha  tSjf).  The  Greek  constrnction  is  peculiar.  Lit, 
that  he  BhauHd  see;  i.e.,  in  the  knowledge  or  anticipation  that 
he  should  see. 

My  day.  The  exact  meaning  of  the  expression  is  altc^ther 
uncertain. 

67.  Thou  art  not  yet  fifty  years  old  (iramitcovTa  hri  olhr» 
I^i9)«  Lit,  thou  hast  not  yet  jifty  years.  The  age  of  com- 
pleted manhood. 

Hast  thou  seen.    Again  misquoting  the  Lord's  words. 

68.  WaSy  I  am  (yepiaStu,  iyA  €lfu).  It  is  important  to  ob- 
serve the  distinction  between  the  two  verbs.  Abraham's  life 
was  under  the  conditions  of  time,  and  therefore  had  a  temporal 
beginning.  Hence,  Abraham  oame  into  heing^  or  woe  horn 
{y€i4a$€u).  Jesus'  life  was  from  and  to  eternity.  Hence  the 
formula  for  abeolutey  timdeee  existence,  lam  (^  e^).  Bee 
on  i.  3 ;  vii  34. 

69.  Going  through  the  midst  of  them,  and  so  passed 

by.    The  best  texts  omit 


OB  AFTER  IX. 

1.  From  his  birth  (&c7eim^).  The  word  only  here  in  the 
New  Testament 

2.  This  man,  or  his  parents.  It  was  a  common  Jewish 
view  that  the  merits  or  demerits  of  the  parents  would  appear 
in  the  children,  and  that  the  thoughts  of  a  mother  might  affect 
the  moral  state  of  her  unborn  ofFspring.  The  apostasy  of  one 
of  the  greatest  Babbis  had,  in  popular  belief,  been  caused  by 
the  sinful  delight  of  his  mother  in  passing  through  an  idol 
grove. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


182  WORD  STUDIBB  IN  THB.NEW  TESTAMENT. 

3.  But  that  (oXX'  Ufa).  There  is  an  ellipsis :  hut  {he  was 
born  Ui/nd){hat. 

4.  I  must  work  [iii^  tel  ipyd^eaSat).  The  best  texts  read 
^fi&:,  U8y  instead  of  i^,  me.  Lit.,  it  is  necessary  far  iM  to 
work.  The  disciples  are  thus  associated  by  Jesus  with  Himself. 
Compare  iii.  11. 

Sent  may  not  us.  The  Son  sends  the  disciples,  as  the  Father 
sends  the  Son. 

5.  As  long  as  (irav).  More  correctly,  whensoever.  Bey., 
when.  Whether  in  my  incarnation,  or  before  my  incarnation, 
or  after  it    Compare  John  i  4,  10. 

The  light.  See  on  viiL  12.  The  article  is  wanting.  West- 
oott  says,  '^  Christ  is  ^  light  to  the  world,'  as  well  as  ^  the  one 
.Light  of  the  world.'  The  character  is  unchangeable,  but  the 
display  of  the  character  varies  with  the  occasion." 

6.  On  the  ground  (xa/Aol).    Only  here  and  xviiL  6. 

Anointed  {ivixpice).  Only  here  and  ver.  11.  The  spittle 
was  regarded  as  having  a  peculiar  virtue,  not  only  as  a  remedy 
for  diseases  of  the  eye,  but  generally  as  a  charm,  so  that  it 
was  employed  in  incantations.  Persius,  describing  an  old  crone 
handling  an  infant,  says:  ^^  She  takes  the  babe  from  the  cradle, 
and  with  her  middle  finger  moistens  its  forehead  and  lips  with 
spittle  to  keep  away  the  evil  eye"  (** Sat,"  ii.,  32,  S3).  Tacitus 
relates  how  one  of  the  common  people  of  Alexandria  impor- 
tuned Yespasian  for  a  remedy  for  his  blindness,  and  prayed 
him  to  sprinkle  his  cheeks  and  the  balls  of  his  eyes  with  the 
secretion  of  his  mouth  ("  History,"  iv.,  81).  Pliny  says :  "  We 
are  to  believe  that  by  continually  anointing  each  morning  with 
fasting  saliva  ({.«.,  before  eating),  inflammations  of  the  eyes 
are  prevented  "  (*'  Natural  History,"  xxviii.,  7).  Some  editors 
read  here  hriBfiiemf,  piU  vpon^  ioac  hr^xp^^^  anointed. 

Of  the  blind  man.    Omit,  and  read  as  Bev.,  his  eyes. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  18^ 

7.  Wash  (W'^).    Wash  the  eyes.    See  on  Acts  xri.  38.     j 

Siloam.  By  Kabbinical  writers,  SMloach:  Septtiagint,  ^(^ 
Xiadfi :  Vulgate  and  Latin  fathers,  Siloe.  Josephns,  generally, 
Siloa.  In  scripture  always  called  a  jx>ol  or  tankj  huiUj  and  not 
natural.  The  site  is  clearly  identified  in  a  recess  at  the  south- 
eastern termination  of  Zion,  near  the  junction  of  the  valley  of 
TyropoBon  with  that  of  the  Kidron.  According  to  Dr.  Thom- 
son, it  is  a  parallelogram  about  fifty-three  feet  long  and  eigh- 
teen wide,  and  in  its  perfect  condition  must  have  been  nearly 
twenty  feet  deep.  It  is  thus  the  smallest  of  all  the  Jerusalem 
pools.  The  water  fiows  into  it  through  a  subterraneous  conduit 
from  the  Fountain  of  the  Virgin,  and  the  waters  are  marked 
by  an  ebb  and  fiow.  Dr.  Eobinson  witnessed  a  rise  and  fall  of 
one  foot  in  ten  minutes.  The  conduit  has  been  traversed  by 
two  explorers,  Dr.  Eobinson  and  Captain  Warren.  See  tlie 
account  of  Warren's  exploration  in  Thomson,  ^  Southern  Pales- 
tine and  Jerusalem,"  p.  460.  On  the  word  j>ool^  see  on 
V.2. 

Sent.  The  Hebrew  word  means  outflow  (of  waters) ;  missioj 
probably  with  reference  to  the  fact  that  the  temple-monot 
sends  forth  its  spring- waters*  Many  expositors  find  a  typical 
significance  in  the  fact  of  Christ's  working  through  the  pool  of 
this  name.  Thus  Milligan  and  Moulton,  after  noting  the  faet 
that  the  water  was  drawn  from  this  pool  for  pouring  upon  the 
altar  during  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles ;  that  it  was  associated 
with  the  ^^  wells  of  salvation  "  (Isa.  xii.  3) ;  and  that  the  pouring 
out  of  the  water  symbolized  the  effusion  of  spiritual  blessing  in 
the  days  of  the  Messiah,  go  on  to  say:  ^^With  the  most 
natural  interest,  therefore,  the  Evangelist  observes  that  its  Y^rj 
name  corresponds  to  the  Messiah ;  and  by  pointing  out  this 
fact  indicates  to  us  what  was  the  object  of  Jesus  in  sending  the 
man'to  these  waters.  In  this,  even  more  distinctly  than  in  the 
other  particulars  that  we  have  noted,  Jesus,  in  sending  the  man 
away  from  Him,  is  keeping  Himself  before  him  in  everything 
connected  with  his  cure.  Thus,  throughout  the  whole  narra- 
tive, all  attention  is  concentrated  on  Jesus  Himself,  who  is  the 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


184  WORD  8TUDIBS  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Light  of  the  world,  who  was  ^  sent  of  Qoi '  to  open  blind  ejes." 
See  also  Westcott  and  GKxlet 

8.  Blind.    The  best  texts  snbstitate  irpocairfy:,  a  beggar. 

That  sat  and  begged  (o  fcoBi^fiaH^  koI  wpoa-a&r&v).  Lit., 
the  one  sitting  and  begging.    Denoting  something  customary. 

9.  He  said  {iKeaw).  The  strong  demonstrative  throws  the 
man  into  strong  relief  as  the  central  figure. 

11.  To  the  pool  of  Siloam.  The  best  texts  read  simply, 
Oo  to  Siloam. 

Received  sight  {Avifikey^).  Originally,  to  look  upj  as 
Matt  xiv.  19 ;  Mark  xvi.  4>  and  so  some  render  it  here ;  bat 
better,  /  recovered  eight. 

14.  It  was  the  Sabbath  day  when  (^  Bi  adfifiarov  ire). 
The  best  texts  read,  instead  of  2x6  when^  hf  §  fifjiipff  on  which 
day.    lit.,  it  was  a  Sabbath  on  the  day  on  which. 

16.  Keepeth  not  the  Sabbath.  A  Babbinical  precept  de- 
elares,  ^'It  is  forbidden  to  apply  even  fasting-spittle  to  the 
eyes  on  the  Sabbath."  The  words  in  ver.  14,  made  the  day^ 
also  mark  a  specific  point  of  offence. 

18.  The  Jews.  Notice  the  change  from  ^  Pharisees. 
The  Pharisees  had  already  divided  on  this  miracle  (ver.  16). 
The  Jews  represent  that  section  which  was  hostile  to  Jesus. 

Of  him  that  had  received  his  sight  (airov  rovavafiKh^w^ 
T09).    Properly,  ^^  of  the  very  one  who  had  reoevoed.^^ 

32.  Had  agreed — ^that  {(ruperiBe^vro — iva).  The  sense  is, 
had  formed  an  agreement  in  order  to  bring  about  this  end,  viz., 
that  the  confessor  of  Christ  should  be  excommunicated. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  185 

Confess  (ofioXoyijoi;).    See  on  Matt,  vii  33;  x.  33. 

He  should  be  put  out  of  the  synagogue  {&inHrvpdrfmyo9 
ffbnrrai).  The  literal  rendering  cannot  be  neatly  given,  as 
there  is  no  English  adjective  corresponding  to  cmoavvirf^t^^ 
which  means  exoiuded  from  the  synagogue:  as  nearly  as  pos- 
sible— that  he  should  become  banished  from  the  synagogue. 
The  adjective  occurs  only  in  John's  Gtospel — here,  xiL  43 ;  xvi. 
3.  Three  kinds  of  ezcommnnication  were  recognized,  of  which 
only  the  third  was  the  real  cutting  off,  the  other  two  being  dis- 
ciplinary. The  first,  and  lightest,  was  called  rebuke,  and  lasted 
from  seven  to  thirty  days.  The  second  was  called  thrusting 
outj  and  lasted  for  thirty  days  at  least,  followed  by  a  ^^  second 
admonition,"  which  lasted  for  thirty  days  more.  This  could 
only  be  pronounced  in  an  assembly  of  ten.  It  was  accompanied 
by  curses,  and  sometimes  proclaimed  with  the  blast  of  the  horn. 
The  excommunicated  person  would  not  be  admitted  into  any 
assembly  of  ten  men,  nor  to  public  prayer.  People  would  keep 
at  the  distance  of  four  cubits  from  him,  as  if  he  were  a  leper. 
Stones  were  to  be  cast  on  his  coffin  when  dead,  and  mourning 
for  him  was  forbidden.  If  all  else  failed,  the  third,  or  real  ex- 
communication was  pronounced,  the  duration  of  which  was 
indefinite.  The  man  was  to  be  as  one  dead.  Ko  intercourse 
was  to  be  held  with  him ;  one  must  not  show  him  the  road, 
and  though  he  might  buy  the  necessaries  of  life,  it  was  forbid- 
den to  eat  and  drink  with  him.  These  severer  forms  appear 
to  have  been  of  later  introduction,  so  that  the  penalty  which 
the  blind  man's  parents  feared  was  probably  separation  from 
all  religious  fellowship,  and  from  ordinary  intercourse  of  life 
for  perhaps  thirty  days. 

34.  Give  God  the  praise  (S09  U^  r^  BeS).  Bey.,  give 
glory  to  God.  Compare  Josh.  vii.  19 ;  1  Sam.  vi.  6.  This 
phrase  addressed  to  an  offender  implies  that  by  some  previous 
act  or  word  he  has  done  dishonor  to  God,  and  appeals  to  him 
to  repair  the  dishonor  by  speaking  the  truth.  In  this  case  it  is 
also  an  appeal  to  the  restored  man  to  ascribe  his  cure  directly 
to  GKhI,  and  not  to  Jesus.    Palgrave,  ^^  Central  and  Eastern- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


J.86  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NBW .  TESTAMENT. 

Arabia,"  says  that  the  Arabic  phrase  commonly  addresaed  to 
one  who  has  said  something  extremely  oat  of  place,  la  Istaghfir 
AUahy  Askjixmhn  of  Ood. 

We  know.  The  V)e  is  emphatic  TTd,  the  wise  men  and 
gnardians  of  religion. 

28.  Reviled  {PsjoAipufaav),  The  verb  means  to  reproach  or 
scold  in  a  load  and  abnsive  manner.  Calvin,  on  1  Cor.  iv.  12, 
'^  being  r&viled  we  bless,"  remaib:  ^^Ao^opla  is  a  harsher  rail- 
ing, which  not  only  rebakes  a  man,  bat  also  sharply  bites  him, 
and  stamps  him  with  open  contamely.  Hence  Xoiiopei^  is  to 
wonnd  a  man  as  with  an  accarsed  sting." 

His  disciple  (/lo^iTr^  i/celvov).  Lit.,  that  man^s  disciple. 
The  prononn  has  a  contemptaoas  force  which  is  not  given  by 
his. 

29.  Spake  (XeXiX^icey).  Perfect  tense,  haih  spohenj  and  the 
authority  of  Moses'  words  therefore  continaes  to  the  present. 
So  Bev.    AaKi(o  is  to  talk,  familiarly.    See  Exod.  xxziiL  11. 

Whence  he  is.    Compare  viL  27 ;  viiL  14. 

30.  A  marvellous  thing  {Savfuurrw).  The  correct  reading 
adds  the  article,  the  marvel.    So  Bev. 

Ye  know  not.  Ye  is  emphatic :  ye  who  might  be  expected 
to  know  aboat  a  man  who  has  wronght  sach  a  miracle. 

And  yet  (koI).     See  on  viii  20 ;  i.  10. 

31.  We  know.  Here  the  pronoan  is  not  expressed,  and  the 
toe  is  not  emphatic,  like  the  prononns  in  vv.  24,  29,  bat  ex- 
presses the  common  information  of  all  concerning  a  familiar 
fact 

A  worshipper  of  God  {Seocefitfi).  Only  here  in  the  New 
Testament  The  kindred  word,  Seoaifieia,  godlinesa,  occnrs  only 
at  1  Tim.  ii.  10.    Compoanded  with  B€6<:,  God,  and  aifiofuu,  to 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOBPBL  OF  JOHN.  18iT 

yxytsKip^  the  same  verb  which  appears,  in  eiaefiii^t  devaui  (Acta 
z.  2,  7;  xxii.  12),  and  evaifieiOf  godliness  (Acts  iiL  12 ;  1  Tim. 
iL  2,  etc.).  See  on  2  Pet  i  3.  These  two  latter  words,  while 
they  maj  mean  reverence  toward  God,  maj  also  mean  the  dap 
folfihnent  of  human  relations ;  while  Oeoaefii^,  worshipper  of 
God,  is  limited  to  piety  towards  God. 

32.  Since  the  world  began  (&  rot)  at&vo^).  The  exact 
phrase  only  here  in  tiie  New  Testament.  *Air  al&vos  is  found 
in  Acts  iiL  21 ;  zv.  18 ;  &wb  r&v  auivmp  in  CoL  i  26. 

34.  Altogether  (8X09).    Lit.,  all  of  thee. 

In  sins.  Standing  first  in  the  Greek  order,  and  emphatid, 
as  is  also  ai>  thouy  in  both  instances.  ^^  In  sins  wast  thou  bom, 
all  of  thee;  and  dost  thou  teach  us t " 

Teach.  Emphatic:  Dost  thou,  thus  bom  in  sins,  assume 
the  office  of  teacher  f 

Cast  him  out.  From  the  place  where  they  were  conversing. 
Kot  eoDOommumcaied,  which  this  miscellaneous  gathering  could 
not  do. 

35.  Said  unto  him.    Omit  unto  him. 

Dost  thou  believe  (<n^  wurrevei^)  ?  The  form  of  the  question 
indicates  the  confident  expectation  of  an  affirmative  answer. 
It  is  almost  an  affirmation,  you  stireh/  believe/  you  {av^  em- 
phatic) who  have  borne  such  bold  testimony  to  me  that  they 
have  cast  you  out  Note  the  phrase,  vurrevet^  ek$  hdieve  on^ 
and  see  on  i.  12. 

Son  of  God.  Both  Tischendorf  and  Westcott  and  Hort 
read  Sonofman. 

86.  Who  is  He  9  The  best  texts  insert  mi,  and;  emd  wh» 
is  Set  which  imparts  an  air  of  eagerness  to  the  question. 

38.  Worshipped  {irpoceKihni<reif).    See  on  Acts  z.  25. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


188  WORD  8TUDIB8  IN  THB  HEW  TESTAMENT. 

39.  Judgment  (tcplfAa).  Kot  the  <ict  of  judgment,  bat  its 
t€8uU.  Bis  very  presence  in  the  world  constitates  a  separation^ 
which  is  the  primitive  idea  of  judgment,  between  those  who 
believe  on  Him  and  those  who  reject  Him.    See  on  iii.  17. 

40.  Are  we  blind  also  (/lij  ieaX^fiekrwfiXaNir^i  The 
also  belongs  with  we.  The  interrogative  particle  has  the  force 
of  we  are  surely  not,  and  the  we  is  emphatic.  Are  we  also 
TMndf    So  'Rev. 

41.  Ye  should  have  no  sin  {ovk  op  elxere  ufuiprlav).  Or, 
ye  would  have  had.  The  phrase  ifiaprlav  ix^iv,  to  home  sin, 
occurs  only  in  John,  in  the  Gk>spel  and  First  Epistle. 


CHAPTER  X. 

1.  Verily,  verily  (a^^y«  ^h^)*  "^be  formula  never  begins 
anything  quite  new,  but  connects  what  follows  with  what  pre- 
cedes. This  discourse  grows  out  of  the  assumption  of  the 
Pharisees  to  be  the  only  authoritative  guides  of  the  people  (ix. 
24,  29).   They  have  already  been  described  as  hlmd  and  si/nful. 

Sheepfold  (odX^y  t&v  irpofiiiwii).  TAtyfold  of  the  sheep. 
So  Rev.,  better,  because  the  two  ideas  of  the  fiock  and  the  fold 
are  treated  distinctly.    Compare  ver.  16. 

Some  other  way  (dXXa;^^^).  \A\..yfrom  some  other  guar- 
ier.  The  thief  does  not,  like  the  shepherd,  oome  from  some 
well-known  direction,  as  from  his  dwelling  or  from  the  pasture, 
but  from  an  unknown  quarter  and  by  a  road  of  his  own.  This 
from  is  significant,  because,  in  the  previous  discourses,  Jesus 
has  laid  great  stress  on  the  source  from  which  He  proceeded, 
and  has  made  the  difference  in  character  between  Himself  and 
His  opposers  turn  upon  difference  of  origin.  See  viii.  23,  42, 
44.  In  the  latter  part  of  this  chapter  He  brings  out  the  same 
thought  (w.  SO,  32,  33,  36). 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


OOSPBL  OF  JOHN.  189 

Thief —robber  (tcXiimr: — Xpanlj^).  For  the  distinction  see 
on  Mark  xi.  17.  There  is  a  climax  in  the  order  of  the  words ; 
one  who  will  gain  his  end  by  orqfij  and,  if  that  will  not  suffice, 
by  violence. 

3.  The  ehepherd  (woifiiiv).  Better,  a  shepherd.  It  is  the 
character  rather  than  ihejfereon  that  is  contemplated. 

3.  Porter  (At;/Ho/>^).  From  ^vpa,  doar^  and  &pa,  care.  An 
nnder-shepherd,  to  whose  charge  the  sheep  are  committed  after 
they  have  been  folded  for  the  night,  and  who  opens  the  door 
on  the  arrival  of  the  shepherd  in  the  morning. 

Calleth  (icoXcZ).  But  the  best  texts  read  ^vei,  expressing 
personal  address. 

4.  Putteth  forth  {itefidKy).  Bev.,  more  strictly,  hath  jmi 
forth.  Instead  of  leadeth  oat,  in  ver.  3.  It  implies  a  oonetraini  / 
as  if  some  of  the  sheep  were  unwilling  to  leave  the  fold.  Meyer 
says  that  putteth  forth  pictures  the  maimer  of  the  leading  out. 
He  lays  hold  on  the  sheep  and  brings  them  out  to  the  door. 

His  own  sheep  (r^  IBta  'n-pSfiara).  The  best  texts  read 
wdma,  ally  for  wpd^ara,  sheep  :  all  hie  own.    So  Bev. 

Goeth  before.  As  the  Eastern  shepherd  always  does. 
Having  pushed  them  forth,  he  now  leads  them. 

Follow.  ^^  It  is  necessary  that  they  should  be  taught  to  fol- 
low, and  not  stray  away  into  the  unfenced  fields  of  wheat  which 
^lie  so  temptingly  on  either  side.  The  shepherd  calls  from  time 
to  time  to  remind  them  of  his  presence.  They  know  his  voice 
and  follow  on ;  but  if  a  stranger  call,  they  stop,  lift  up  their 
heads  in  alarm,  and  if  the  call  is  repeated,  they  turn  and  flee 
from  him ;  for  they  know  not  the  voice  of  strangers.  This  is 
not  the  fanciful  costume  of  a  parable ;  it  is  simple  fact.  I  have 
made  the  experiment  often  "  (Thomson). 

6.  Parable  (wapoifAlap).  The  word  occurs  but  once  outside 
of  John's  writings  (3  Pet  iL  22).    The  usual  word  for  parable 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


190  WORD  STUDIBS  IK  THB  AKW  TESTAMENT. 

18  irapafidXai,  which  is  once  rendered  proveri  in  the  A.  Y.  (Lake 
1J7.  23,  changed  to  parable  hj  Bev.),  and  which  occors  nowhere 
in  John.    For  the  distinction  flee  on  Matt  xiiL  8. 

7.  The  door  of  the  sheep.  Meaning  the  door  far  the 
flheep;  not  the  door  of  the  fold.  ^The  thought  is  connected 
with  the  life,  and  not  simply  with  the  organization." 

10.  The  thief  (o  xXiirrff^).  Christ  pnts  Himself  in  contrast 
with  the  meaner  criminal. 

I  am  come  (^X3oy).  More  oorrectlj,  /  oame.  I  am  came 
wonld  be  the  perfect  tense. 

More  abundantly  {mpurahv).    Lit,  may  have  abundance* 

11.  The  good  shepherd  (o  ttoi/m^  6  m)^).  Lit,  the  shep- 
herd the  good  (shepherd).  £aX^,  though  not  of  freqnent  oc- 
cnrrence  in  John,  is  more  common  than  iya36^,  ffoodj  which 
occurs  but  four  times,  and  three  times  out  of  the  four  in  the 
neuter  gender,  a  good  thmffj  or  that  which  is  good.  KdXM  in 
John  is  applied  to  tcine  (ii.  10),  three  times  to  the  shepherd  in 
this  chapter,  and  twice  to  toorks  (x.  32,  33).  In  classical  usage, 
originally  as  descriptive  of  outward form^  heauiiful ;  of  usefvl- 
nesSf  as  Ajair  haveuj  a  fadr  wind.  AtispicuyuSt  as  sacrifices. 
2f orally  heautifvly  noble ;  hence  virtue  is  called  rh  kcCKjov. 
The  New  Testament  usage  is  similar.  Out/tjoardly  fair^  as  the 
stones  of  the  temple  (Luke  xxi.  5) :  well  adapted  to  Ospwrpose^ 
as  salt  (Mark  ix.  50) :  competent  for  an  office^  as  deacons  (1 
Tim.  iv.  6) ;  a  steward  (1  Pet.  iv.  10) ;  a  soldier  (2  Tim.  ii. 
3) :  expedient^  wholeso7ne  (Mark  ix.  43,  46,  47) :  moraUy  ffoodj 
noblej  as  toorks  (Matt  v.  16) ;  conscience  (Heb.  xiii.  18).  The 
phrase  it  is  ffood^  i.e.,  a  good  or  proper  thing  (Itom.  xiv.  21). 
In  the  Septuagint  /ccPio^  is  the  most  usual  word  for  good  as 
opposed  to  evil  (Gen.  ii.  17 ;  xxiv.  50 ;  Isa.  v.  20).  In  Luke 
viiL  IS,  iciiXo9  and  iryaSi^  are  found  together  as  epithets  of  the 
heart ;  honest  (or  virtuous,  noble)  and  good.  The  epithet  iraX^, 
applied  here  to  the  shepherd,  points  to  the  essential  goodness  as 
nobly  realized,  and  appealing  to  admiring  respect  and  affection. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


G06PBL  OF  JOHK.  191 

As  Canon  WestcJott  observesy  "  in  the  fulfilment  of  His  work, 
the  GkH>d  Shepherd  claims  the  admiration  of  all  that  is  gen- 
erous in  man." 

Giveth  hi8  life  (t^  i^^OC^  airov  rlSffaof).  The  phrase  is 
peculiar  to  John,  occnrring  in  the  Gospel  and  First  Epistle.  It 
is  explained  in  two  ways :  either  (1)  as  laying  down  as  a  pledge^ 
payi/ng  as  ajmce,  according  to  the  classical  usage  of  the  word 
rlSfifu.  So  Demosthenes,  tojHiy  interest  or  the  alien  tax.  Or 
(2)  according  to  John  xiiL  4,  as  laying  aaids  his  life  like  a  gar- 
ment The  latter  seems  preferabla  TiSff/jUj  in  the  sense  <^ 
io  pay  dawn  a  priccj  does  not  occur  in  the  Kew  Testament, 
unless  this  phrase,  to  lay  down  the  Ufe^  be  so  explained.^  Grodet 
calls  attention  to  the  fact  that  just  as  John  says  (xiii.  12)  He 
took  again  His  garmeniSj  so  in  1  John  iii.  16,  where  the  expres- 
sion occurs  again,  He  sajs,  that  I  may  take  it  again.  So  also 
in  this  chapter,  vv.  17, 18.  The  verb  is  used  in  the  sense  of 
laying  aside  in  the  classics,  as  to  lay  aside  ti^or,  shields,  etc 
Compare  Matt.  xx.  28,  Sotmu  rijv  '^^v^v,  to  give  His  life. 

For  the  sheep  {inrip).    On  behalf  of. 

12.  Hireling  (jiurSmrbs:).  From  fiurSa^j  hire.  See  on  2 
Pet  ii.  18.    Wye,  merchant. 

Seeth  (Seapet).  Yery  graphic  His  gaze  is  Jiated 'WiQi  the 
fascination  of  terror  on  the  approaching  wolf.  Compare  Dante : 

"  But  not  60  much,  thjit  did  not  give  me  fear 
A  lion's  aspect  which  appeared  to  me. 


And  a  she- wolf,  that  with  all  hnngeringa 
Seemed  to  be  laden  in  her  meagreness, 
And  man  J  folk  has  caused  to  live  forlorn  I 
She  brought  upon  me  so  much  heaviness, 
With  the  affright  that  from  her  aspect  came, 
That  I  the  hope  relinquished  of  the  height" 

''Inferno,"!.,  44-64. 

*  Huther  on  1  John  iii  16,  claims  that  this  sense  would  be  admissible 
onlj  in  the  event  of  the  phrase  being  used  invariabl/  with  Mp  rirot ,  on  be- 
kaffqfane. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


192  WORD  8TUDIBS  IN  THB  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

Westcott  cites  Angastine  on  this  word :  fuga  animi  iimor 
estj  the  flight  of  the  mind  is  cowardice;  with  which  again  com- 
pare Dante : 

*'  So  did  mj  soul,  that  gtill  was  fleeing  onward, 
Tom  itself  baok,"  etc. 

"Inferno,"!.,  25. 

Leaveth  (a^lffo-i).    See  on  iy.  3. 

Catoheth  {apirdfyi).  Better,  as  Bey.,  encOcheth;  though 
C(ztch  is  doubtless  ased  by  the  A.  Y.  in  its  earlier  and  stronger 
sense,  from  the  low  Latin  caoiarey  to  chasCj  corrupted  from  cap- 
tarCf  to  match  or  lag  hold  of.  Compare  the  Italian  cacciarey  to 
hunt.  The  same  word  is  used  at  yer.  28,  of  jiihAcking  out  of 
Christ's  hand.    See  on  Matt.  xi.  12. 

The  sheep.  The  best  texts  omit.  Bead,  as  Bey.,  soattereth 
them. 

13.  The  hireling  fleeth.  The  best  texts  omit  Bead,  as 
Bey.,  supplying  hejleeth. 

Careth  not  (ov  ^Xe^  axn^).  Lit.,  the  sheep  a^e  not  a  care 
to  him.    See  on  1  Pet.  y.  7.    The  contrast  is  suggestiye. 

14.  Am  known  of  mine  {yt^vdHrtcofuu  inro  r&v  ifi&v).  The 
best  texts  read,  yafdKrtcova-i  fie  r^  ifid,  mine  own  know  me.  So 
Bey. 

15.  As  the  Father  knoweth  me.  Connect  these  words 
with  the  previous  sentence :  mme  own  know  m^,  even  as  the 
Faiiher  knoioeth  me^  etc. 

16.  Fold  (avXay:).  From  &»,  to  hlowy  hence,  strictly,  a  place 
open  to  the  air ;  an  uncovered  space  enclosed  by  a  walL  So 
Homer,  of  the  caye  of  the  Cyclops: 

*'  Bnt  when  we  oame  npon  that  neighboring  oossti 
We  saw  npon  its  verge  beside  the  sea 
A  oave  high-yanlted,  overbrowed  with  shmbs 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  193 

Of  IftoreL    There  nmcli  cattle  Ujr  at  rest. 

Both  sheep  and  goats.    Aronnd  it  was  a  eauri  (tAx4IU 

A  high  encloeore  of  hewn  stone." 

••Odyssey,"  ix.,  181-185. 

Dr.  Thomson  says :  ^^  The  low  building  on  the  hill-side  which 
we  have  jnst  passed,  with  arches  in  front,  and  its  endosore 
protected  by  a  rabble  wall  and  thorny  hedge,  is  a  sheepfold  or 
mardh.  .  .  .  The  mar&hs  are  generally  boilt  in  a  valley, 
or  on  the  sunny  side  of  a  hill,  where  they  are  sheltered  from 
the  winter  winds.  In  ordinary  weather  the  sheep  and  goats 
are  gathered  at  night  into  the  enclosed  yard ;  bat  when  the 
nights  are  cold  and  stormy  the  flocks  are  shnt  up  in  the  mar&h. 
The  sharp  thorn-bashes  on  the  top  of  the  wall  that  snrroands 
the  yard  are  a  defence  which  the  prowling  wolf  will  rarely 
attempt  to  scale.  The  leopard  and  panther  of  this  conntry, 
however,  when  pressed  with  hanger,  will  sometimes  overleap 
this  thorny  hedge,  and  with  one  bonnd  land  amongst  the  fright- 
ened fold**  Q^ Oentral  Palestine  and  PhoBnicia,"  p.  591).  Oom- 
pare  Homer : 

•'  As  a  lion  who  has  leaped 
Into  a  fold— and  he  who  guards  the  flook 
Has  wonnded  bnt  not  slain  him— feels  his  rage 
Waked  by  the  blow ;— the  affrighted  shepherd  then 
Yentores  not  near,  bnt  hides  within  the  stalls. 
And  the  forsaken  sheep  are  put  to  flight, 
And  huddling,  slain  in  heaps,  tiU  o*er  the  fenoe 
The  sarage  bounds  into  the  fields  again." 

•«  mad,'*  v.,  188-10. 

Bring  {dyarfeh^).  Better,  leadj  as  Bev.,  in  margin*  Compare 
ver.  3,  leaddh  them  (nU.  The  idea  is  not  bringing  thrnn  to^ 
gether  (as  (Twarfd^fg^  xi.  52),  or  oonducUng  them  to  one  place,  bat 
aeeuming  the  guidance. 

There  ahall  be  (yevii^erai).  More  correctly,  shaU  come  to 
he.    Some  editors  read  y€p4<rovTa&,  they  shaU  become. 

One  fold  (jUa  iroti»mi).    The  A.  Y.  entirely  ignores  the  dis* 
tinction  between  av>uj,foldj  and  irofyanf,  flook.    The  latter  word 
is  f onnd  Matt  xxvL  31 ;  Lake  iL  8 ;  1  Oor.  iz.  7,  and  always 
Vol.  n.— 18 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


:194  WORD  STUDIBS  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

distinctly  meaning  a  flocks  as  does  also  the  diminutive  woi^iviov, 
little  fiock  (Luke  xii.  32 ;  1  Pet.  v.  2,  etc.).  Bender,  as  Bev., 
one  flocky  one  ehepherd.  So  Tjnd.  Compare  Ezek.  xxxiv.  23. 
We  are  not,  however,  to  say  with  Trench  ("Authorized  Version 
of  the  New  Testament"),  that  the  Jew  and  the  Oentile  are  the 
two  folde  which  Christ  will  gather  into  a  single  fiodc.  The 
heathen  are  not  conceived  as  a  fdldy  but  as  a  dispersion.  See 
vii.  35 ;  zi.  52 ;  and,  as  Meyer  observes,  ^^  the  thought  of  a 
divine  leading  of  the  heathen  does  not  correspond  at  all  to  the 
figure  of  2i,foldj  of  which  the  conception  of  theocratic  fellow- 
ship constitutes  an  essential  feature."  So  Bengel.  ^'  He  says, 
oiher  sheepj  not  another  ^2t^  for  they  were  scattered  abroad  in 
the  world."  When  Jesus  speaks  of  the  other  sheep  who  are 
not  Jrom  this /old,  the  emphasis  is  on  foldy  not  on  this.  Com- 
pare Bom.  xi.  17  sqq.  Nor,  moreover,  does  Jesus  mean  that  the 
Gentiles  are  to  be  incorporated  into  the  Jewish  fold,  but  that 
the  unity  of  the  two  is  to  consist  in  their  common  relation  to 
Himself.  "  The  unity  of  the  Church  does  not  spring  out  of  the 
extension  of  the  old  kingdom,  but  is  the  spiritual  antitype  of 
that  earthly  figure.  Nothing  is  said  of  onefold  under  the  new 
dispensation"  (Westcott).  It  will  readily  be  seen  that  the  in- 
correct rendering  fostered  by  the  carelessness  or  the  mistake  of 
some  of  the  Western  fathers,  and  by  the  Vulgate,  which  renders 
both  words  by  ovile,  Jbldy  has  been  in  the  interest  of  Bomish 
claims. 

18.  Taketh  away  {aXpei).  Some  texts  read  ijpep,  took  away. 
According  to  this  reading  the  word  would  point  back  to  the 
work  of  Jesus  as  conceived  and  accomplished  in  the  eternal 
counsel  of  God,  where  His  sacrifice  of  Himself  was  not  exacted, 
but  was  His  own  spontaneous  offering  in  harmony  with  the 
Father's  wilL 

I  lay  It  down  of  myaelf.    Wye,  Ijput  it  from  myedf. 

-  Power  {i^vaiav).    Bev.,  in  margin,  rigkt.    See  on  i.  12, 

;  Commandment  (orroX^i^).    See  on  Jas.  ii.  8. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPBL  OF  jomr.  aos 

19.  There  was  a  division  {<rx((Tiia  iyivero).  Rev.,  more 
oonreetly,  there  arose.  The  word  (rxla-fia,  division^  from  o^^ 
to  dUai^  deecribes  a  fact  which  continnallj  recarB  in  John's 
narrative.  See  vi.  52,  60,  66  ;  vii.  12,  26  sqq.;  viii.  22 ;  ix. 
16, 17;  X.  19,  24,  41 ;  xi.  37  sqq. ;   xu.  19,  29,  42 ;  xvi.  18, 19. 

Words  (XoTot/v).    Ot^  HiiQawreee. 

21.  That  hath  a  devil  (ScufumtmUpov).  Lit.,  ofonedemon- 
teed.    Eey.,  oneposaeseed  with  a  dawL 

Can  a  devil  (^  hvvaToi}.    Surely  a  demon  cannot 

22.  Feast  of  the  dedication  {iyieaCvui).  Only  here  in  the 
New  Testament.  The  word  signifies  renewal^  from  muw;,  neto^ 
Jresh.  Josephus  calls  it  il>Sn'a,  lights.  It  was  instituted  by 
Jadas  Maccabsans  (b.o.  164),  in  memory  of  the  cleansing  of  the 
temple  from  the  pollutions  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes.  The  vic- 
torious Jews,  says  Dean  Stanley,  ^^  entered  and  found  the  scene 
of  havoc  which  the  Syrian  occupation  had  left.  The  corridors 
of  the  priests'  chambers,  which  encircled  the  temple,  were  torn 
down ;  the  gates  were  in  ashes,  the  altar  was  disfigured,  and  the 
whole  platform  was  overgrown  as  if  with  a  mountain  jungle  or 
forest  glade.  It  was  a  heartrending  spectacle.  Their  first  im- 
pulse was  to  cast  themselves  headlong  on  the  pavement,  and  blow 
the  loud  horns  which  accompanied  all  mournful  as  well  as  all 
joyful  occasions — the  tocsin  as  well  as  the  chimes  of  the  nation. 
Then,  whilst  the  foreign  garrison  was  kept  at  bay,  the  warriors 
first  began  the  elaborate  process  of  cleansing  the  polluted  place. 
.  .  .  For  the  interior  of  the  temple  everything  had  to  be 
refurnished  afresh — ^vessels,  candlesticks  and  incense-altar,  and 
tables  and  curtains.  At  last  all  was  completed,  and  on  the  25th 
of  Chisleu  (middle  of  December),  the  same  day  that,  three  years 
before,  the  profanation  had  occurred,  the  temple  was  rededi- 
cated.  .  .  .  What  most  lived  in  the  recollection  of  the 
time  was  that  the  perpetual  light  blazed  again.  The  golden 
candlestick  was  no  longer  to  be  had.  Its  place  was  taken  by  an 
iron  chandelier,  cased  in  wood^  ("Jewish  Church,"  pt.  iii.,  346, 
346).    According  to  tradition,  the  oil  was  found  to  have  been 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


196  WOBD  8TUDIBB  IN  THH  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

desecrated,  and  only  one  flagon  of  pnre  oil,  sealed  with  the 
High-Priest's  signet,  was  foand,  sufficient  to  feed  the  candle- 
stick for  a  single  day.  Bat  by  a  miracle  the  flagon  was  re- 
plenished during  eight  days,  until  a  fresh  supply  could  be 
procured.  The  festival  lasted  for  eight  days.  Lights  were 
kindled,  not  only  in  the  temple,  but  in  every  home.  Pious 
householders  lighted  a  lamp  for  every  inmate  of  the  home, 
and  the  most  zealous  added  a  light  every  night  for  every  indi- 
vidual, so  that  if  a  house  with  ten  inmates  began  with  ten 
lights,  it  would  end  with  eighty.  The  Jews  assembled  in  the 
temple,  or  in  the  synagogues  of  the  places  where  they  resided, 
bearing  branches  of  palm,  and  singing  psalms  of  praise.  T^o 
fast  or  mourning,  on  account  of  any  calamity  or  bereavement, 
was  permitted  to  commence  during  the  festival 

33.  Solomon's  porch.  A  covered  colonnade  on  the  eastern 
side  of  the  outer  court  of  the  temple.  According  to  Josephus 
it  was  a  relic  of  Solomon's  days,  which  had  remained  intact  in 
the  destruction  of  the  temple  by  Nebuchadnezzar. 

24.  Make  us  to  doubt  (r^  i^^x^v  fiii&v  aXpei^).  Lit.,  lift 
up  our  90uL  Excite  us  and  inflame  our  hopes.  Bev.,  hM  u% 
in  suy>en9e. 

Plainly  (vafi^lef).    See  on  viL  13. 

36.  As  I  said  unto  you.    The  best  texts  omit. 

37.  My  sheep  (rh  wpSfiara  rh  ifih).  Lit.,  the  sheepy  those 
that  (ire  mine.  A  characteristic  form  of  expression  with  John. 
Compare  iil  29;  v.  30 ;  xiv.  15,  etc 

38.  I  give  {B&0fu).  Not,  IwiU  gvoe.  The  gift  is  present 
and  continuous.    Compare  iiL  36. 

Shall  pluck  {apiriiirei).  See  on  ver.  13.  Compare  can  j^uo^ 
▼er.  29.  Here  Jesus  speaks  of  the  fact;  there  of  the  poemr 
JnlAJty.    Kev.,  mcOch.    Wye,  ravish. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPBL  OF  JOHN.  197 

29.  My  Father,  which  gave  them  me,  is  greater  than  all 
(o  Trarijp  fiov  69  Hho^ici  fioi^  fjtei^mv  irdinwv  iartv).  There  is  con- 
Biderable  confoaion  here  aboat  the  reading.  Westcott  and 
Hort  and  Tischendorf  read  o  iranip  fiov  (Tischendorf  rejects 
fiov)  ft  SeSm/chf  fioi  irdimov  fLei^v  iarw.  That  which  the  Father 
(or  my  Father)  hath  given  me  ie  greater  than  aXL  Sev.  gives 
this  in  the  margin.    For  ga/oe^  render  hath  given. 

30.  One  {iv).  The  nettterj  not  the  m/umUine  eU,  one  person. 
It  implies  unity  of  essence^  not  merely  of  will  or  oi  power. 

31.  Took  up— again  {ifidcrratrau — irdKui).  Again  refers  to 
viii  59.  It  seems  as  thoogh  a  different  verb  is  purposely 
chosen  here  (compare  fipa»  took  up,  in  viii^  59),  since  the  inter- 
yiew  took  place  in  Solomon's  porch,  where  stones  would  not  be 
at  hand.    The  verb  here  may  mean  to  take  up.    So  Ajax  says : 

''Send  some  one  m  s  meesenger  to  bear 
The  evil  news  to  Teacroe,  that  he  first 
Haj  mt  (fimrrdrp)  mj  oorpee  bj  this  sharp  sword  transflxed.** 

Sophocles,  <*Ajaz»'*827. 

Its  more  usual  meaning  in  the  Kew  Testament,  however,  is  to 
hea/r  or  carry.  So  of  the  cross  (John  xix.  17 ;  Luke  xiv.  27). 
Here  it  might  very  properly  be  rendered  brought^  perhaps  from 
the  works  which  were  then  going  on  at  the  temple.  See  fur- 
ther on  ziL  6. 

32.  Good  works  (icoX^).  Beautiful^  noble  works,  adapted 
to  call  forth  admiration  and  respect  Compare  Mark  xiv.  6, 
and  see  on  ver.  11. 

For  which  of  theae  worka  (£«^  irdiov  avr&v  ipyov).  lit, 
/or  what  kind  of  a  work  of  these.  This  qualitative  force  of 
mSov  is  not  to  be  lost  sight  of,  though  it  is  impossible  to  ren- 
der it  accurately  without  paraphrasing.  Jesus  does  not  mean, 
as  the  A.  V.  and  Kev.  imply,  "for  which  one  of  these  works,* 
but  "  wJiot  is  the  character  of  that  particular  work  among  all 
these  for  which  you  stone  me } ''  The  me,  closing  the  sentence, 
is  emphatic 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


198  WOBD  8TUDIBS  IN  THB  KBW  TB8TAMBNT. 

33.  Saying.    Omit 

34.  Is  it  not  written  {oifK  iarty  yeypofifiipov).  More  strict- 
Ijf  does  it  not  stand  written. 

Law  (vi^V)'  The  word  is  sometimee  used  in  the  New  Tea- 
tament  of  other  scriptares.  See  xiL  34 ;  xv.  25 ;  Bom.  iii.  19 ; 
1  Cor.  xiv.  21. 

I  said,  etc.    The  reference  is  to  Pb.  IzxziL  6. 

35.  The  Scripture  (i^  7/>a^-  The  j>a$Bage  of  scriptnre. 
See  on  ii.  22 ;  v.  47. 

Brolcen  (XuS^mm).  Lit,  loosened.  Wye,  undone.  The 
word  is  characteristic  of  John.  He  uses  it  of  the  destruction 
of  the  temple  (ii.  19) ;  the  breaking  of  the  Sabbath  (v.  18) ;  the 
violation  of  the  law  (vii.  23) ;  the  destruction  of  Satan's  works 
(1  John  iii.  8),  besides  elsewhere  in  the  physical  sense. 

36.  Sanctified  {ffilaaeif).  Better,  as  Bey.,  in  margin,  oonse^ 
crated.  The  fundamental  idea  of  the  word  is  separation  and 
consecration  to  the  service  of  Deity.  See  note  on  Acts  xzvi. 
10,  on  the  kindred  adjective  ^i09»  holy  or  consecrated. 

The  Son  of  God.  There  is  no  article.  Its  absence  directs 
us  to  the  character  rather  than  to  the  person  of  Jesus.  The 
judges,  to  whom  the  quotation  in  ver.  35  refers,  were  calle4 
godsj  as  being  representatives  of  GK>d.  See  Exod.  xxi.  6 ;  xxii. 
8,  where  the  word  rendered  jvdges  is  elohim^  gods.  In  Exod. 
xxii.  28,  gods  appears  in  the  A.  Y.*  Jesus'  course  of  reasoning 
is,  if  these  judges  could  be  called  godsy  how  do  I  blaspheme  in 
calling  myself  Son  of  God,  since  the  Father  has  consecrated  me 
and  sent  me  on  a  special  mission  to  the  world } 

37.  Believe  me  {^urreveri  ikoi).  Notice  heUevSj  with  the 
simple  dative ;  believe  me^  not  on  me.  It  is  a  question  of  faith 
in  His  testimony^  not  in  'ELiBj>erson.    See  on  i.  12. 

^  Bev.  Ood,  with  the  judges  in  margin. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


G06PBL  OF  JOHH.  199 


88.  In  Him.  The  best  texts  read  iv  r^  warpl^  iii  the  Father. 

39.  Again.  Pointing  back  to  viL  80^  32, 44,  where  the  word 
irtdaoif  to  eeize^  is  f  oand. 

Escaped  out  of  (^^X^€i^  id).  Bey.,  literallj,  went  forth  out 
of.    The  phrase  occurs  only  here. 

40.  Beyond  Jordan  {wipav  rov  lopSoPov).  Into  the  region 
called  Perceaj  from  iripaif,  beyond.  It  was  on  the  east  side  of 
the  river,  and  was  the  ancient  possession  of  Gad  and  Eeuben. 
It  corresponds,  in  an  enlarged  sense,  to  the  region  round  about 
Jordan  (Matt.  iii.  6;  Luke  liL  3).  Compare  Matt  xix.  1; 
Mark  z.  1. 


CHAPTER  XL 

1.  Now  (S^.  Marking  the  interruption  to  Jesus'  retirement 
(x.  40). 

Lazarus.    See  on  Luke  zvL  20. 

2.  Anointed  {al^i'^fixad).  Three  words  for  anointing  are 
found  in  the  New  Testament:  oXe/^,  XP^»  &Q<1  i^  qoxsl- 
pounds,  and  fivpt^<0.  The  last  is  used  but  once,  Mark  xiy.  8,  of 
anointing  the  Lord's  body  for  burying.  Between  the  two 
others  the  distinction  is  strictly  maintained.  Xpi»,  which  oc- 
curs five  times,  is  used  in  every  case  but  one  of  the  anointing 
of  the  Son  by  the  Father  with  the  Holy  Spirit  (Luke  iv.  18 ; 
Acts  iv.  27;  x.  38;  Heb.  i.  9).  In  the  remaining  instance 
(2  Cor.  i.  21)  of  enduing  Christians  with  the  gifts  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  Thus  the  word  is  confined  to  sacred  anointing.*  *^X6i- 
^  is  used  of  all  actual  anointings.  See  Matt.  vi.  17 ;  Mark 
vi.  13 ;  Luke  vii.  38 ;  Jas.  v.  14.    The  same  distinction  is  gen- 

*  Trenoh  (SjnonjmB)  spi>ear8  to  orerlook  the  exception  in  2  Cor.,  thoogii 
he  cites  the  passage.  He  sajrs  that  xp^ciy  is  abtoltUel^  redrieUd  to  the  aaoini- 
ing  of  the  Son  hy  the  Father,  p.  181. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


SOO  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THB  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

erally  maintained  in  the  Septoagint,  though  with  a  few  excep- 
tions^  as  Nmn.  iiL  3. 

8.  Thou  lovest  (^Xe!?).  See  on  v.  20.  <<  They  do  not  say, 
come.    He  who  loves  needs  but  know ''  (Bengel). 

4.  Unto  death.    Not  to  have  death  as  its  final  issue. 

For  the  glory  {inrip).  Here,  as  elsewhere  in  John,  in  heKaif 
of.  Canon  Westcott  remarks :  ^^  The  sickness  is  regarded  in  a 
triple  relation ;  ttntOy  in  respect  of  the  actual  result ;  in  behalf 
of,  in  respect  of  the  suffering  borne ;  in  order  thoitj  in  respect 
of  the  divine  purpose." 

5.  Loved  i^dm'cC).  Kotice  the  verb  here :  not  ^Xek,  as  ver. 
8.    See  on  v.  20.    Lazarus  is  not  mentioned  in  Luke  x.  38  sqq. 

8.  Of  late  sought  {vvv  Hifyrow).  Bev.,  much  better,  giving 
the  true  force  of  vip,  nowy  and  of  the  imperfect :  vsere  hut  now 
Beehing. 

Goest  {yirdrf€i^).  Dost  thou  ioUhdraw  from  this  safe  re- 
treat?   See  on  vi  21 ;  viii  21. 

9.  Walk  (ire/>MraT$).  Walk  ahout^  in  the  pursuit  of  his  <m*- 
dinary  business.    Wye.,  wander. 

11.  Sleepeth  {tceicoliJi/qTai).  More  oorrectly,  as  Bev.,  hath 
fallen  asleep.    See  on  Acts  viL  60 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  4. 

Awake  him  out  of  aleep  {i^tnrvlam  airriv).  Only  here  in 
the  New  Testament 

12.  Shall  do  well  (owSijaerai).  Lit.,  shall  he  saved.  Bev., 
he  toill  recover.    Wye.,  shall  he  safe.    l?ynd.,  shall  he  do  wM 


13.  Taking  rest  {icoifju/ia^m).    Akin  to  the  verb  in  ver,  IL 
Wye.,  the  deeping  of  sleep.    Tynd.,  the  nattiral  sleep. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  201 

15.  For  your  sakes— to  the  intent  ye  may  believe. 
These  two  clauses,  which  are  separated  in  the  A.  Y.  and  Eev., 
are,  in  the  Greek  order,  placed  together :  for  your  aakes,  to  the 
intent  ye  may  believe;  the  latter  daose  being  explanatory  of 
the  former. 

That  I  was  not  there.  BengePs  comment  is  beantifnl  and 
characteristic.  ^^It  accords  beaatifnlly  with  divine  propriety 
that  we  read  of  no  one  having  died  while  the  Prince  of  life 
was  present  If  yon  suppose  that  death  could  not,  in  the  pres- 
ence of  Jesus,  have  assailed  Lazarus,  the  language  of  the  two 
sisters,  vv.  21,  32,  attains  loftier  meaning ;  and  the  Lord's  joy 
at  His  own  absence  is  explained." 

Unto  him  (vpi^  aMp).  Most  touching.  To  Atm,  as  though 
he  were  yet  living.  Death  has  not  broken  the  personal  relation 
of  the  Lord  with  His  friend. 

16.  Didymus  (AiSvfio^).  Not  a  surname  of  Thomas,  bnt 
the  Greek  equivalent  of  the  Aramaic  name,  twin.  See  on 
Mark  iiL  18.    The  word  occurs  only  in  John's  Gospel. 

Fellow-disciplea  {trvfifiaSfiTak).  Only  here  in  the  New 
Testament 

We  may  die.  ^^He  will  die  for  the  love  which  he  has,  but 
he  will  not  affect  the  faith  which  he  has  not"  (Westcott). 

17.  Had  lain  in  the  grave  four  days  already  {riatrapa^ 
^fiip<K  ^  ixpvra  hf  r^  fimffiel^).  Lit,  found  him  hcmng 
already  four  daye  in  the  UmJb. 

18.  Fifteen  furlongs.    About  two  miles. 

19.  Many  of  the  Jews  came.  Kev.,  rightly,  had  oome. 
The  tense  is  the  pluperfect  Lazarus'  friendship  with  Jesus 
had  not  caused  him  to  be  regarded  as  an  apostate,  at  whose 
burial  every  indignity  would  have  been  shown.  People  were 
even  to  array  themselves  in  white,  festive  garments  in  demon- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


WORD  8TUDIBB  IN  THB  KBW  TESTAMENT. 

stratioQ  of  joy.   Here,  on  the  contrary,  every  token  of  sympaihy 
and  respect  seems  to  have  been  shown. 

To  Martha  and  Mary  {vp^  tA?  vepi  MdpSw  Koi  Mapiav). 
Lit.,  to  those  about  Martha  and  Mary ;  a  Greek  idiom  for 
Martha  and  Mary  and  their  companions^  or  attendants.  Com- 
pare 01  irepl  t6v  Uc^jKov,  Paul  and  his  companions  (Acts  xiiL 
13).  Somewhat  analogous  is  onr  familiar  idiom  when  we  speak 
of  going  to  visit  a  household:  1  am  goi/ng  to  Smithes  or 
Brovm^Sj  by  wliich  we  include  the  head  of  the  household  with 
its  members.  Westcott  and  Hort  and  Tregelles,  however,  read 
9rf>09  T^i^  Mdp^av  k.  M .,  to  Martha  and  Mary,  So  also  the 
Revisers'  text 

20.  That  Je8U8  was  coming  (ori  6  Iff<rov^  Ipxerai).  Lit, 
is  coming.    The  exact  words  of  the  message :  Jesus  is  coming. 

Went  and  met  (inr^vTff<r€p).    The  verb  means  to  goto  m,eet. 

22.  Wilt  ask  of  God  {alnj<rp  rhv  9e6v).  The  verb  atrim  is 
used  of  the  asking  of  an  inferior  from  a  superior.  'Epcmam  is 
to  ask  on  equal  terms,  and  hence  is  always  used  by  Christ  of 
His  own  asking  from  the  Father,  in  the  consciousness  of  His 
equal  dignity.  Hence  Martha,  as  Trench  observes,  ^plainly 
reveals  her  poor,  unworthy  conception  of  His  person,  that  she 
recognizes  in  Him  no  more  than  a  prophet,  when  she  ascribes 
that  asking  {aireuT^iu)  to  Him  which  He  never  ascribes  to 
Himself"  ("Synonyms'').  Bengel  says:  "Martha  did  not 
speak  in  Greek,  yet  John  expresses  her  inaccurate  remark, 
which  the  Lord  kindly  tolerated."    See  on  Matt.  xv.  23. 

24.  in  the  resurrection.    Wye,  the  again  rising. 

25.  I  am  the  resurrection  and  the  life.  The  words  /  am 
are  very  significant  Martha  had  stated  the  resurrection  rather 
as  a  doctrine^  a  current  tenet :  Jesus  states  it  as  a  f<^  iden- 
tified with  His  own  person.  He  does  not  say,  I  raise  the  dead; 
I  perform  the  resurrection,  but  I  am  the  resurrection.    Li  His 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  203 

own  peraon,  representiDg  hnmanitj,  He  exhibits  man  as  im- 
mortal, but  immortal  only  throngh  union  witii  Him. 

The  life.  The  life  is  the  larger  and  inclusive  idea.  Resur- 
rection is  involved  in  life  as  an  incident  developed  by  the  tem- 
porary and  apparent  triumph  of  death.  All  true  life  is  in 
Christ.  In  Him  is  lodged  everything  that  is  essential  to  life, 
in  its  origin,  its  maintenance,  and  its  consummation,  and  all 
this  is  conveyed  to  the  believer  in  his  union  with  Him.  This 
life  is  not  affected  by  death.  ^^  Every  believer  is  in  reality  and 
for  ever  sheltered  from  death.  To  die  with  full  light,  in  the 
clear  certainty  of  the  life  which  is  in  Jesus,  to  die  only  to  con- 
tinue to  live  to  Him,  is  no  longer  that  fact  which  human  Ian-* 
guage  designates  by  the  name  of  death.  It  is  as  though  Jesus 
had  said :  In  me  death  is  certain  to  live,  and  the  living  is  cer- 
tain never  to  die  "  (Godet).    On  ^onj^  life,  see  on  L  4. 

He  were  dead  (airo^vjf).  The  aorist  denotes  an  eventj  not 
a  condition^    Hence,  much  better,  Eev.,  thaagh  he  die. 

27.  I  believe  (ireiriarevKa).  Lit,  I  have  heUeved.  The  per- 
fect tense.  So  Rev.  Martha  goes  back  to  her  previous  belief, 
which  consists  in  the  recognition  of  Christ  as  her  Lord.  What- 
ever faith  she  has  in  this  new  revelation  of  Christ  rests  upon 
the  truth  that  He  is  the  Anointed,  the  Son  of  God,  even  He 
that  Cometh  into  the  world. 

28.  The  Master  (o  S^dcrKoKo^).  Lit,  the  teacher.  Westcott 
remarks  that  this  title  opens  a  glimpse  into  the  private  inter- 
course of  the  Lord  and  the  disciples :  so  they  spoke  of  Him. 

la  come  {irdpearai).    Lit,  isjpreaent.    Bev.,  is  Jiere. 

29.  Arose  and  came  {vy^pSfj  KalUfyxero).  The  Boristy  aroeey 
marks  the  single,  instantaneous  act  of  rising.  The  imperfect, 
VHM  coming  J  the  progress  towards  Jesus. 

31.  Saying  (Xiyoirre^).  The  best  texts  read  Zo^o'^e^t  eup- 
jpoeing.    So  Rev. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


204  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

She  goeth  {yir6rf€C).  WUhdroMeth  from  onr  oompaDj.  See 
on  vL  21 ;  viiL  21. 

To  weep  (&a  KXawrg).  Bey.,  in  margin,  waiL  The  word 
means  loud  weeping.  See  Matt  iL  18 ;  Mark  y.  88 ;  and  on 
Lnke  vi.  21 ;  vii  32. 

S3.  He  groaned  in  the  epirit  {ipefipifn/iiaaTo  r^  wpevfAan). 
See  on  Mark  i.  43.  Tlie  word  for  grocmsd  occurs  three  times 
elsewhere :  Matt.  ix.  30 ;  Mark  i.  43 ;  xiv.  5.  In  every  case  it 
expresses  a  charge^  or  renwnBtranoe^  accompanied  with  a  feel- 
ing of  displeasure.  On  this  passage  there  are  two  lines  of  in- 
terpretation, both  of*  them  assuming  the  meaning  just  stated. 
(1)  T^  wvevfiaTi,  the  spirUj  is  regarded  as  the  c^ed  pf  Jesus' 
inward  charge  or  remonstrance.  This  is  explained  variously : 
as  that  Jesus  sternly  rebuked  the  natural  shrinking  of  His 
human  spirit,  and  summoned  it  to  the  decisive  conflict  with 
death ;  or  that  He  checked  its  impulse  to  put  forth  His  divine 
energy  at  once.  (2)  Takes  m  the  epirU,  as  representing  the 
sphere  qffedvng^  as  xiii.  21 ;  Mark  viii.  12 ;  Luke  x.  21.  Some 
explain  the  feeUng  as  indignation  at  the  hypocritical  mourning 
of  the  Jews,  or  at  their  unbelief  and  the  sisters'  misapprehen- 
sion ;  others  as  indignation  at  the  temporary  triumph  of  Satan, 
who  had  the  power  of  death. 

The  interpretation  which  explains  r^  irveiiiari  as  the  sphere 
of  feeling  is  to  be  preferred.  Comp.  ver.  38,  m  himself.  The 
nature  of  the  particular  emotion  of  Jesus  must  remain  largely 
a  matter  of  conjecture.  Eev.  renders,  in  margin,  was  moved 
with  indiffnatian  in  the  spirit. 

Was  troubled  {irdpa^  iavrbv).  Lit,  trotMed  Himself. 
Probably  of  the  outward  manifestation  of  His  strong  feeling. 

35.  Wept  (iSiUpva-ep).  A  different  verb  from  that  in  ver.  31. 
From  Sdxpv,  tea/r^  and  meaning  to  shed  tearSy  to  weep  sHerUly. 
Only  here  in  the  New  Testament  KkcUto,  to  toeep  audibVjfy  is 
once  used  of  our  Lord  in  Luke  xix.  41.  "  The  very  Gtespel  in 
which  the  deity  of  Jesus  is  most  clearly  asserted,  is  also  that 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  205 

which  makee  ns  best  aoqaaiDted  with  the  profoundly  human 
side  of  His  life"  (Godet).  How  far  such  a  conception  of  deity 
is  removed  from  die  pagan  ideal,  may  be  seen  by  even  a  super- 
ficial study  of  the  classics.  Homer's  gods  and  goddesses  weep 
and  bellow  when  wounded,  but  are  not  touched  with  the  feeling 
of  human  infirmity*  (see  on  iii.  16).  "The  gods,"  says  Glad- 
stone, "  while  they  dispense  afflictions  upon  earth,  which  are 
neither  sweetened  by  love,  nor  elevated  by  a  distinct  disciplin- 
ary purpose,  take  care  to  keep  themselves  beyond  all  touch  of 
grief  or  care." 

**  The  gods  ordain 
The  lot  of  m«n  to  suffer,  whUe  themselyes 
Are  free  from  oare." 

"Iliad/'xxiT.,  525. 

So  Diana,  when  appealed  to  by  the  wretched  Hippolytus  for 
sympathy,  replies : 

*'  I  see  thj  loYO,  bat  must  not  shed  a  tear.** 

Bnripidee,  *«  HippolTtofl,"  1896. 

The  Boman  satirist  unconsciously  bears  witness  to  the  profound 
truthfulness  and  beauty  of  this  picture  of  the  weeping  Saviour, 
in  the  words :  ^^  Nature  confesses  that  she  gives  the  tenderest 
of  hearts  to  the  human  race  by  giving  them  tears :  this  is  the 
best  part  of  our  sensations"  (Juvenal,  ^^  Satire"  xv.,  131-133). 

86.  Loved  (i<^CKei).  Not  the  word  in  ver.  5.  See  on  v.  20, 
and  compare  xx.  2. 

87.  Of  the  blind  (roi)  rv^Xot;).  Referring  to  the  restoration 
of  the  blind  man  in  ch.  ix.  The  A.  Y.  is  too  indefinite.  Bev., 
rightly,  of  him  that  was  Uind. 

Have  caused,  etc.  This  saying  of  the  Jews  may  have  been 
uttered  ironically,  in  which  case  it  throws  light  on  the  meaning 

*  Perhaps  the  oetreBt  approach  to  such  a  sentiment  in  Homer  is  the  case  of 
Thetis,  weeping  for  and  with  her  son  AohUles  C  Iliad,"  i,  860 ;  zviiL,  51, 66). 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


206  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

of  groaned  in  the  spirit  (ver.  33)  and  of  groaning  in  Himeelf 
ill  the  next  verse.  Bat  the  words  may  have  been  spoken  sin- 
cerely. 

38.  Lay  upon  {hrUuro).  This  would  be  the  meaning  if  the 
tomb  were  a  vertical  pit ;  but  if  hollowed  horizontally  into  the 
rocky  it  may  mean  lay  against.  Tlie  traditional  tomb  of  Lazarus 
is  of  the  former  kind,  being  descended  into  by  a  ladder. 

Take  ye  away.  The  stone  was  placed  over  the  entrance 
mainly  to  guard  against  wild  beasts^  and  could  easily  be  re- 
moved. 

The  sister  of  him  that  was  dead.  An  apparently  super- 
fluous detail,  but  added  in  order  to  give  point  to  her  remon- 
strance at  the  removal  of  the  stone,  by  emphasizing  the  natural 
rehictance  of  a  sister  to  have  the  corrupted  body  of  her  brother 
exposed. 

Stinketh  (iJeO*  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  Not 
indicating  an  eooperience  of  her  sense^  which  has  been  main- 
tained by  some  expositors,  and  sometimes  expressed  in  the 
pictorial  treatment  of  the  subject,*  but  merely  her  inference 
from  the  fact  that  he  had  been  dead  four  days. 

He  hath  been  dead  four  days  {Terapraio^  iariv),  A 
peculiar  Greek  idiom.  He  is  a  fourth-day  man,  So  Acts 
xxviii.  13,  after  one  day:  lit.,  heing  second-day  men.  The 
common  Jewish  idea  was  that  the  soul  hovered  about  the 
body  until  the  third  day,  when  corruption  began,  and  it  took 
its  flight. 

41.  From  the  place  where  the  dead  was  laid.    Omit. 

42.  The  people  {rov  Sx^ov).  In  view  of  the  distinction 
which  Joha  habitually  niakes  between  the  Jews  and  the  m/uUi- 
tude,  the  use  of  the  latter  term  here  is  noticeable,  since  Jeios 

*A8  by  Fra  Angelloo  (Florence),  Bonif«iio  (Louvre),  and  the  superb  picture 
hy  Sebastian  del  Piombo  in  the  National  CkUery,  London. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OP  JOHK.  207 

occurs  at  w.  19, 31, 36.   It  would  eeem  to  indicate  that  a  miscel- 
laneous crowd  had  gathered.   Bev.,  the  muUUvde.    See  on  i.  19. 

43.  Come  forth  (SeOpo  i^w).    Lit,  hUher forth. 

44.  Grave-clothe8  {leeipUwi).  Lit,  stoathing-banch.  Only 
here  in  the  New  Testament  In  xix.  40 ;  xx.  5,  7,  oSovuif  linen 
hands,  is  used. 

A  napkin  (a-ovBaptf).    See  on  Luke  xix.  20. 

It  is  Interesting  to  compare  this  Gospel  picture  of  sisterly 
affection  under  the  shadow  of  death,  with  the  same  sentiment 
as  exhibited  in  Greek  tragedy,  especially  in  Sophocles,  by 
whom  it  is  developed  with  wonderful  power,  both  in  the  "An- 
tigone "  and  in  the  "  Electra." 

In  the  former,  Antigone,  the  consummate  female  figure  of 
the  Greek  drama,  falls  a  victim  to  her  love  for  her  dead  brother. 
Both  here,  and  in  the  "Electra,"  sisterly  love  is  complicated  with 
another  and  sterner  sentiment :  in  the  "  Antigone  "  with  indig- 
nant defiance  of  the  edict  which  refuses  burial  to  her  brother; 
in  the  "Electra"  with  the  long-cherished  craving  for  vengeance. 
Electra  longs  for  her  absent  brother  Orestes,  as  the  minister  of 
retribution  rather  than  as  the  solace  of  loneliness  and  sorrow. 
Uis  supposed  death  is  to  her,  therefore,  chiefiy  the  defeat  of  the 
passionate,  deadly  purpose  of  her  whole  life.  Antigone  lives 
for  her  kindred,  and  is  sustained  under  her  own  sad  fate  by  the 
hope  of  rejoining  them  in  the  next  world.  She  believes  in  the 
permanence  of  personal  existence. 

*'  And  yet  I  go  and  feed  myself  with  hopes 
That  I  shaU  meet  them,  by  my  father  lored, 
Dear  to  my  mother,  well-beloved  of  thee, 
Thou  darling  brother »» (897-900). 


And  again, 


«  Lored,  I  shall  be  with  him  whom  I  have  loved, 
Onilty  of  holiest  crime.     More  time  is  mine 
In  which  to  share  the  favor  of  the  dead, 
Than  that  of  those  who  lire ;  for  I  shall  rest 
Forever  there  "  (78-76). 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


208  WORD  8TUDIBB  IN  THB  NBW  TBSTAMENll 

No  Bach  hope  iUominates  the  grief  of  Electra. 

•<  Ah,  Orestes  I 
Bear  brother,  in  thj  death  thou  sUjest  me ; 
For  thou  art  gone,  berearing  mj  poor  heart 
Of  all  the  little  hope  that  jet  remained 
That  then  wonldst  come,  a  liriDg  minister 
Of  Tengeanoe  for  thj  fathsr  and  for  me**  (807-812). 

And  again, 

**  If  thon  snggestest  anj  hope  from  those 
So  clearlj  gone  to  Hades,  then  on  me, 
Wasting  with  sorrow,  thon  wilt  trample  more**  (882-884). 

When  she  is  aaked, 

<*Whatt  shaU  I  OTor  bring  the  dead  to  life?" 
she  replies, 

**  I  meant  not  that :  I  am  not  qnite  so  mad.** 

In  the  honsehold  of  Bethany,  the  grief  of  the  two  sisters,  nn- 
like  that  of  the  Greek  maidens,  is  nnmixed  with  any  other  senti- 
ment, save  perhaps  a  tinge  of  a  feeling  bordering  on  reproach 
that  Jesns  had  not  been  there  to  avert  their  calamity.  Com- 
fort from  the  hope  of  reunion  with  the  dead  is  not  expressed 
by  them,  and  is  liardly  implied  in  their  assertion  of  the  doctrine 
of  a  fntare  resurrection,  which  to  them,  is  a  general  matter 
having  little  or  no  bearing  on  their  personal  grief.  In  thia 
particular,  so  far  as  expression  indicates,  the  advantage  is  on 
the  side  of  the  Theban  maiden.  Though  her  hope  is  the  out- 
growth of  her  affection  rather  than  of  her  religious  training — a 
thought  which  is  the  child  of  a  wish — she  never  loses  her  grasp 
upon  the  expectation  of  rejoining  her  beloved  dead. 

But  the  gospel  story  is  thrown  into  strongest  contrast  with 
the  classical  by  the  truth  of  resurrection  which  dominates  it  in 
the  person  and  energy  of  the  Lord  of  life.  Jesus  enters  at 
once  as  the  consolation  of  bereaved  love,  and  the  eternal  solu- 
tion of  the  problem  of  life  and  death.  The  idea  which  Electra 
sneered  at  as  madness,  is  here  a  realized  fact    Beautiful,  won- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  209 

derfnl  as  is  the  action  which  the  drama  evolves  out  of  the  con- 
flict of  sisterly  love  witli  death,  the  curtain  falls  on  death  as 
victor.  Into  the  gospel  story  Jesns  brings  a  benefaction,  a 
lesson,  and  a  triumph.  His  warm  sympathy,  His  comforting 
words,  HiB  tears  at  His  friend's  tomb,  are  in  significant  contrast 
with  the  politic,  timid,  at  times  reproachful  attitude  of  the  cho- 
rus of  Theban  elders  towards  Antigone.  The  consummation 
of  both  dramas  is  unmitigated  horror.  Suicide  solves  the  prob- 
lem for  Antigone,  and  Electra  receives  back  her  brother  as 
from  the  dead,  only  to  incite  him  to  murder,  and  to  gloat  with 
him  over  the  victims.  It  is  a  beautiful  feature  of  the  Gospel 
narrative  that  it  seems,  if  we  may  so  speak,  to  retire  with  an  in- 
stinctive delicacy  from  the  joy  of  that  reunited  household.  It 
breaks  oflF  abruptly  with  the  words,  "Loose  him,  and  let  him  go." 
The  imagination  alone  follows  the  sisters  with  their  brother, 
perchance  with  Christ,  behind  the  closed  door,  and  hears  the 
sacred  interchanges  of  that  wonderful  communing.  Tenny- 
son, with  a  deep  and  truly  Christian  perception,  has  struck  its 
key-note. 

'*  Her  ejes  are  homes  of  silent  prajer, 
Nor  other  thought  her  mind  adxnits 
Bnt,  he  was  dead,  and  there  he  sits  t 
And  He  that  brought  him  back  is  there. 

Then  one  deep  lore  doth  supersede 
All  other,  when  her  ardent  gaze 
Boves  from  the  liring  brother*s  faoe 
And  rests  upon  the  Life  indeed.'* 

« In  Memoriam.** 

45.  The  things  which  Jesus  did.  The  best  texts  omit 
Je8tA8.  Some  read  &,  that  which  He  did ;  others  &,  the  things 
which. 

46.  Some  of  them.  Not  of  the  Jews  who  had  come  to 
Mary,  bnt  some  of  the  Jews,  some  perhaps  who  had  joined  the 
crowd  from  curiosity. 

47.  The  chief  priests.  Of  the  Sadducean  party.  This 
should  be  constantly  kept  in  mind  in  reading  both  John's  nar- 
rative and  that  of  the  Synoptists.    The  Saddncees,  represented 

Vol.  IL— U 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


210  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

by  the  chief  priests,  are  the  leaders  in  the  more  decisive  meas- 
ui-es  against  Christ  Throughout  this  Gospel  the  form  of  ex- 
pression is  either  the  chief  priests  alone,  or  the  chief  priests 
and  the  Pharisees.  The  only  mention  of  the  Pharisees  in  tlie 
history  of  the  passion  is  Matt,  xxvii.  62,  where  also  the  expres- 
sion is  the  chief  priests  amd  Pharisees.  The  chief  priests  are 
the  deadly  enemies  of  Christ  (Matt.  xxvL  3, 14).  Similarly,  in 
the  Acts,  the  opposition  to  the  Christians  is  headed  by  the 
priests  and  Sadducees,  who  represent  the  same  party.  In  the 
two  instances  where  the  Pharisees  appear,  they  incline  to  favor 
the  Christians  (v.  34 ;  xxiii.  6). 

47.  A  council  (awiSpiov).  Correctly,  and  not  the  council, 
which  would  require  the  article.  The  meaning  is,  they  called  a 
sitting  of  the  Sanhedrim;  probably  as  distinguished  from  a 
formal  meeting  of  that  body. 

What  do  we  ?  The  present  tense,  indicating  an  emergency. 
This  man  is  at  work  teaching  and  working  miracles,  and  what 
are  we  doing  ? 

48.  Place  and  nation  {top  tottov  koX  to  SBvo^).  PlaoSy  the 
temple  and  city  (Acts  vi.  13 ;  xxi.  28 ;  Matt.  xxiv.  15).  Ifa- 
tion^  the  civil  organization.  See  on  1  Pet.  ii.  9 ;  Luke  ii.  32. 
In  the  Sanhedrim  were  many  devoted  adherents  of  Rome,  and 
the  rest  were  well  aware  of  the  weakness  of  the  national  power. 

49.  Caiaphas.  A  Sadducee,  who  held  the  office  for  eigh- 
teen years. 

That  year.  This  has  been  cited  to  show  that  John  is  guilty 
of  a  historical  error,  since,  according  to  the  Mosaic  law,  the  high 
priesthood  was  held  for  life.  The  occurrence  of  the  phrase 
three  times  (vv.  49,  51)  is  significant,  and,  so  far  from  indicat- 
ing an  error,  goes  to  connect  the  office  of  Caiaphas  with  his  part 
in  accomplishing  the  death  of  Christ.  It  devolved  on  the  High- 
Priest  to  offer  every  year  the  great  sacrifice  of  atonement  for  sin ; 
and  in  ihat  year^  that  memorable  year,  it  fell  to  Caiaphas  to  be 
the  instrument  of  the  sacrifice  of  Him  that  taketh  away  the 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPBL  OF  JOHN.  211 

sin  of  the  world.    Dante  places  Caiaphas  and  his  father-in-law, 
Annas,  far  down  in  Hell  in  the  Bolgia  of  the  Hypocrites : 

"  to  mine  ejes  there  rushed 
One  omoified  with  three  stakes  on  the  ground. 
When  me  he  saw,  he  writhed  himSelf  all  oyer, 
Blowing  into  his  beard  with  saspirations ; 
And  the  friar  Catalan  who  noticed  this, 
Baid  to  me  :  '  This  transfixed  one  whom  thon  seest. 
Counselled  the  Pharisees  that  it  was  meet 
To  put  one  man  to  tortnre  for  the  people. 
Crosswise  and  naked  is  he  on  the  path, 
As  thon  perceivest ;  and  he  needs  mnst  feel, 
Whoerer  passes,  first  how  mnoh  he  weighs ; 
And  in  like  mode  his  father-in-law  is  punished 
Within  this  moat,  and  the  others  of  the  conncil. 
Which  for  the  Jews  was  a  malignant  seed." 

*•  Inferno, »»  xxiil.,  110-132. 

Dean  Plumptre  suggests  that  the  pnnishment  described  bj  the 
poet  seems  to  reproduce  the  thought  of  Isa.  IL  23. 

50.  People— nation  (toO  XooO— ri  SBvo^).  The  former 
the  theooratio  nation^  the  people  of  God :  the  latter,  the  body 
jpoUtio.    See  on  1  Pet  ii.  9. 

52.  Nation  {i^vovi).  John  does  not  used  the  word  7\jao<;,peO' 
pUj  which  Caiaphas  had  just  employed.  The  Jews  were  no 
longer  a  people^  only  one  of  the  ruUions  of  the  world.  He 
wishes  to  set  the  Grentiles  over  against  the  Jews,  and  this  dis- 
tinction was  national.  Moreover,  John  points  out  in  this  word 
the  fact  that  the  work  of  Christ  was  not  to  be  for  saij people  as 
specially  chosen  of  God,  but  for  all  nations. 

54.  Wilderness.  The  wild  hill-country,  northeast  of  Jeru- 
salem. 

Ephralm.  The  site  is  uncertain.  Commonly  taken  as 
Ophrah  (1  Sam.  xiii.  17),  or  Ephraim  (2  Chron.  xiii.  19),  and 
identified  with  eIrTaiyibehy  sixteen  miles  from  Jerusalem,  and 
situated  on  a  hill  which  commands  the  Jordan  valley. 

65-57.  xiL  1-11.  Compare  Matt  xxvi.  6-18 ;  Mark  xiv.  3-9. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


212  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


CHAPTER  XIL 

1.  Which  had  been  dead.    (Omit) 
He  raised.    For  He^  read  JemA9. 

3.  A  pound  ^rpav).  Only  here  and  xix.  89.  Matthew 
and  Marky  aXdficurrpov,  a  flask. 

Of  spikenard  {vdpBov  wumicfjsty  So  Mark.  See  on  Mark 
xiv.  3. 

Very  precious  (iroXurifiov).  Lit.,  of  much  value.  Matthew 
has  fiapvrifjLoVf  of  weighty  value. 

Anointed.    See  on  zi.  2. 

Feet.  The  Synoptists  mention  only  the  poming  on  the 
head. 

4.  Simon's  son.    Omit 

5.  Three  hundred  pence  {rpuucoalmv  ^vapUov).  Or  three 
hundred  denarii.  On  the  denarius,  see  on  Matt.  xx.  2.  Mark 
says  more  than  three  hundred  pence.  Three  hundred  denarii 
would  be  about  fifty  dollars,  or  twice  that  amount  if  we  reckon 
according  to  the  purchasing  power. 

The  poor  (irro^xw).  See  on  Matt  v.  3.  No  article :  to 
poorpeople. 

6.  And  had  the  bag,  and  bare  what  was  put  therein 

{iciiL  TO  ffKoaxaoKoiAov  elxe,  tcaX  rh  fiaXKofjLcva  ifidara^ev).  The 
best  texts  read  exmVf  havinffy  and  omit  the  second  teal,  anoL 
The  rendering  would  then  be,  cmd  hanAng  the  hag  harey  etc. 

The  bag  (yTuocaSKOfiov).  Only  here  and  xiii.  29.  Origi- 
nally a  box  for  keeping  the  mouth-pieces  of  wind  instruments. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  213 

From  iKSHTaa,  tongue^  and  leoiiAn,  to  tend.  The  word  was  also 
used  for  a  coffin.  Josephus  applies  it  to  the  coffer  in  which  the 
golden  mice  and  emerods  were  preserved  (1  Sam.  vi.  11).  In 
the  Septnagint,  of  the  chest  which  Joash  had  provided  for  re- 
ceiving contributions  for  the  repairing  of  the  Lord's  house  (2 
Ghrou.  xxiv.  8).    Rev.  gives  box^  in  margin. 

Bare  {il3daTa^ev).  Carried  away  or  purloined.  This  mean- 
ing is  rather  imparted  by  the  context  than  residing  in  the  verb 
itself,  i.e.y  according  to  New  Testament  usage  (see  on  x.  21). 
Unquestionably  it  has  this  meaning  in  later  Greek,  frequently 
in  Josephus."^  Render,  therefore,  as  Rev.,  took  away.  The 
rendering  of  the  A.  Y.  is  tautological. 

7.  Let  her  alone :  against  the  day  of  my  burying  hath 
she  kept  this  (o^  aimjv  ek  rijv  tlfUpav  rov  hna^uiafiov  fiov 
renjpTjKev  auro).  This  passage  presents  great  difficulty.  Ac- 
cording to  the  reading  just  given,  the  meaning  is  that  Mary 
had  kept  the  ointment,  perhaps  out  of  the  store  provided  for 
Lazarus'  burial,  against  the  day  of  Christ's  preparation  for  the 
tomb.    The  word  ivra^uurfiov  is  wrongly  rendered  burial.    It 


*  The  meaning  to  take  or  bMT  away  is  claimed  bj  some  for  Mati  TiiL  17 
and  John  zx.  25  (so  Thajer,  N.  T.  Lexicon).  The  former  I  think  more  than 
donbtfaL  Mejer  declares  it  "  contrary  to  the  sense  ;  **  De  Wette  and  Lange 
both  render  bore.  Canon  Ck>ok  sajs :  "  The  words  chosen  bj  St.  Matthew  pre- 
clude the  supposition  that  he  refers  the  prophet's  words,  contrary  to  the  sense 
of  the  original,  to  the  mere  remoyal  of  diseases  by  healing  them."  The  words 
in  Matthew  are  a  citation  from  Isa.  liii.  4,  which  Cheyne  (**  Prophecies  of 
Isaiah  **)  renders,  **  surely  our  sicknesses  he  bore,  and  our  pains  he  carried 
them."  Septuagint :  **  This  man  carries  our  sins  and  is  pained  for  us."  Sym- 
machus:  "Surely  he  took  up  our  sins  and  endured  our  labors.*'  Edersheim 
remarks  that  **  the  words  as  ^ven  by  St  Matthew  are  most  truly  a  New  Testa- 
ment targnm  of  the  original."  Delitzsch,  who  thinks  that  the  meaning  took 
away  is  included  in  the  sense  of  the  Hebrew  ndaA,  admits  that  its  primary 
meaning  is,  Be  took  ifp,  bore.  The  meaning  in  John  xz.  25  may  be  explained 
as  in  John  xiL  6,  as  determined  by  the  context,  though  it  may  be  rendered  if 
thou  ha$t  taken  him  up.  Field  (**  Otium  Norvicense  ")  cites  a  passage  from 
Diogenes  L^ertius,  ir.,  59,  where  it  is  said  that  Lacydes,  wheneyer  he  took 
anything  out  of  his  store-room,  was  accustomed,  after  sealing  it  up,  to  throw 
the  seal  or  ring  through  the  hole,  so  that  it  might  neyer  be  taken  from  his  fin- 
ger, and  any  of  the  stores  be  stolen  (fioarax^lri). 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


214  WOBD  8TUDIBB  DT  THB  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

means  the  preparation  for  banal,  the  laying  otti^  or  embalm^ 
merU.  It  is  explained  bj  xix.  40,  as  the  binding  in  linen 
cloths  with  spices,  ^^  as  the  manner  of  the  Jews  is  hna^iafyw 
to  prepare  for  hurialj^  not  to  bufy.  It  is  the  \Atm  poUingere^ 
to  wash  and  prepare  a  corpse  for  the  funeral  pile.  Hence  the 
name  of  the  servant  to  whom  this  dntj  was  committed  was 
poUinctor.  He  was  a  slave  of  the  libitinaritiSy  or  famishing 
undertaker.  Mary,  then,  has  kept  the  ointment  in  order  to 
embalm  Jesas  with  it  on  this  day,  as  though  He  were  already 
dead.  This  is  the  sense  of  the  Synoptists.  Matthew  (xxvi.  12) 
says,  she  did  U  with  reference  to  my  preparation  for  burial. 
Mark,  eJie  anticipated  to  anoint. 

The  reading  of  the  Beceived  Text  is,  however,  dispated. 
The  best  textaal  critics  agree  that  the  perfect,  renifyrfteev,  she 
hath  keptj  was  substituted  for  the  original  reading  T/jpi^aif,  the 
aorist,  she  may  keepj  or  may  have  keptj  by  some  one  who  was 
trying  to  bring  the  text  into  harmony  with  Mark  xiv.  8 ;  not 
understanding  how  she  could  keep  for  His  burial  that  which 
she  poured  out  now.  Some,  however,  urge  the  exact  contrary, 
namely,  that  the  perfect  is  the  original  reading,  and  that  the 
aorist  is  a  correction  by  critics  who  were  occupied  with  the 
notion  that  no  man  is  embalmed  before  his  death,  or  who 
failed  to  see  how  the  ointment  could  have  been  kept  already, 
as  it  might  naturally  be  supposed  to  have  been  just  purchased. 
(So  Godet  and  Field.) 

According  to  the  corrected  reading,  &»,  in  order  that,  is  in- 
serted after  5^  airrijv,  let  her  alone^  or  sufer  her;  rerrffyq- 
K€P,  hath  keptj  is  changed  to  rrfpi^,  may  keepj  and  the  whole 
is  rendered,  suffer  her  to  keep  it  against  the  day  of  my  burying. 
So  Rev. 

But  it  is  difficult  to  see  why  Christ  should  desire  to  have 
kept  for  His  embalmment  what  had  already  been  poured  out 
upon  Him.  Some,  as  Meyer,  assume  that  only  a  part  of  the 
ointment  was  poitred  out,  and  refer  axrrot  it,  to  the  part  remain- 
ing. ^^  Let  her  alone,  that  she  may  not  give  away  to  the  poor 
this  ointment,  of  which  she  has  just  used  a  portion  for  the 
anointing  of  my  feet,  hxxt  preserve  it  for  the  day  of  my  embalm'' 
ment?^    Canon  Westcott  inclines  to  this  view  of  the  use  of  only 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  215 

a  part  Bat  the  inference  from  the  synoptic  narratives  can  be 
onlj  that  the  whole  contents  of  the  flask  were  used,  and  the 
mention  of  the  j>ound  by  John,  and  the  charge  of  waste  are  to 
the  same  effect.  There  is  nothing  whatever  to  warrant  a  con- 
trary supposition. 

Others  explain,  sufer  her  to  Juwe  kept  it,  or  suffer  that  she 
may  hwce  hejpt  it.  So  Westcott,  who  says:  "The  idiom  by 
which  a  speaker  throws  himself  into  the  past,  and  regards  what 
is  done  as  still  a  purpose,  is  common  to  all  languages." 

Others,  again,  retain  the  meaning  let  her  alone^  and  render 
Iva,  in  order  thatj  with  an  ellipsis,  thus :  ^^  Let  her  alone :  (she 
hath  not  sold  her  treasure)  in  order  that  she  might  keep  it," 
etc. 

The  old  rendering,  as  A.  V.,  is  the  simplest,  and  gives  a  per- 
fectly intelligible  and  consistent  sense.  If,  however,  this  must 
be  i-ejected,  it  seems,  on  the  whole,  best  to  adopt  the  marginal 
reading  of  the  lie  v.,  with  the  elliptical  ha:  let  her  alone:  it  was 
that  she  might  keep  it.  This  preserves  the  jprohibitory  force  of 
o^  avn^v,  which  is  implied  in  Matt.  xxvi.  10,  and  is  unques- 
tionable in  Mark  xiv.  6.  Compare  Matt.  xv.  14;  xix.  14; 
xxvii.  49.* 

Note  that  the  promise  of  the  future  repute  of  this  act  (Matt, 
xxvi.  13 ;  Mark  xiv.  9)  is  omitted  by  the  only  Evangelist  who 
records  Mary's  name  in  connection  with  it 

9.  Much  people  (^Xo9  iroXif^;).  The  best  texts  insert  the 
article,  which  converts  the  expression  into  the  current  phrase, 
the  coTnmon  people.    So  Rev. 

Knew  (eyw»).  He  v.,  more  correctly,  learned.  They  ocMtne 
to  know. 

10.  The  chief  priests.    See  on  ver.  47. 

♦Field  (•*  OtSum  Norvicense **)»  ^^^  holds  bj reHipriKtp,  obflerrea  that  "the 
conjecture  that  the  ointment  may  hare  been  reserred  from  that  nsed  at  the 
bnrying  of  Lazarus,  is  not  fanciful,  but  an  ezceUent  example  of  undesigned 
coincidence,  since  we  should  never  have  perceived  the  proprietj  of  the  might 
have  been  $old  of  the  first  two  Gospels,  if  John  had  not  helped  us  out  with  his 
reriipfiKaff  the  h(Uh  kept.** 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


216  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

11.  Went  away  (yniffov).    Withdrew  from  their  company. 

12-19.  Compare  Matt.  xxL  1-11 ;  Mark  xi  1-11 ;  Luke  xix. 
29-44. 

12.  A  great  multitude  (^Xo9  vxiXi/si).  Some  editors  add 
the  article  and  render,  the  coTrmwn  people. 

13.  Branches  of  palms  (r^  fiaia  r&v  if)otvlicmv).  The  A.  Y. 
overlooks  both  the  articles,  the  branches  of  the  palms.  Bata 
occurs  only  here  in  the  New  Testament,  and  means  paJbn^ 
hranch^j  or,  strictly,  tope  of  the  palms  where  the  fruit  is  pro- 
duced. Of  the  palms  may  have  been  added  by  John  for  read- 
ers unacquainted  with  the  technical  term,  but  the  expression 
pahmrbromches  of  the  palmSy  is  similar  to  h/mae-maater  of  the 
hottae  {oltcoBetnrirrf^  rip;  oucla^,  Luke  xxii.  11).  The  articles  are 
commonly  explained  as  marking  the  trees  which  were  by  the 
wayside  on  the  route  of  the  procession.  Some  think  that  they 
point  to  the  weU-hnoion  palm-branches  connected  with  the 
Feast  of  Tabernacles.  On  the  different  terms  employed  by 
the  Evangelists  for  "  branches,"  see  on  Mark  xL  8. 

To  meet  {eU  irn-dvTrfaiv).    Very  literally,  to  a  going  to  meet. 

Cried  {Ixpa^ov).    Imperfect,  k^t  crying  as  he  advanced. 

Hosanna.    Meaning  O  S(we  ! 

Blessed  {evKo^iiivof;).  A  different  word  from  the  blessed  of 
Matt.  V.  3  (/uuedpcof;).  This  is  the  perfect  participle  of  the 
verb  eiikoyioOf  to  speak  well  of j  praise^  hence  our  eulogy.  Mat- 
thew's word  applies  to  character ;  this  to  repute.  The  ascrip- 
tion of  praise  here  is  from  Ps.  cxviii.  25,  26.  This  Psalm,  ac- 
cording to  Perowne,  was  composed  originally  for  the  first  cele- 
bration of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  after  the  completion  of  the 
sacred  temple.  The  words  of  the  twenty-fifth  verse  were  sung 
during  that  feast,  when  the  altar  of  burnt-offering  was  solemn- 
ly compassed ;  that  is,  once  on  each  of  the  first  six  days  of  the 
feast,  and  seven  times  on  the  seventh  day.    This  seventh  day 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  217 

was  called  '^  the  Great  HoBanna,"  and  not  only  the  prayers  for 
the  feast,  but  even  the  branches  of  trees,  including  the  myrtles 
which  were  attached  to  the  palm-branch,  were  caUed  ^^Ho- 


The  King  of  Israel.  The  best  texts  add  icdi^  even  the  king, 
etc. 

14.  A  young  ass  (ovdpiov).  Only  here  in  the  Kew  Testa- 
ment Matthew  mentions  an  ass  and  a  colt ;  Mark  and  Luke  a 
colt  only. 

18.  Met  {xnrrivTriaeii).  The  verb  means  to  go  to  meet.  Hence 
Bev.,  went  <md  met. 

19.  Is  gone  after  Him  {ovCa-m  avrov  amjpJM).  The  phrase 
occurs  only  here.    Lit.,  is  gone  awc^. 

20.  Greeks  ('BlXXfive^).  Gentiles,  not  Hellenists.  See  on 
Acts  vi.  1.  Jesas  comes  into  contact  with  the  Gentile  world  at 
His  birth  (the  Magi)  and  at  the  close  of  His  ministry. 

22.  Philip— Andrew.  They  appear  together  in  i.  46;  vL 
7, 8.    Compare  Mark  iii.  18. 

23.  Answered  {imeKptmro).  The  best  texts  read  imiepbf- 
eroh  anawereth. 

The  hour  is  come,  that  {ik^^vBev  ^  &pa  &a).  This  is  not 
equivalent  to  "  the  hour  is  come  in  whioh.^^  The  hxmr  is  used 
absolutely :  the  criHcal  hour  is  come  in  order  that  the  Son,  etc. 

24.  Verily,  verily.    See  on  i.  61 ;  x.  i. 

• 
A  corn  (o  k6kko*s).  Properly,  the  com  or  grain.  The  article 
should  be  inserted  in  the  translation,  because  Jesus  is  citing  the 
wheat-grain  as  a  familiar  type  of  that  which  contains  in  itself 
the  germ  of  life.  So  wheat  has  the  article :  the  com  of  the 
wheat     The  selection  of  the  cam  of  wheat  as  an  illustration 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


218  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

acqnii*es  a  peculiar  interest  from  the  fact  of  its  being  addressed 
to  Greeks,  familiar  with  the  Eleosinian  mysteries  celebrated  in 
their  own  country.  These  mysteries  were  based  on  the  legend 
of  Dionysus  (Bacchus).  According  to  the  legend  his  original 
name  was  Zagreus.  ne  was  the  sou  of  Zeus  (Jupiter)  by  his  own 
daughter  Persephone  (Proserpina),  and  was  destined  to  succeed 
to  supreme  dominion  and  to  the  wielding  of  the  thunderbolt. 
The  jealousy  of  Here  (Juno),  the  wife  of  Zeus,  incited  the 
Titans  against  him,  who  killed  him  while  he  was  contemplat- 
ing his  face  in  a  mirror,  cut  up  his  body,  and  boiled  it  in  a 
caldron,  leaving  only  the  heart.  Zeus,  in  his  wrath,  hurled 
the  Titans  to  Tartarus,  and  Apollo  collected  the  remains  of 
Zagreus  and  buried  them.  The  heart  was  given  to  Semele, 
and  Zagreus  was  born  again  from  her  under  the  form  of 
Dionysus.  The  mysteries  represented  the  original  birth  from 
the  serpent,  the  murder  and  dismemberment  of  the  child,  and 
the  revenge  inflicted  by  Zeus;  and  the  symbols  exhibited — the 
dice,  ball,  top,  mirror,  and  apple — signified  the  toys  with  which 
the  Titans  allured  the  child  into  their  power.  Then  followed 
the  restoration  to  life ;  Demeter  (Ceres)  the  goddess  of  agri- 
culture, the  mother  of  food,  putting  the  limbs  together,  and 
giving  her  maternal  breasts  to  the  child.  All  this  was  pre- 
paratory to  the  great  Eleusinia,  in  which  the  risen  Dionysus  in 
the  freshness  of  his  second  life  was  conducted  from  Athens  to 
Eleusis  in  joyful  procession.  An  ear  of  com,  plucked  in  solemn 
silence,  was  exhibited  to  the  initiated  as  the  object  of  mystical 
contemplation,  as  the  symbol  of  the  god,  prematurely  killed, 
but,  like  the  ear  enclosing  the  seed-corn,  bearing  within  him- 
self the  germ  of  a  second  life. 

With  this  mingled  the  legend  of  Persephone,  the  daughter 
of  Demeter,  who  was  carried  off  by  Pluto  to  the  infernal  world. 
The  mother  wandered  over  the  earth  seeking  her  daughter,  and 
having  found  her,  applied  to  Zeus,  through  whose  intervention 
Persephone,  while  condemned  to  Hades  for  a  part  of  the  year, 
was  allowed  to  remain  upon  earth  during  the  other  part.  Thus 
the  story  became  the  symbol  of  vegetation,  which  shoots  forth 
in  spring,  and  the  power  of  which  withdraws  into  the  earth  at 
other  seasons  of  the  year.    These  features  of  the  mysteries  set 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  219 

forth,  and  with  the  same  symbol  as  that  employed  by  Christ 
here,  the  crade  pagan  conception  of  life  rismg  out  of  death. 

Alone  {avTo^  iiovos).    Lit.,  Uadf  alone.    Eev.,  by  itself  alone, 

25.  Life  {'^hodl^)'    See  on  Mark  xii.  80 ;  Lnke  i.  46. 

Shall  lose  {a'jroXia-ei).  The  best  texts  read  aTroXXtki,  loeeth. 
See  on  Lnke  ix.  25. 

In  this  world.  This  earthly  economy,  regarded  as  alien  and 
hostile  to  Ood.  The  words  are  added  in  order  to  explain  the 
strong  phrase,  haieth  hie  life  or  eotU. 

Shall  keep  (^vX^et).    See  on  1  Pet  i  4. 

26.  Serve  {Suucov^).  See  on  Matt  xx.  26;  Mark  ix.  35; 
1  Pet  i.  12. 

Me  {ifiol).  Notice  the  emphatic  recurrence  of  the  pronoun 
in  this  verse. 

My  Father.  Rev.,  rightly,  the  Father.  "Very  much  of 
the  exact  force  of  St  John's  record  of  the  Lord's  words  ap- 
pears to  depend  upon  the  different  conceptions  of  the  two 
forms  under  which  the  fatherhood  of  Ood  is  described.  God 
is  spoken  of  as  ^^  Father'  and  as  *my  Father.'  Generally 
it  may  be  said  that  the  former  title  expresses  the  original  rela- 
tion of  God  to  being,  and  specially  to  humanity,  in  virtue  of 
man's  creation  in  the  divine  image ;  and  the  latter  more  par- 
ticularly the  relation  of  the  Father  to  the  Son  incarnate,  and 
so  indirectly  to  man  in  virtue  of  the  incarnation.  The  former 
suggests  those  thoughts  which  spring  from  the  consideration  of 
the  absolute  moral  connection  of  man  with  God ;  the  latter, 
those  which  spring  from  what  is  made  known  to  us  through 
revelation  of  the  connection  of  the  incarnate  Son  with  God 
and  with  man.  *The  Father'  corresponds,  under  this  aspect, 
with  the  group  of  ideas  gathered  up  in  the  Lord's  titles,  ^  the 
Son,'  ^the  Son  of  man;'  and  *my  Father'  with  those  which 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


220  WORD  STUDIBS  IN  TH£  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

are  gathered  np  in  the  title  *  the  Son  of  God/  *  the  Christ ''^ 
(Westcott). 

27.  My  soul.  See  reff.  on  ver.  25.  The  aoiU,  '^hoci*  ^^  ^® 
seat  of  the  human  affections;  the  spirit  (irvevfia)  of  the  relig- 
ious affections. 

Is  troubled  (jerdpcucrai).  The  perfect  tense;  has  heen  dis- 
turbed and  remains  troubled.  The  same  verb  as  in  xi.  33.  No- 
tice that  there  it  is  said  He  groaned  in  the  spirit  {r^  irvevfuvri). 
His  inward  agitation  did  not  arise  from  personal  sorrow  or 
sympathy^  but  from  some  shock  to  His  moral  and  spiritual 
sense. 

What  shall  I  say  ?  A  natural  expression  out  of  the  depths 
of  our  Lord's  humanity :  How  shall  I  express  my  emotion  ? 
Some  commentators  connect  this  with  the  following  clause, 
shall  I  say^  Faiher^  save  me^  etc.  But  this  does  not  agree 
with  the  context,  and  represents  a  hesitation  in  the  mind  of 
Jesus  which  found  no  place  there.* 

Save  me.  The  shrinking  from  suffering  belongs  to  the 
human  personality  of  our  Lord  (compare  Matt.  xxvi.  39) ;  but 
the  prayer,  «aw  me  from  this  hovAr^  is  not  for  deliverance  from 
suffering,  but  for  victory  in  the  approaching  trial.  See  Heb.  v. 
7.    The  expression  is  very  vivid.    "  Save  me  ot^  of  this  hour." 

For  this  cause.  Explained  by  glorify  thy  name.  For  this 
cause,  namely,  that  the  Father's  name  might  be  glorified. 

28.  Glorify  {BS^aa-ov).  (Wye,  darifyy  as  the  Vulgate  dari- 
fioa:) 

Name.    See  on  Matt  xxviii.  19. 

30.  For  my  sake.  Emphatic  in  the  Greek  order.  It  is  not 
for  my  sake  that  this  voice  hath  come. 

*  Mejer  acutely  remarks  that  this  rendering  *'  yields  the  resalt  of  an  aotoal 
prayer  interwoven  into  a  reflective  monologuci  and  is  therefore  less  suitable 
to  a  frame  of  mind  so  deeply  moved.*' 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  221 

31.  The  prince  of  this  world  (o  afrxf^v  rov  koo-^mov  tovtov). 
The  phrase  occurs  only  in  the  Gospel ;  here,  xiv.  30  ;  xvL  11. 

Shall  be  cast  out  {iKpXjn^riirercu  1^).  In  every  case  bat 
one  where  the  word  iicfiaSXa  occurs  in  John,  it  is  used  of  cast- 
ing out  from  a  holy  place  or  society.  See  ii.  16 ;  ix.  34,  35 ;  3 
John  10 ;  Apoc.  xii.  2.    Compare  John  x.  4. 

32.  Be  lifted  up  (v^^to^).  See  on  iii.  14.  The  primary 
reference  is  to  the  cross,  but  there  is  included  a  reference  to 
the  resurrection  and  ascension.  Bengel  says:  "In  the  very 
cross  there  was  already  something  tending  towards  glory." 
Wye.,  enhcmoed. 

From  the  earth  {U  r^  7%).    lit.,  out  of  ^e  earth. 

Will  draw  ipucwm).    See  on  yL  44. 

All  men  {irimiv;).  Some  high  authorities  read  wdvra,  all 
thingB. 

Unto  Me  (Trp^  ifuiirrSv).  Eev.,  rightly,  tmto  Myself:  in 
contrast  with  thejnince  of  this  world. 

34.  The  law.    See  on  x.  34. 

35.  With  you  (jiey  vfi&v).  The  best  texts  read  h  viih, 
among  you. 

While  ye  have  {tm).  The  best  texts  read  <09>  as:  walk  in 
conformity  with  the  fact  that  you  have  the  Light  among  you. 

Lest  darkness  come  upon  you  {Jva  fiif  aieorrCa  ifjL&i  icara^ 
Xafiff).  Kev.,  better,  that  darhnees  overtake  you  not.  On  over- 
take  see  on  taketh^  Mark  ix.  18 ;  sjidjpercevvedy  Acts  iv.  13. 

40.  He  hath  blinded,  etc.  These  words  of  Isaiah  are  re- 
peated five  times  in  the  New  Testament  as  the  description  of 
the  Jewish  people  in  its  latest  stage  of  decay.  Matt.  xiii.  13 ; 
Mark  iv.  12 ;  Luke  viiL  10 ;  John  xii.  40 ;  Acts  xxviii.  26. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


222  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Hardened  {TreTrwptDKep),  See  on  the  kindred  noun  irdpaxrt^^ 
AardnesSy  Mark  iii.  5. 

Understand  (voi^aaHriv).  'B^y.^hetteTypercewe.  Mark  has 
awi&avv,  understand.     See  on  vmderstcmdmgj  Luke  ii.  47. 

Be  converted  {hrurrpa^aiv).  See  on  Matt.  xiii.  15 ;  Lnke 
xxii.  32.  Rev.,  more  accurately,  turn^  with  the  idea  of  tuniing 
to  or  Unjoa/rd  something  (iir/). 

41.  When  (5t€).    The  best  texts  read  oti^  hecatise. 
His  glory.    In  the  vision  in  the  temple,  Isa.  vi.  1,  8,  6. 
Of  Him.    Christ 

42.  Among  the  chief  rulers  {koX  U  t&v  apxSvrmv).  Bev., 
more  neatly  and  accurately,  even  of' the  rulers. 

Believed  on  Him  {hrurrewrav  ek  avrov).  See  on  i.  12.  It 
is  to  be  noted  that  John  here  uses  of  this  imperfect  faith 
which  refused  to  complete  itself  in  confession,  the  formula  for 
complete  faith.  Compare  believed  m  Sis  name  (ii.  23),  and 
see  note  there. 

Confess  Him  (ifioXoyow).  The  JKw,  or.  Rev.,  it,  is  not  in 
the  text.  The  verb  is  used  absolutely.  They  did  not  make 
confession.    See  on  Matt.  vii.  23 ;  x.  32 ;  xiv.  7. 

Lest  they  should  be  put  out  of  the  synagogue  (&a/ti^ 
airoawcirfwyov  yivfovrai).  Better,  that  they  should  not  he,  etc. 
Compare  Rev.,  ver.  35.  On  the  phrase,  bejmt  out  of  the  synor 
gogue,  see  on  ix.  22. 

43.  Praise  {BS^av).  Much  better.  Rev.,  glory,  because  sug- 
gesting a  contrast  with  the  vision  of  divine  glory  referred  to  in 
ver.  41.     Compare  v.  44. 

Than  (^ep).  The  word  cannot  be  rendered  by  a  corre- 
sponding word  in  English.  The  force  is,  "  more  than  the  glory 
of  Qody  though  He  is  so  much  m^ore  glorious.^^    The  word  is 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  223 

foand  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament.    Some  authorities 
read  Hhrep,  above. 

44.  Cried  (eKpa^ev).  This  is  not  meant  to  relate  a  reap- 
pearance of  Jesus  in  public  The  close  of  His  public  ministry 
is  noted  at  ver.  36.  It  is  in  continuation  of  the  Evangelist's 
own  remarks,  and  introduces  a  summary  of  Jesus'  past  teaching 
to  the  Jews. 

Believeth— on  Him  that  sent  Me  {wurreve^ — ek  rov  wifi^ft- 
avrd  fjLe).  This  is  the  first  and  almost  the  only  place  in  the 
Gospel  where  the  words  hdieve  on  are  used  with  reference  to 
the  Father.  This  rendering  in  v.  24  is  an  error.  See  xiv.  1. 
The  phrase  is  constantly  associated  with  our  Lord.  At  the 
same  time  it  is  to  be  noted  that  it  contemplates  the  Father  as 
the  source  of  the  special  revelation  of  Christ,  and  therefore  is 
not  absolutely  an  exception  to  the  habitual  usage.  The  same  is 
true  of  xiv.  1. 

45.  Seeth  {SecDpeZ).  Rev.,  properly,  heholdeth.  Compare 
xiv.  9.  The  word  is  purposely  chosen  to  mark  an  intent^  con- 
tinttous  contemplation  of  Christ,  issuing  in  ever  larger  knowl- 
edge of  the  Father. 

I  am  come  (ikijikvSa).  The  perfect  tense,  pointing  to  the 
abiding  result  of  His  manifestation.  Compare  v.  43 ;  vii.  28 ; 
viii.  42 ;  xvi.  28 ;  xviii.  37. 

Abide  in  darkness.  The  phrase  occurs  only  here.  Com- 
pare 1  John  ii.  9,  11 ;  also  viii.  12 ;  xii.  35. 

47.  Believe  not  (ji^  irurrewrui).  The  best  texts  read  (l>v\dfy, 
keep  (them). 

Came  (fjiKSov).  The  aorist  tense,  pointing  to  the  purpose  of 
the  coming,  as  /  am  come  (ver.  46)  to  the  residi.  Compare 
viii.  14;  ix.  39;  x.  10;  xii  27,  47;  xv.  22.  Both  tenses  are 
found  in  viii.  42 ;  xvi  28. 

48.  Rejecteth  {a!^&v).    See  on  Luke  vii  30. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


224  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

The  word  (o  Xoyosi).  Comprehending  all  the  Boymgs  {pq- 
fiara). 

The  same  (iKea^.  That.  The  pronoun  of  remote  refer- 
ence, "Westcott  finely  remarks:  "The  resumptive,  isolating 
pronoun  places  in  emphatic  prominence  the  teaching  which  is 
regarded  as  past,  and  separated  from  those  to  whom  it  was  ad- 
dressed.   It  stands,  as  it  were,  in  the  distance,  as  a  witness  and 


The  last  day.    Peculiar  to  John.    See  yi.  39. 

49.  Of  myself  {i^  ifiavrou).  Out  of  myself.  This  formula 
occurs  only  here.  The  usual  expression  is  air  ifuiirrov.  *Aw6, 
fronts  as  distinguished  from  Ik^  oiut  of  marks  rather  the  point 
of  depart/urey  while  iic^  including  this  idea,  emphasizes  the 
point  of  departure  as  the  living  and  impelling  source  of  that 
which  issues  forth.  In  vii.  17,  we  read,  "  whether  it  be  out  of 
God  {iK  Tov  Oeov)^  or  whether  I  speak  from  myself  {air  ifuw- 
ToOy 

Gave  (SB(o/c€v).  The  best  texts  read  SiScoxev,  the  perfect 
tense,  hath  gwerty  the  result  of  the  gift  still  abiding.    So  Rev. 

Say — speak  {elirto — XoCk/iafo).  The  former  relating  to  the 
sicbstancey  and  the  latter  to  the  form  of  Jesus'  utterances. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

'  1.  Before  the  Feast  of  the  Passover.  This  clause  is  to  be 
construed  with  '^dirrfcevj  loved^  at  the  close  of  this  verse.  No- 
tice that  John,  in  mentioning  the  Passover,  here  drops  the  ex- 
planatory phrase  of  the  Jews  (xi.  55).  It  is  not  the  Passover 
ofth^  Jews  which  Jesus  is  about  to  celebrate,  which  had  d^en- 
erated  into  an  empty  form,  but  the  national  ordinance,  accord- 
ing to  its  true  spirit,  and  with  a  development  of  its  higher 
meaning. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPBL  OF  JOHN.  "225 

Knowing  (etBi^).    Or,  since  he  Tcnew. 

His  hour.    See  on  xii.  23,  and  compare  ii  4. 

That  (&a).  In  order  that;  marking  the  departure  as  a 
divine  decree. 

Depart  (juraff^).  The  compounded  preposition  fierd,  ^dgai- 
&eBj>amng  over  from  one  sphere  into  another. 

His  own  {roif^  IBiovsi).  See  on  Acts  i.  7.  Compare  xvii.  6 
sqq. ;  Acts  iv.  23 ;  xxiv.  23 ;  1  Tim.  v.  8;  John  L  11. 

He  loved  {ffyimiaev).  Notice  that  John  uses  the  word  in- 
dicating the  discriminating  affection :  the  love  of  choice  and 
selection.    See  on  y.  20. 

Unto  the  end  (ek  riKosi).  Interpretations  differ.  The  ren- 
dering of  the  A.  V.  aid  Rev.  is  of  doubtful  authority.  The 
passages  cited  in  support  of  this,  Matt  x.  22 ;  xxiv.  13 ;  Mark 
xiii.  13,  may  all  be  rendered  to  the  uttermost.  Morever,  other 
formulas  are  used  where  the  meaning  to  the  end  is  unquestiona- 
ble. In  Apoc.  ii.  26,  the  only  other  instance  in  John's  writings 
where  riKo^  is  used  in  an  adverbial  phrase,  the  expression  is 
ixp^  TcXow,  tinto  the  end.  Similarly  Heb.  vi.  11.  In  Heb.  iii. 
6, 14,  M^XP^  riKov^^  tmto  the  end.  The  phrase  may  mean  (U 
lasty  and  so  is  rendered  by  many  here,  as  Meyer,  Lange,  Thayer 
(Lex.).  "At  last  He  loved  them ;  ^  that  is,  showed  them  the  last 
proof  of  His  love.  This  is  the  most  probable  rendering  in 
Luke  xviii.  5,  on  which  see  note.  It  may  also  mean  to  the  tUter- 
mostj  completely.  So  Westcott  and  Godet  But  I  am  inclined, 
with  Meyer,  to  shrink  from  the  "inappropriate  gradation'' 
which  is  thus  implied,  as  though  Jesus'  love  now  reached  a 
higher  degree  than  before  (AyoTnJaa?).  Hence  I  prefer  the 
rendering  at  last,  or  Jmally  He  loved  them^  taking  ^ihn^a^^ 
loved,  in  the  sense  of  the  mcmifestation  of  His  love.  This 
sense  frequently  attaches  to  the  verb.  See,  for  instance,  1  John 
iv.  10  ("love  viewed  in  its  historic  manifestation"  Westcott); 
Vol.  n.— 15 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


„„  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

and  compare  John  iii.  16 ;  Eph.  ii.  4 ;  v.  2,  25 ;  2  ThesB.  ii.  16 ; 
Apoc.  iii  9. 

2.  Supper  being  ended  {Selirvov  y€vofihH)v).  The  most 
approved  reading  is  y^vofUvov,  the  present  participle,  denoting 
while  a  Slipper  was  in  progress.  Hence  Rev.,  rightly,  during 
Slipper,  The  A.  V.  is  wrong,  even  if  the  reading  of  the  Received 
Text  be  retained ;  for  in  ver.  12  Jesns  reclined  again,  and  in 
ver.  26,  the  supper  is  still  in  progress.  It  should  be,  supper 
honing  begun,  or  ha/omg  been  served.*  It  is  important  to  note 
the  absence  of  the  definite  article :  a  supper,  as  distinguished 
from  the  feast,  which  also  is  designated  by  a  different  word. 

Having  now  put  {^Srf  PepXaiie&roi).  Rev.,  better,  already. 
Put,  is  literally,  thrown  or  cast. 

Into  the  heart  of  Judas.  Meyer,  strangely,  refers  the 
heart,  not  to  Judas,  but  to  the  Devil  himself ;  rendering,  the 
Devil  having  already  formed  the  design  that  Judas  should  de- 
Uver  Sim  up.  Godet  does  not  speak  too  strongly  when  he  says 
that  "  this  meaning  is  insufferable."  f 

3.  Had  given  (BiSm/cep).  The  best  texts  read  iSmicePj  gave, 
the  aorist  marking  Jesus'  commission  as  given  once  for  all. 

Was  come  (i^rjIXSe).  This  rendering  would  require  the  per- 
fect tense.  The  aorist  points  to  His  coming  as  a  historic  fact, 
not  as  related  to  its  result.  See  on  xiL  47.  Rev.,  rightly,  came 
forth. 

Went  {xnr6/^e£).  Present  tense:  goeth;  withdrawing  from 
the  scenes  of  earth.  Note  the  original  order :  thai  it  was  from 
God  He  came  forth,  and  unto  Ood  He  is  going. 

*  €k>det,  with  his  well-known  areraion  to  departures  from  the  Beo.,  holds  bj 
the  reading  ytro/itvav,  and  explains  ytwofUrov  bj  mhen  the  repcut  a$  a  r^^ast 
began;  adding  that  the  correction  was  made  in  order  to  place  the  foot- wash- 
ing at  the  beginning  of  the  repast,  the  cnstomarj  time  for  it.  But  the  per- 
formance of  the  act  during  the  course  of  the  meal,  is  indicated  bj  the  words 
in  Ter.  4,  He  ri»eQifrom  (Jk)  the  mipper. 

f  I  am  surprised  to  find  it  adopted  bj  MiUigan  and  Moulton. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHH.  327 

4.  From  the  supper  (iic  rov  Seiirvov).  Out  of  the  gronp 
gathered  at  the  table. 

Laid  aside  {^(l^nftri).    Present  tense :  layelh  aside. 
Garments  (^ria).    See  on  Matt.  y.  40.     ZPpper  garments. 

Towel  (Aiinrioi^).  A  Latin  word,  ImJtemfi.  A  linen  doth. 
Only  here  and  ver.  5. 

Girded  {SU^toaev).  Only  in  this  chapter  and  xxL  7.  The 
oomponnd  verb  means  to  hind  or  gird  all  rovmd. 

6.  A  bason  {^virrf^pci).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament 
From  vhrrfo,  to  wash. 

6.  Dost  thou  wash  {trv  ftov  viirr€i^)i  The  two  pronouns 
27um,  mi/j  stand  together  at  the  b^inning  of  the  sentence  in 
emphatic  contrast.    Dost  thou  of  me  wash  the  feet ! 

7.  Knowest—shalt  know  (01809—71^(^7).  The  A.  V.  ig- 
nores the  distinction  between  the  two  words.  ^^  Thoa  knowest 
not "  {ovK  olZa<i\  of  absolute  and  complete  knowledge.  Thoa 
shalt  learn  or  perceive  iyvwrrDj  of  knowledge  gained  by  exper- 
ience.    See  on  ii.  24. 

Hereafter  (jierh  raxna).    Lit,  after  these  things. 

8.  Never  (ov  fii^ — ek  rbv  al&va).  A  very  strong  expression. 
Lit,  thou  shalt  hy  no  means  wash  my  feet  as  long  as  the  world 
stands. 

10.  He  that  is  washed— wash  his  feet  (o  XsKoviihH^ — 
vi^wr^).  The  A.  Y.  obliterates  the  distinction  between 
Xoua>,  to  iathcj  to  apply  water  to  the  whole  body,  and  vhrrm, 
to  toash  a  part  of  the  body.  Thus,  when  Dorcas  died  (Acts  iz. 
37)  they  lathed  her  body  {\jovaavTesi).  The  proverb  in  2  Pet  ii 
22,  is  about  the  sow  that  has  been  bathed  all  over  (KowrafAhni). 
On  the  other  hand,  he  who  fasts  must  wcuh  (y/^roi)  his  face 
(Matt  yi.  17).    Both  verbs  are  always  used  of  lioing  beings  in 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

the  New  Testament.  The  word  for  washing  thvngsj  as  nets, 
garments,  etc.,  is  irKxnm.  See  Luke  y.  2.  All  three  verbs 
occur  in  Lev.  xv.  11  (Sept.). 

11.  Who  should  betray  {rov  irapaSiSovra).  Lit,  him  that 
is  betraying.  So  in  Matt  xxvi.  2,  the  present  tense  is  used,  is 
ieing  betrayed  {irapaBlBoTai).  See  on  Matt.  iv.  12,  and  compare 
TTpoBonr;,  betrayer^  Luke  vi.  16  ;  Acts  vii.  62  ;  2  Tim.  iii.  4. 

12.  Was  set  down  {avaw€<roi>v).  Lit,  hmmig  reclined.  The 
guests  reclined  on  conches,  lying  on  the  left  side  and  leaning 
on  the  left  hand.  The  table  was  in  the  hollow  square  or  ob- 
long formed  on  three  sides  by  the  couches,  the  fourth  side 
being  open,  and  the  table  extending  beyond  the  ends  of  the 
couches. 

Know  ye  {yivaHncere)  ?    Perceim  or  tmderstand  ye  ? 

13.  Master  (o  SiBda-KaXo^).  Lit.,  the  Teacher.  Teacher  and 
Lord  were  used,  according  to  the  Jewish  titles  Haibi  and  Mar^ 
corresponding  to  which  the  followers  were  disciples  or  servants* 

14.  Your.  Inserted  in  A.  Y.  Better,  the  Lord  and  the 
Master  as  Eev.    Both  have  the  article. 

Ought  (o^tXere).  The  verb  means  to  otoe.  It  occurs  several 
times  in  John's  Epistles  (1  John  ii.  6 ;  iii.  16 ;  iv.  11 ;  3  John  8). 
In  the  Gospel  only  hei-e  and  xix.  7.  Compare  Luke  xvii.  10.  In 
Matthew's  version  of  the  Lord's  prayer  occur  the  two  kindred 
words  6<f>€CKrffjLa,  debtj  and  o^eiXiTi;9»  debtor.  Jesus  here  puts 
the  obligation  to  ministry  as  a  debt  under  which  His  disciples 
are  laid  by  His  ministry  to  them.  The  word  ottght  is  the  past 
tense  of  owe,  Ael,  ought  or  must  (see  iii.  7, 14,  30,  etc.)  ex- 
presses an  obligation  vn  the  naiwre  of  things;  i^tkew,  a  special^ 
jpersonal  obligation. 

15.  Example  (inrSBeiyfia).  On  the  three  words  used  in  the 
Kew  Testament  for  example^  xnro^vfiui,,  rwro^^  and  SeSy/io,  see 
on  2  Pet.  ii.  6 ;  1  Pet.  v.  3 ;  Jude  7. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPBL  OF  JOHN. 

16.  Verily,  verily.    See  on  L  61 ;  x.  1. 

The  servant.  No  article.  Better  a  servanty  as  Bev.,  a  ^oru^ 
servofU. 

He  that  ie  eent  {awoaroXt^).  lit,  an  apasUe.  See  on  Matt 
X.  2. 

17.  Happy  (juucdpioi).  Better,  as  Bev.,  Uewed.  See  on 
Matt.  V.  8. 

18.  I  have  chosen  (i^Xe^dfiapi).  Aorist  tense,  lelum.  Not 
elected  to  eat/vation^  but  ohoee  as  an  apoetle. 

That  the  scripture,  etc.  {ha).  Elliptical.  We  must  supply 
this  choice  was  made  in  order  that,  etc 

Eateth  {rpo»ymv).  With  the  exception  of  Matt.  xxiv.  38,  the 
word  occurs  only  in  John.  See  on  vi.  54.  Originally  it  means 
to  gnaw  or  cnmch  /  to  chew  raw  vegetables  or/ruitSj  and  hence 
often  used  of  animals  feeding,  as  Homer  ("  Odyssey,*'  vi.,  90), 
of  mules  feeding.  Of  course  it  has  lost  its  original  sense  in 
the  New  Testament,  as  it  did  to  some  extent  in  classical  Greek, 
though,  as  applied  to  men,  it  more  commonly  referred  to  eat- 
ing vegetables  or  fruit,  as  Aristophanes  (^^  Peace,"  1325)  avtca 
rptijeiv,  to  eat  figs.  The  entire  divorce  in  the  New  Testament 
from  its  primitive  sense  is  shown  in  its  application  to  the  flesh 
of  Christ  (vi  54).  It  is  used  by  John  only  in  connection  with 
Christ 

Bread  with  me  {p-er  ifiov  rov  Aprw).  Some  editors  read, 
IMv  TOP  dpToVf  my  bread. 

Heel  (irripvaii).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament  The 
metaphor  is  of  one  administering  a  kick.  Thus  Plutarch,  de- 
scribing the  robber  Sciron,  who  was  accastomed  ^^  out  of  inso- 
lence and  wantonness  to  stretch  foilh  his  feet  to  strangers, 
commanding  them  to  wash  them,  and  then,  when  they  did  it, 
with  a  kick  to  send  them  down  the  rock  into  the  sea  "  (^^  The- 
seus").  Some  have  explained  the  metaphor  by  the  tripping  up 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


230  WORD  STUDIBS  IN  THB  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

of  one's  feet  in  wrestling ;  bat,  as  Meyer  justly  says,  ^^  Jesus  was 
not  overreached.^^  The  quotation  is  from  the  Hebrew,  not  the 
Septuagint  of  Ps.  xlL  9  (Sept.  xl.).  The  Septnagint  reads, 
"For  the  man  of  my  peace  in  whom  I  hoped,  who  eateth  my 
bread,  magnified  his  cunning  {wrepvurfiop,  lit.,  tripping  tip) 
against  me." 

19.  Novi  (air  dpTi).  'ELev.y  corrootljy  fr(m^  h&noeforth.  Com- 
pare i.  52 ;  idv.  7 ;  Matt,  xxiii.  39. 

I  am  he  {iyd  elfu).    Or,  lam.    See  on  viii.  24. 

21-35.  Compare  Matt.  xzyL  21-25 ;  Mark  xiv.  18-21 ;  Luke 
xxiL  21-23. 

21.  Was  troubled  in  spirit.  See  on  xi.  33;  xii.  27.  The 
agitation  was  in  the  highest  region  of  the  spiritual  life  (^rveO/ui). 

One  of  you  shall  betray  me.  So  Matthew  and  Mark,  with 
the  addition  of,  who  eateth  with  me.  Luke,  the  hand  of  him 
that  betrayeth  me  is  with  me  on  the  UMe. 

22.  Looked  {ifikeirop).  The  imperfect  tense,  kept  hoJcmg 
as  they  doubted. 

Doubting  {inropovfiepoi).    See  on  Mark  yi.  20. 

He  spake  {'Kiyei).  The  present  tense,  speaketh,  introduced 
with  lively  effect. 

23.  Was  leaning  on  Jesus'  bosom  (^  iofOKelfAetw:  h  r^ 
KoKirtp  Tov  ^If)aov).  The  Rev.  renders,  ^'  there  was  at  the  table 
reclining,"  etc.  At  the  table  is  added  because  the  verb  is  the 
general  term  equivalent  to  sitting  at  table.  ^^  In  Jesus'  bosom," 
defines  John's  position  relatively  to  the  other  guests.  As  the 
guests  reclined  upon  the  left  arm,  the  feet  being  stretched  out 
behind,  the  head  of  each  would  be  near  the  breast  of  his  com- 
panion oh  the  left.  Supposing  that  Jesus,  Peter,  and  John 
were  together,  Jesus  would  occupy  the  central  place,  the  place 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


OOSPJSL  OF  JOHN.  231 

of  honor,  and  John,  being  m  front  of  Him,  could  readily  lean 
back  and  speak  to  Him.    Peter  would  be  behind  him. 

Bosom.  See  on  Luke  vi.  38.  The  SjnoptistB  do  not  give 
this  incident. 

24.  Beckoneth  (vevei).    lit.,  noddeth. 

That  he  should  ask  who  it  should  be  {irvSiaBw  rk  ^ 
d^).  The  best  texts  read,  xai  Xiyei  axn^  ehri  rk  iarw,  and 
with  vmio  him^  Tell  U8  who  it  is. 

25.  Lying  {hrvireaonf).  This  word  is,  literallj,  tofaU  upon^ 
and  is  so  rendered  in  almost  every  instance  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment In  Mark  iii.  10,  it  is  applied  to  the  multitudes  j?r««mi^ 
upon  Christ.  It  occurs,  however,  nowhere  else  in  John,  and 
therefore  some  of  the  best  authorities  read  canvtreaowt  Ua/ning 
hackj  a  verb  which  John  uses  several  times  in  the  Gospel,  as  in 
ver.  12.*  So  Rev.  Whichever  of  the  two  is  read,  it  points  out 
the  distinction,  which  the  A.  Y.  misses  by  the  translation  lyings 
between  fiv  avaxelfievo^  (ver.  23),  which  describes  the  reclining 
position  of  John  throughout  the  meal,  and  the  sudden  change 
of  posture  pictured  by  avaireaoiWy  leaning  hack.  The  distinction 
is  enforced  by  the  difiFerent  preposition  in  each  case :  reclining 
in  {ip)  Jesns'  bosom,  and  leaning  hack  (avd).  Again,  the  words 
bosom  and  breast  represent  different  words  in  the  Greek; 
ic<(X/iro9  representing  more  generally  the  bend  formed  by  the 
front  part  of  the  reclining  person,  the  lap,  and  ot^.9o9  the 
breast  proper.  The  verb  mam-linwt  to  lean  back,  always  in  the 
Kew  Testament  describes  a  change  of  position.  It  is  used  of 
a  rower  bending  back  for  a  fresh  stroke*  Plato,  in  the  well- 
known  passage  of  the  ^^  Phsedrus,"  in  which  the  soul  is  de- 
scribed under  the  figure  of  two  horses  and  a  charioteer,  says 
that  when  the  charioteer  beholds  the  vision  of  love  he  is  afraid, 
Mndjatls  backward  {opiireaep),  so  that  he  brings  the  steeds  upon 
their  haanches. 


*  Oodet's  affection  for  the  **receiTed  reading"  oarries  lilm  rather  bejond 
boonda,  when  it  leads  him  to  saj  that  kmmwitp  ** seems  absord.*' 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


282  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

A8  ht  was  (o{rrfl»9).  Inserted  by  the  best  texts,  and  not 
found  in  the  A.  Y.  declining  aa  he  waSj  he  leaned  h(ick.  The 
general  attitude  of  reclining  was  maintained.  Compare  iv.  6 : 
^^  sat  thus  (o£to09)  on  the  welL"  According  to  the  original  in- 
stitution, the  Passover  was  to  be  eaten  standing  (Exod.  xii.  11). 
After  the  Captivity  the  custom  was  changed,  and  the  guests  re- 
clined. The  Babbis  insisted  that  at  least  a  part  of  the  Paschal 
meal  should  be  eaten  in  that  position,  because  it  was  the  man- 
neir  of  slaves  to  eat  standing,  and  the  recumbent  position 
showed  that  they  had  been  delivered  from  bondage  into  free- 
dom. 

Breast  (ot^.9o9).  From  ttrnj/u,  to  owuse  to  stand.  Hence, 
that  which  stands  out.  In  later  writings  John  was  known  as 
i  iirum^Sia^y  the  one  on  the  hreast^  or  the  bosomfriend. 

26.  To  whom  I  shall  give  a  sop  when  I  have  dipped  it 
(a(  ^  fidy^iK  to  '^fjAov  iiriSwm).  The  best  texts  read  £  iyu> 
pd;^  rh  '^filov  icaX  BoHrot  avr^  for  whom  I  shall  dip  the 
sop  and  give  it  him. 

Sop  {'^fUov).  Only  in  this  chapter.  Diminutive  from 
'^li&it  a  morsel^  which,  in  turn,  is  from  '^rooi,  to  rvhj  or  to 
orurrMe.     Homer,  of  the  Cyclops : 

*'Then  from  his  month  oame  hUs  (imftoC)  of  human  flesh 
Mingled  with  wine."  **  Odyaaey,"  ix.,  874. 

And  Xenophon:  ^^  And  on  one  occasion  having  seen  one  of  his 
companions  at  table  tasting  many  dishes  with  one  bit  {'^fi^) 
of  bread"  (" Memorabilia,"  iii.,  14, 15).  The  kindred  verb  ^ra>- 
/t/^,  rendered  feed^  occurs  Bom.  xii.  20 ;  1  Cor.  xiiL  3.  See 
also  Septuagint,  Ps.  Ixxix.  5 ;  Ixxx.  16.  According  to  its  ety- 
mology, the  verb  means  to  feed  with  morsels;  and  it  was  used 
by  the  Greeks  of  a  nurse  chewing  the  food  and  administering 
it  to  an  infant.  So  Aristophanes:  ^^  And  one  laid  the  child  to 
rest,  and  another  bathed  it,  and  another  yS?(2  (i^dfuaev)  it" 
("  Lysistrate,"  19, 20).  This  sense  may  possibly  color  the  word 
as  used  in  Bom.  ziL  20 :  ^^  If  thine  enemy  hunger,/!^  {y^fu^e) 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOBPBL  OF  JOHN.  233 

him;''  wUh  tender  care.  In  1  Cor.  xiiL  3,  the  original  sense 
appears  to  be  emphasized:  ^'Though  Ihestow  all  my  goods  to 
feed  thejpoor  {y^filamy^  This  idea  is  that  of  doUng  away  m 
morsels.  Dean  Stanley  says:  ^^Who  that  has  witnessed  the 
almsgiving  in  a  Catholic  monastery,  or  the  conrt  of  a  Spanish 
or  Sicilian  bishop's  or  archbishop's  palace,  where  immense  rev- 
ennes  are  syringed  away  in  farthings  to  herds  of  beggars,  but 
must  feel  tiie  force  of  the  Apostle's  half  satirical  '^/i^-oot" 

Dipped  the  sop.  Compare  Matt.  xzvi.  23;  Mark  ziv.  20. 
The  regular  sop  of  the  Paschal  supper  consisted  of  the  follow- 
ing things  wrapped  together:  flesh  of  the  Paschal  lamb,  a 
piece  of  unleavened  bread,  and  bitter  herbs.  The  sauce  into 
which  it  was  dipped  does  not  belong  to  the  original  institution, 
but  had  been  introduced  before  the  days  of  Christ  According 
to  one  authority  it  consisted  of  only  vinegar  and  water  (com- 
pare Ruth  ii.  14) ;  others  describe  it  as  a  mixture  of  vinegar, 
figs,  dates,  almonds,  and  spice.  The  flour  which  was  used  to 
thicken  the  sauce  on  ordinary  occasions  was  forbidden  at  the 
Passover  by  the  Babbins,  lest  it  might  occasion  a  slight  fer- 
mentation. According  to  some,  the  sauce  was  beaten  up  to  the 
consistence  of  mortar,  in  order  to  commemorate  the  toils  of  the 
Israelites  in  laying  bricks  in  Egypt. 

To  Judas  Iscariot  the  son  of  Simon  ^lovia  Slfuovo^ 
^la-icapulyrui).  The  best  texts  read  ^la/capiarrov.  ^^  Judas  the 
son  of  Simon  Isoa/riot,^^  So  vi  71.  The  act  was  a  mark  of 
forbearance  and  good-will  toward  the  traitor,  and  a  tacit  appeal 
to  his  conscience  against  the  contemplated  treachery. 

27.  Then  (t6t€).  With  a  peculiar  emphasis,  marking  the 
decisive  point  at  which  Judas  was  finally  committed  to  his  dark 
deed.  The  token  of  good-will  which  Jesus  had  offered,  if  it 
did  not  soften  his  heart  would  harden  it ;  and  Judas  appears  to 
have  so  interpreted  it  as  to  confirm  him  in  his  purpose. 

Satan.    The  only  occurrence  of  the  word  in  this  Oospel. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


284  WORD  8TUDIB8  IN  THE  NEW  TBSTAHENT. 

Into  him  {ek  i/ceufov).  The  pronoan  of  remote  reference 
sets  Judas  apart  from  the  company  of  the  disciples. 

Quickly  {rdxiov).  Lit,  more  quickly.  The  comparative 
implies  a  command  to  hast^i  his  work,  which  was  already 
begun. 

29.  The  bag.    See  on  ziL  6. 

Buy  (arfopaaov).  An  incidental  argument  in  favor  of  this 
gathering  of  the  disciples  having  taken  place  on  the  evening  of 
the  Paschal  feast.  Had  it  been  on  the  previous  evening,  no 
one  would  have  thought  of  Judas  going  out  at  night  to  bnj 
provisions  for  the  feaet^  when  there  was  the  whole  of  the  next 
day  for  it,  nor  would  they  have  thought  of  his  going  out  to 
seek  the  poor  at  that  hour.  The  15th  Nisan,  the  time  of  the 
Passover  celebration,  was  indeed  invested  with  the  sanctity  of 
a  Sabbath ;  but  provision  and  preparation  of  the  needful  food 
was  expressly  allowed  on  that  day.  The  Rabbinical  rules  even 
provided  for  the  procuring  of  the  Paschal  lamb  on  the  Pass- 
over eve  when  that  happened  to  fall  on  the  Sabbath. 

Against  the  feast  (cfc  t^v  iofyniv).  Rev.,  better,  for  the 
feast.  The  Passover  feast.  The  meal  of  which  they  had  been 
partaking  was  the  preliminary  meal,  at  the  close  of  which  the 
Passover  was  celebrated ;  just  as,  subsequently,  the  Eucharist 
was  celebrated  at  the  close  of  the  Agape^  or  love-feast.  Notice 
the  different  word,  iopn/iyfeasty  instead  of  Behrvov,  HfwppeTy  and 
the  article  with^^MU^ 

To  the  poor.  Perhaps  to  help  them  procure  their  Paschal 
lamb. 

30.  He  {itcelvo^).    See  on  ver.  27. 

31.  Now.  Marking  a  crisis,  at  which  Jesus  is  relieved  of 
the  presence  of  the  traitor,  and  accepts  the  consequences  of  his 
treachery. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  285 

Is^glorifitd  {iSo^aaSTf).  Lit,  was  glorified.  The  aorist 
points  to  the  wi&drawal  of  Judas.  Jesas  was  glorified  through 
death,  and  His  fate  was  sealed  (humanly  speaking)  by  Judas' 
going  out  He  speaks  of  the  death  and  consequent  glorification 
as  already  accomplished. 

,  32.  If  God  be  glorified  in  Him.    The  most  ancient  au- 
thorities omit 

In  Himself  {ip  iavr^).  His  glory  will  be  contained  in  and 
identified  with  the  divine  glory.  Compare  "  the  glory  which  I 
had  with  ihee^^^  iraph  aol  (xvii.  5).  ^Ev  i/n^  indicates  unity  of 
being;  irapd  toith,  unity  oijposiUan. 

33.  Little  children  {jexvU).  Diminuitive,  occurring  only 
here  in  the  Gospel,  but  repeatedly  in  the  First  Epistle.  No- 
where else  in  the  New  Testament 

Now  {&pr£).  In  ver.  31,  now  is  vvv^  which  marks  the  point 
of  time  absolutely.  "Aprv  marks  the  point  of  time  as  related 
to  the  past  or  to  the  future.  Thus,  ^'  from  the  days  of  John 
the  Baptist  until  now^^  (ciprh  Matt  xi.  12).  ^^Thinkest  thou 
that  I  cannot  now  (aprn)  pray  to  my  Father  !  "  though  succor 
has  been  delayed  all  along  till  now  (Matt  xzvi.  53).  Here  the 
word  implies  that  the  sorrowful  announcement  of  Jesus'  depart- 
ure from  His  disciples  had  been  withheld  until  the  present 
The  time  was  now  come. 

34.  New  {luuviiv).    See  on  Matt  xxvL  29. 

Commandment  {hnohipf).  The  word  for  a  single  com- 
mandment or  injunction^  but  used  also  for  the  whole  body  of 
the  moral  precepts  of  Christianity.  See  1  Tim.  vi.  14 ;  2  Pet. 
ii.  21 ;  iii.  2.  See  also  oxx  Jas.  ii.  8.  This  new  commandment 
embodies  the  essential  principle  of  the  whole  law.  Compare 
also  1  John  iii.  23.  Some  interpreters,  instead  of  taking  thai 
ye  love  one  (mother,  etc.,  as  the  definition  of  the  commandment, 
explain  the  commandment  as  referring  to  the  ordinance  of  the 
Holy  Communion,  and  render,  "  a  new  commandment  (to  ob- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


236  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THfl  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

serve  this  ordinance)  I  give  nnto  yon,  in  order  that  je  love  one 
another."  It  is,  however,  more  than  improbable,  and  contraiy 
to  usage,  that  the  Holy  Sapper  should  be  spoken  of  as  iproTJf 
a  commandment. 

That  {Tva).  With  its  usual  teUo  *  force ;  indicating  the 
scope  and  not  merely  the  form  or  nature  of  the  commandment 

As  {KoSm).  Kev.,  better,  even  as.  Not  a  simple  comparison 
(oKnre/)),  but  a  conformity  ;  the  love  \aU}\)Qofthe  same  nature. 
There  are,  however,  two  ways  of  rendering  the  passage.  1.  ^'I 
give  you  a  new  commandment,  that  ye  love  one  another  with 
the  same  devotion  with  which  I  loved  you."  2.  "  I  give  you  a 
new  commandment,  that  ye  love  one  another,  even  as  up  to  this 
moment  I  loved  you,  in  order  that  you  may  imitate  my  love 
one  toward  another."  By  the  first  rendering  the  character  of 
the  mutual  love  of  Christians  is  described ;  by  the  second,  its 
grov/nd.    The  Kev.  gives  the  latter  in  margin. 

35.  Shall — know  {^fywovraC).    Perceive^  or  corns  to  know. 

My  disciples  {ifj^ol  fiaSrrrat).  See  on  Matt.  xiL  49.  Lit., 
disciples  tmto  me.    Compare  xv.  8. 

36-38.  Compare  Matt  xxvi.  31-35 ;  Mark  xiv.  27-31 ;  Luke 
xxii.  31-38. 

37.  Now  (4p^0«  Without  waiting  for  a  future  time.  See 
on  ver.  33,  and  compare  vuv  nowj  in  ver.  36. 

I  will  lay  down  my  life.    See  on  x.  11. 

38.  Wilt  thou  lay  down  thy  life  ?  For  a  similar  repetition 
of  Peter's  own  words,  see  on  xxi.  17. 

*  Directed  to  an  end  {r4Kos)f  and  therefore  marWng  Apurp<m. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


G08PHL  OF  JOHN.  287 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

1.  Heart  (xtipSU).  Never  nsed  in  the  New  Testament,  as 
in  the  Septnagint,  of  the  mere  physical  orgam^  thongh  some- 
times of  the  mgor  and  sefise  of  physical  life  (Acts  xiv.  17 ; 
Jas.  V.  5 ;  Luke  xxi.  34).  Generally,  the  centre  of  our  complex 
^i'n^^— physical,  moral,  spiritual,  and  intellectual.  See  on  Mark 
zii.  30.  The  immediate  organ  by  which  man  lives  his  personal 
life,  and  where  that  entire  personal  life  concentrates  itself.  It 
is  thus  used  sometimes  as  parallel  to  '^rt;^,  the  individtial  Ufe^ 
and  to  irveviia  the  principle  qf  life,  which  manifests  itself  in  the 
^rvx»f.  Strictly,  icaphla  is  the  immediate  organ  of  -^rvj^,  occupy- 
ing a  mediating  position  between  it  and  irvevfui.  In  the  heart 
(KapBia)  the  spirit  {irP€VfJLa)y  which  is  the  distinctive  principle 
of  the  life  or  soul  ('^^n/^^),  has  the  seat  of  its  activity. 

jEfnotions  of  joy  or  sorrow  are  thus  ascribed  both  to  the 
heart  and  to  the  soid.  Compare  John  xiv.  27,  "  Let  not  your 
heart  (xapSia)  be  troubled ;  ^  and  John  xii.  27,  "  Now  is  my 
sotd  {^vxn)  troubled."  The  heart  is  the  focus  of  the  religious 
life  (Matt.  xxii.  37 ;  Luke  vi  45 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  22).  It  is  the 
sphere  of  the  operation  of  grace  (Matt,  xiii  19  ;  Luke  viii.  15  ; 
xxiv.  32 ;  Acts  ii.  37 ;  Bom.  x.  9, 10).  Also  of  the  opposite 
principle  (John  xiii.  2  ;  Acts  v.  3).  Used  also  as  the  seat  of  the 
understandvng ;  ihefa^mUy  of  inteilligence  as  applied  to  divine 
things  (Matt  xiii.  15  ;  Bom.  L  21 ;  Mark  viii  17). 

Ye  believe — believe  also  (irKTrevere  koX  irurrevere).  The 
verbs  may  be  taken  either  as  indicatives  or  as  imperatives. 
Thus  we  may  render :  ye  believe  in  Oody  ye  believe  also  in  me; 
or,  believe  in  God  and  ye  believe  in  me;  or,  believe  in  God  and 
bdieve  in  me;  or  again,  as  A.  V.  The  third  of  these  render- 
ings corresponds  best  with  the  hortatory  character  of  the  dis- 
course. 

2.  House  {oiicla).  The  dweUmgpUice,  TTsed  primarily  of 
the  ed\fice  (Matt.  vii.  24 ;  viii  14 ;  ix.  10 ;  Acts  iv.  34).    Of 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


238  WORD  STUDIBS  IN  THB  NSW  TESTAMENT. 

the  family  or  aU  the  persons  inhabiting  the  house  (Matt  xii. 
25  ;  John  iv.  53  ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  15  ;  Matt.  x.  13).  Of  property 
(Matt  xxiii.  14 ;  Mark  xii.  40).    Here  meaning  hecuoen.* 

Mansions  {jiovalX).  Only  here  and  ver.  28.  From  /iow  to 
stay  or  abide.  Originally  a  staying  or  abiding  or  delay.  Thus 
Thncydides,  of  Pausanias :  "  He  settled  at  Colonse  in  Troas, 
and  was  reported  to  the  Ephors  to  be  negotiating  with  the 
Barbarians,  and  to  he  staying  there  {rijp  /loptfv  woiovfiafo^,  lit, 
making  a  stay)  for  no  good  purpose"  (L,  131).  Thence,  a  stay- 
ing  or  abiding-place ;  an  abode.  The  word  mansion  has  a 
similar  etymology  and  follows  the  same  course  of  development, 
being  derived  from  manerej  to  remain.  Mam^sio  is  thus,  first,  a 
staying^  and  then  a  dweUingplace.  A  later  meaning  of  both 
mansio  and  fMvi^  is  a  halting-plaoe  or  station  on  a  journey. 
Some  expositors,  as  Trench  and  Westcott,  explain  the  word 
here  according  to  this  later  meaning,  as  indicating  the  combi- 
nation of  the  contrasted  notions  of  progress  and  repose  in  the 
vision  of  the  future.t  This  is  quite  untenable.  The  word 
means  here  abodes.  Compare  Homer's  description  of  Priam's 
palace: 

**  A  palace  bnilt  with  graoefal  porticoes, 
And  flftj  chambers  near  each  other,  waUed 
With  polished  stone,  the  rooms  of  Priam's  sons 
And  of  their  wives ;  and  opposite  to  these 

*  The  explanation  given  bj  Mllligan  and  Monlton  is,  that  the  Father's 
honse  includes  earth  as  well  as  heaven  :  that  it  is,  in  short,  the  universe,  over 
which  the  Father  rales,  having  manj  apartments,  some  on  this  side,  others 
bejond  the  grave.  When,  therefore,  Jesus  goes  awaj,  it  is  onlj  to  another 
chamber  of  the  one  house  of  the  Father.  The  main  thought  is  that  wherever 
Jesus  is,  wherever  we  are,  we  are  all  in  the  Father*s  house,  and  therefore 
there  can  be  no  real  separation  between  Jesus  and  His  disciples.  This  is  very 
beautiful,  and,  in  itself,  true  ;  but,  as  an  explanation  of  this  passage,  is  not 
warranted  by  anything  in  it,  but  is  rather  read  into  it 

fW.  Aldis  Wright  (**  Bible  Word-Book ")  is  wrong  in  calling  this  "the 
primary  meaning**  of  the  word.  No  authorities  for  the  use  of  mantio  in  this 
sense  are  quoted  earlier  than  Pliny  and  Suetonius,  and  none  for  this  use  of 
fuuHi  earlier  than  Pausanias  (a.d.  180).  Canon  Westcott' s  interpretation  is 
effectively  demolished  (usually  no  easy  thing  to  do)  by  J.  Sterling  Berry,  in 
Th$  BBpoiUar^  2d  series,  voL  iii.,  p.  897. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GCMSPEL  OF  JOHN.  239 

Twelve  chambers  for  his  daughters,  also  near 
Each  other ;  and,  with  polished  marble  walls, 
The  sleeping-rooms  of  Priam*s  sons-in-law 
And  their  unblemished  oonsorts." 

"Iliad,''Ti,242-25a 

Godet  remarks:  ^'The  image  is  derived  from  those  vast  oriental 
palaces,  in  which  there  is  an  abode  not  only  for  the  sovereign 
and  the  heir  to  the  throne,  but  also  for  all  the  sons  of  the  king, 
however  numerous  they  may  be." 

If  it  were  not  so,  I  would  have  told  you  {ei  Bi  fiif  ehrov  hv 
vfiiv).    Wye,  If  anything  less,  I  had  said  to  you. 

I  go  to  prepare,  etc.  Many  earlier  interpreters  refer  / 
would  home  told  you  to  these  words,  and  render  I  would  have 
told  you  that  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you.  But  this  is  in- 
admissible, because  Jesus  says  (ver.  3)  that  He  is  actually  go- 
ing to  prepare  a  place.  The  better  rendering  regards  if  it  were 
not  sOy  Iwovld  home  told  you^  as  parenthetical,  and  connects  the 
following  sentence  with  a/re  many  manaionSj  by  means  of  oTh 
for  or  becausCj  which  the  best  texts  insert.  "  In  my  Father's 
house  are  many  mansions  (if  it  were  not  so,  I  would  have  told 
jon)yfor  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you.'* 

I  go  to  prepare.  Compare  iN'um.  x.  83.  Also  Heb.  vi  20, 
"  whither  the  forerunner  is  for  us  entered,  even  Jesus." 

A  place  {t&jtov).  See  on  xi.  48.  The  heavenly  dwelling  is 
thus  described  by  three  words :  Jiouee^  ahode^  place. 

3.  If  I  go  (ii^v  wopeul^).  IlopevofuUf  gOy  of  going  with  a 
definite  object     See  on  viii.  21. 

I  will  come  again  {irdKiv  Ipxofuu).  The  present  tense ;  / 
come,  so  Bev.  Not  to  be  limited  to  the  Lord's  second  and 
glorious  coming  at  the  last  day,  nor  to  any  special  coming,  such 
as  Pentecost,  though  these  are  all  included  in  the  expression ; 
rather  to  be  taken  of  His  contintud  coming  and  presence  by 
the  Holy  Spirit    ^^  Christ  is,  in  fact,  from  the  moment  of  His 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


240  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

resnrrection,  ever  coming  into  the  world  and  to  the  Church,  and 
to  men  as  the  risen  Lord  "  (Westcott). 

And  receive  {irapd\4i^fuu).  Here  the  fntnre  tense,  wUl 
receive.  Rev.,  therefore,  much  better :  I  come  again  amd  wiU 
receive  you.  The  change  of  tense  is  intentional,  the  future 
pointing  to  the  future  personal  reception  of  the  believer 
throngh  death.  Christ  is  with  the  disciple  alwaj,  continually 
"coming"  to  him,  unto  the  end  of  the  world.  .  Then  He  will 
receive  him  into  that  immediate  fellowship,  where  he  "  shall 
see  Him  as  He  is."  The  verb  irapaXofifi^ivm  is  used  in  the 
New  Testament  of  taking  alonff  with  (Matt.  iv.  5;  xvii.  1; 
Acts  xvi.  33,  on  all  which  see  notes) :  of  taking  to  (Matt.  i.  20 ; 
John  xiv.  3) :  of  taking  from^  receimng  hy  transmission;  so 
mostly  in  Paul  (Gal.  i.  12;  Col.  ii.  6;  iv.  17;  1  Thess.  ii.  13, 
etc.  See  also  Matt.  xxiv.  40,  41).  It  is  scarcely  fanciful  to 
see  the  first  two  meanings  blended  in  the  use  of  the  verb  in 
this  passage.  Jesus,  by  the  Spirit,  takes  His  own  along  with 
Him  through  life,  and  then  takes  them  to  His  side  at  death. 
He  himself  conducts  them  to  Himself. 

I  am.    See  on  vii.  34. 

4.  I  go  (yir<irf(D).    Withdraw  from  you.    See  on  viii.  21. 

Ye  know,  and  the  way  ye  know  {oXSare,  leaX  rifv  ohov 
otSare).  The  best  texts  omit  the  second  ye  know,  and  the  and 
before  the  toay;  reading,  whither  I  go  ye  know  the  way. 

6.  And  how  can  we  know  {kqI  wik  BwdfieBa  ri/p  6S6v 
elBivoi).  The  best  texts  substitute  otSofiev,  know  toe^  for  Bwdfi- 
eSa,  can  we  ;  reading,  how  know  we  the  way.  So  Rev.  Some 
also  omit  ami  before  how. 

6.  I  am  the  way.  The  disciples  are  engrossed  with  the 
thought  of  sepa/ration  from  Jesus.  To  Thomas,  ignorance  of 
whither  Jesus  is  going  involves  ignorance  of  tJie  way.  "  There- 
fore, with  loving  condescension  the  figure  is  taken  up,  and  they 
are  assured  that  He  is  Himself,  if  we  may  so  speak,  this  dis- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  241 

tance  to  be  traversed  "  (Milligan  and  Moalton).    All  along  the 
coarse  to  the  Father's  house  they  are  still  with  EQm. 

The  truth.  As  being  the  perfect  revelation  of  God  the 
Father :  combining  in  Himself  and  manifesting  all  divine  Teatr 
itj/y  whether  in  the  heingj  the  law,  or  the  character  of  Ood. 
Ue  embodies  what  men  ought  to  know  and  believe  of  Ood ; 
what  they  should  do  as  children  of  God,  and  what  they  should 
he. 

The  life.  Not  only  life  in  the  ftUure  world.  He  is  "the 
principle  and  source  of  life  in  its  temporal  development  and 
future  consummation,  so  that  whoever  has  not  received  Him 
into  himself  by  faith,  has  become  a  prey  to  spiritual  and  eter- 
nal death"  (Meyer).  "He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath 
everlasting  life.'*  Oompare  OoL  iii.  4 ;  John  vi  50,  51 ;  xi. 
26,  26. 

"  I  am  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life.  Without  the  way 
there  is  no  going;  without  the  truth  there  is  no  knowing; 
without  the  life  there  is  no  living.  I  am  the  way  which  thou 
shouldst  pursue ;  the  truth  which  thou  shouldst  believe ;  the 
life  which  thou  shouldst  hope  for"  (Thomas  &  Kempis,  "Imi- 
tation of  Ohrist,"  iiL,  56).    On  Ijtoii,  lifcy  see  on  L  4. 

Unto  the  Father.    The  end  of  the  way. 

7.  Had  known  {iyv&icevre).  Bather,  had  learned  to  know, 
through  my  successive  revelations  of  myself. 

Ye  should  have  known  {iypd/eeire  Sv).  The  same  verb  as 
above.  Some  editors,  however,  read  ^Betre,  the  verb  signifying 
absoltUe  knowledge,  the  knowledge  of  intuition  and  saiiefied 
conviction.  If  this  is  adopted,  it  marks  a  contrast  with  the 
progreeeim  knowledge  indicated  by  iyimKeire.    See  on  iL  24. 

My  Father.    Not  the  Father,  as  ver.  6.    It  is  the  knowledge 
of  the  Father  in  His  relation  to  the  Son.  Through  this  knowl- 
edge the  knowledge  of  God  as  the  Father,  "in  the  deepest 
Vol.  1L— 16 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


242  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  HEW  TESTAMENT. 

Terity  of  His  being,"  is  attained.  This  latter  knowledge  is  bet- 
ter expressed  by  oZSo.     See  on  iv.  211 

Have  seen.    See  on  i.  18. 

9.  Have  I  been  (elfu).    Lit.,  am  /. 

Known  {iyiw/cS:),     Come  to  know. 

Sayest  thou  (av).  Emphatic.  Thau  who  didst  say,  "We 
have  found  him  of  whom  Moses  in  the  law  and  the  prophets 
did  write"  (i.  46).     Omit  and  before  how  sayest  thou. 

10.  Of  myself  (air  ifiavnw).  Kev.,  better,  from  myself. 
See  on  vii.  17. 

The  Father  that  dwelleth  in  me,  He  doeth  the  works 

(o  Bk  warrip  6  h  ifiol  fihtov^  aino^  iroiei  rh  Ipya).  The  best 
texts  read,  6  Bi  irarifp  iv  ifiol  fikimv  irom  rh  Spya  aUrov;  the 
Father  abiding  in  me  doeth  His  works.  Philip  doubts  whether 
Christ  is  in  the  Father,  and  the  Father  in  Him.  The  answer 
is  twofold,  corresponding  to  the  two  phases  of  the  doubt. 
His  wordsj  spoken  not  from  Himself,  are  from  the  Father,  and 
therefore  He  utters  them  from  within  the  Father,  and  is  Him- 
self in  the  Father.  His  works  are  the  works  of  the  Father 
abiding  in  Him ;  therefore  the  Father  is  in  Him. 

11.  Believe  me  {irurreveri  fioi).  The  plural  of  the  impera- 
tive: "believe  ye  me."  Compare  believest  thou,  ver.  10. 
These  words  are  addressed  to  the  disciples  collectively,  whose 
thought  Philip  had  voiced. 

Or  else  {el  Bk  fiif).  Lit.,  hut  if  not.  If  you  do  not  believe 
on  the  authority  of  my  personal  statement. 

For  the  very  works'  sake  {Bi^  rh  Ipya  airrh).  Lit,  on 
aoootmt  of  the  works  themseheSy  irrespective  of  my  oral  testi- 
mony. 

12.  Greater  works.  Not  more  remarkable  miracles,  but 
referring  to  the  wider  work  of  the  apostolic  ministry  under  the 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


G08PBL  OF  JOHN.  243 

dispensation  of  the  Spirit.  This  work  was  of  a  higher  natnro 
than  mere  bodily  cures.  Oodet  tmthfnllj  says :  ^^  That  whidi 
was  done  by  St.  Peter  at  Pentecost,  by  St.  Paul  all  over  the 
world,  that  which  is  effected  by  an  ordinary  preacher,  a  single 
believer,  by  bringing  the  Spirit  into  the  heart,  could  not  be 
done  by  Jesus  during  His  sojourn  in  this  world."  Jesus'  per- 
sonal ministry  in  the  flesh  must  be  a  local  ministry.  Only 
under  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit  could  it  be  unwersdL 

13.  In  my  name.  The  first  occurrence  of  the  phrase.  See 
on  Matt,  xxviii.  19.  Prayer  is  made  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  "if 
this  name,  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  full  substance  of  the  saving 
faith  and  confession  of  him  who  prays,  is,  in  his  consciousness, 
the  element  in  which  the  prayerful  activity  moves;  so  that 
thus  that  Kame,  embracing  the  whole  revelation  of  redemp- 
tion, is  that  which  specifically  measures  and  defines  the  disposi- 
tion, feeling,  object,  and  contents  of  prayer.  The  express  U96 
of  the  name  of  Jesus  therein  is  no  specific  token ;  the  question 
is  of  the  spirit  and  mind  of  him  who  prays  "  (Meyer).  West- 
cott  cites  Augustine  to  the  effect  that  the  prayer  in  Christ's 
name  must  be  consistent  with  Christ's  character,  and  that  He 
fulfils  it  as  Saviour,  and  therefore  just  so  far  as  it  conduces  to 
salvation. 

14.  If  ye  shall  ask  anything.  Some  authorities  insert  me. 
So  Rev.    This  implies  prayer  to  Christ 

15.  Keep  {rqpi/faare).  The  best  texts  read  rr^pijireTe,  ye  will 
keep.  Lay  up  in  your  hearts  and  preserve  by  careful  watching. 
See  on  reserved^  1  Pet.  i.  4. 

My  commandments  (r^  iirroX^  t^  if/Li/i).  lit.,  the  oom- 
mamdmente  which  a/re  mine.    See  on  x.  27. 

16.  I  will  pray  (^pan^w).    See  on  xi.  22. 

Comforter  {^(ip&dKgiftixv).  Only  in  John's  Gh)6pel  and  First 
Epistle  (xiv.  16,  26 ;  xv.  26 ;  xvi.  7;  1  Ep.  ii.  1).  From  irapd, 
to  the  side  of^  and  luiKi^^  to  eummoti.    Hence,  originally,  one 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


244  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

who  is  caUed  to  another^s  side  to  aid  him^  as  an  advocate  in  a 
court  of  jastice.  The  later,  Hellenistic  use  of  irapaicdKHP  and 
wapdte\ff<ri^,  to  denote  the  act  of  consoling  and  oonsolationy  gave 
rise  to  the  rendering  Comforter^  which  is  given  in  eveiy  instance 
in  the  Gospel,  but  is  changed  to  advocate  in  1  John  ii.  1,  agree* 
ably  to  its  uniform  signification  in  classical  Greek.  The  argu- 
ment in  favor  of  this  rendering  throv^ghout  is  conclusive.  It  is 
urged  that  the  rendering  Comforter  is  justified  by  the  fact  that, 
in  its  original  sense,  it  means  more  than  a  mere  consoler^  being 
derived  from  the  Latin  oonfortare^  to  strengthen^  and  that  the 
Comforter  is  therefore  one  who  strengthens  the  cause  and  the 
courage  of  his  client  at  the  bar :  but,  as  Bishop  Lightf oot  ob- 
serves, the  history  of  this  interpretation  shows  that  it  is  not 
reached  by  this  process,  but  grew  out  of  a  grammatical  error, 
and  that  therefore  this  account  can  only  be  accepted  as  an 
apology  after  the  fact,  and  not  as  an  explanation  pf  the  fact. 
The  Holy  Spirit  is,  therefore,  by  the  word  TrapdKKf/ro^,  of  which 
J^aradete  is  a  transcription,  represented  as  our  Advocate  or 
Counsel^  ^^  who  suggests  true  reasonings  to  our  minds,  and  true 
courses  of  action  for  our  lives,  who  convicts  our  adversary,  the 
world,  of  wrong,  and  pleads  our  cause  before  God  our  Father." 
It  is  to  be  noted  that  Jesvs  as  well  as  the  Holy  Spirit  is  repre- 
sented as  Paraclete.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  to  be  am,oth£r  Para- 
clete, and  this  falls  in  with  the  statement  in  the  First  Epistle, 
"  we  have  an  advocaie  with  God,  even  Jesus  Christ.^  Compare 
Bom.  viii.  26.  See  on  Luke  vi.  24.  Note  also  that  the  word 
another  is  oXXov,  and  not  Irepov,  which  means  different.  The 
advocate  who  is  to  be  sent  is  not  different  from  Christ,  but  an- 
other  similar  to  Himself.     See  on  Matt.  vi.  2i.* 

With  you  (jJbey  v/a&p).  Notice  the  three  prepositions  used 
in  this  verse  to  describe  the  Spirit^s  relation  to  the  believer. 
With  you  (jJLeTa)y  in  fellowship ;  hy  you  {irapd)y  in  His  personal 

*The  Btndent  wiU  And  the  whole  question  diflcnased  bj  Bishop  Lightf  oot 
<'*  On  a  Fresh  Rerision  of  the  New  Testament, **  p.  58  sqq.) ;  Jalins Charles  Hare 
C*  Mission  of  the  Comforter,"  p.  348) ;  and  Canon  WestooU  (Introduction  to  the 
Commentarj  on  John*8  Gospel,  Speaker's  Commentary,  p.  211).  See  also  his 
note  on  1  John  U.  1,  in  his  Commentarj  on  the  Epistles  of  John. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


G08PBL  OF  JOHN.  345 

presence ;  in  yon  {hf)j  as  an  indwelling  personal  energy,  at  the 
spi-ings  of  the  life. 

17.  The  Spirit  of  Truth.  "  A  most  exquisite  title,"  says 
Bengel.  The  Spirit,  who  has  the  truth,  reveals  it,  by  knowl- 
edge in  the  understanding ;  confers  it  by  practical  proof  and 
taste  in  the  will ;  testifies  of  it  to  others  also  through  those  to 
whom  He  has  revealed  it ;  and  defends  that  truth,  of  which 
ch.  i.  17  speaks,  grace  cmd  tnUh,  .  .  .  The  truth  makes  all 
our  virtues  true.  Otherwise  there  is  a  kind  of  false  knowledge, 
false  faith,  false  hope,  false  love ;  but  there  is  no  such  thing  as 
false  truth.*' 

The  world.    See  on  L  9. 

Shall  be  In  you.    Some  editors  read,  iartv,  is  in  yoo. 

18.  Leave  (d^f^).    See  on  iv.  3. 

Comfortless  ipp^cofoisi).  lit,  hereft  or  orphans.  Only  here 
and  Jas.  i.  27,  where  it  is  renderedyo^A^ZeM.  .Compare  my  Utile 
children  (xiii.  33).  ^^  He  hath  not  left  ue  without  a  nde  (xiii. 
34);  nor  without  an  example  (xiii.  15);  nor  without  a  motwe 
(xiv.  15) ;  nor  without  a  strength  (xv.  5) ;  nor  without  a  toanm- 
ing  (xv.  2, 6) ;  nor  without  a  Oomforter  (xiv.  18) ;  nor  without 
a  reward  (xiv.  2)  (James  Ford,  ^^  The  Gospel  of  St  John  Illus- 
trated^. 

I  will  come  (^/>XOfuu).   Present  tense, /ct^ma.  Seeonyer.3. 

19.  Ye  shall  live  also  {koX  hyy&i  ^^eaSe).  This  may  also  be 
rendered,  and  ye  shall  live,  explaining  the  former  statement,  ye 
behold  me.  So  Bev.,  in  margin.  This  is  better.  John  is  not 
arguing  for  the  dependence  of  their  life  on  Christ's,  but  for 
fellowship  with  Christ  as  the  ground  of  spiritual  vision. 

21.  Hath.  ^^  Who  has  in  memory  and  keeps  in  life"  (Au- 
gustine). 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


246  WORD  STUDIBS  IN  THB  NEW  TB8TAKENT. 

Will  manifest  {ifA^avl^w).  Properly,  of  manifestation  to 
the  ng/Uj  as  distinguished  from  Sf;X6oi>  to  make  evident  to  the 
mind  (1  Cor.  iiL  13 ;  Col.  i.  8,  etc.).  A  clear,  conspicuous  mani- 
festation is  indicated.  Compare  ye  see  me  (ver.  19).  ^^It  con- 
yeys  more  than  tlie  disclosing  of  an  undiscovered  presence 
{i7roicaXuimai)j  or  the  manifesting  of  a  hidden  one  (^ai^/Mifl»)  " 
(Westcott). 

22.  Judas.    See  on  ThaddcBuSy  Mark  iiL  18. 

Not  Iscariot.  The  Bev.  improves  the  translation  by  placing 
these  words  immediately  after  Judas.  ^^  He  distinguishes  the 
godly  Judas,  not  by  his  own  surname,  but  by  the  negation  of 
the  other's ;  marking  at  the  same  time  the  traitor  as  present 
again  after  his  negotiation  with  the  adversaries,  but  as  having 
no  sympathy  with  such  a  question  "   (Bengel). 

How  is  it  (rtyiyoveii).  Lit.,  what  has  corns  to  pose.  Im- 
plying that  Judas  thought  that  some  change  had  taken  place 
in  Jesus'  plans.  He  had  assumed  that  Jesus  would,  as  the 
Messiah,  reveal  Himself  publicly. 

23.  My  word  OUnyov  (jlov).  The  entire  gospel  message,  as 
distinguished  from  its  separate  parts  or  commandments. 

We  will  come.    Compare  x.  30 ;  Apoc.  iiL  20. 

Abode  (jjtovf)v).  See  on  ver.  2.  Compare  1  Johnii.  24; 
V.  15. 

24.  My  sayings  (Xoyovs).  Bev.,  toorda.  Compare  toord^ 
ver.  23.    The  constituent  parts  of  the  one  toord. 

25.  Being  yet  present  (jih^v).  Bev.,  stronger  and  more 
literaUy,  while  yet  dbidi/ng. 

26.  In  my  name.    See  on  ver.  13. 

He  (iteelvosi).  Setting  the  Advocate  distinctly  and  sharply 
before  the  hearers.    The  pronoun  is  used  in  John's  First  Epis- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  247 

tie,  distinctively  of  our  Lord.    See  1  John  ii.  6 ;  iiL  3,  5,  7, 16 ; 
iv.  17. 

I  have  said  (ehrov).    The  aorist  tense,  I  said. 

27.  Peace.  ^^  These  are  last  words,  as  of  one  who  is  aboat 
to  go  away  and  says  ^good-night'  or  gives  his  blessing" 
(Lather).  PecLce  !  was  the  ordinary  oriental  greeting  at  part- 
ing.   Compare  xx.  21. 

My  peace  I  give.  Compare  1  John  iiL  1.  ^^  It  is  of  hi»  own 
that  one  gvoea  "  (Godet). 

Let  it  be  afraid  {^CKiArm).  Only  here  in  the  Kew  Tes- 
tament. Properly  it  signifies  cowardly  fear.  ^Sj^y.^  fearful. 
The  kindred  adjective  86iXo9  featfvlj  is  used  by  Matthew  of 
the  disciples  in  the  storm  (viii.  26),  and  in  the  Apocalypse 
of  tliose  who  deny  the  faith  throngh  fear  of  persecution  (zxi. 
8).  The  kindred  noun,  heCKla,  occurs  only  in  2  Tim.  i.  7,  "  Gk)d 
hath  not  given  us  the  spirit  oifear^^  contrasted  with  the  spirit 
of  power,  love,  and  a  sound  mind. 

28.  I  said.  Omit,  and  read,  ye  waiUd  have  refaioed  beoauee 
I  go  unto  the  Father, 

30.  Hereafter  I  will  not  talk  {ovtc  St$  Xak^o-co).  Bev.,  more 
correctly,  ItotU  no  more  speak. 

The  prince  of  this  world.  The  best  texts  read,  '^of  the 
world.'' 

Hath  nothing  in  me.  No  right  nor  power  over  Christ 
which  sin  in  Him  could  give.  The  Greek  order  iB^in  me  he 
hath  nothing. 

31.  But  that  the  world  may  know,  etc.  The  connection 
in  this  verse  is  much  disputed.  Some  explain,  Ariee^  let  us  go 
henoey  that  the  world  may  know  that  I  love  the  Father,  and  that 
even  as  the  Father  commanded  ms  %o  I  do.    Others,  8o  IdOj 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


248  WORD  STUDIBB  IN  THB  K£W  TESTAMENT. 

that  tAs  world  may  hnaw — and  even  m  the  FatAsr^  etc.  Others^ 
again,  take  the  opening  phrase  as  elliptical,  supplying  either, 
he  oomethf  i.e.,  Satan,  in  order  that  the  world  maj  know — and 
that  as  the  Father,  etc. ;  or,  I  surrender  myself  to  svffering  and 
death  that  the  world  may  know,  etc  In  this  case,  ArisSj  etc., 
will  form,  as  in  A.  Y,  and  Bev.,  an  independent  sentence.  I 
incline  to  adopt  this.  The  phrase  &XX'  ha,  hut  in  order  thaty 
with  an  ellipsis,  is  common  in  John.  See  i  8,  31 ;  ix.  3 ;  xiii. 
18;  XV.  25;  lJohniil9. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

Where  the  following  discourses  were  uttered  is  a  matter  of 
uncertainty.  Some  suppose  that  after  the  words,  Arise^  letvsgo 
hencsj  the  disciples  still  lingered  at  the  table.  Others,  that  the 
discourses  were  spoken  on  the  way  to  the  Mount  of  Olives ; 
and  others,  again,  in  the  court  of  the  temple.  Assuming  that 
the  figure  of  the  vine  was  suggested  by  some  external  object, 
that  object  is  explained  according  to  the  different  views  of  the 
scene  of  tlie  discourses.  Those  who  think  that  it  was  the 
chamber  which  the  company  had  not  yet  left,  suggest  His  cup 
of  wine  of  which  they  had  recently  partaken  (Meyer) ;  or  a 
vine  whose  tendrils  had  crept  into  the  room  (Tholuck) ;  or  the 
view  of  vineyards  outside  in  the  light  of  the  moon  (Storr). 
Those  who  assign  the  discourses  to  the  walk  to  the  Mount  of 
Olives,  down  to  Kedron  through  the  vineyards,  draw  the  figure 
from  the  vineyards,  and  the  fires  burning  along  the  sides  of  the 
Kedron  valley  in  order  to  consume  the  vine-cuttings  (Lange, 
Gk)det).  Those  who  place  the  discourses  in  the  court  of  the 
temple,  find  the  suggestion  in  the  great  golden  vine  over  the 
temple-gate  (Westcott,  Lampe).  Others,  again,  think  that  the 
simUitade  was  not  drawn  from  any  external  object,  but  was 
su^ested  by  the  familiar  Old  Testament  symbolism  of  the 
vineyard  and  the  vine,  as  in  Ps.  Ixxx.  8-19 ;  Isa.  v.  1  sqq. ; 
Jer.  ii.  21 ;  Ezek.  xix.  10  sqq.  (So  Liicke,  Alford,  Milligan  and 
Moulton,  and  Trench). 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  249 

1.  The  true  vine  {^  aim^Ko^  fi  iLKafiHofii).  lit,  ^  vvne^ 
the  true  (vine).  True^  genuine^  answering  to  the  perfect  ideal. 
See  on  i.  9.  The  vine  was  a  symbol  of  the  Ancient  church. 
See  the  passages  cited  above,  and  Hosea  x.  1 ;  Matt  xxi.  33 ; 
Luke  xiiL  6. 

Husbandman  (yempyS^).  From  71},  the  earth,  and  ipy<o»  to 
work.  The  vine-dresser  is  ifiweXovfyYoq,  occarring  onl  j  at  Luke 
xiiL  7 ;  but  the  office  of  the  vine-dresser  is  a  subordinate  one, 
while  yeo9py6^  may  indicate  the  jproprietor.  See  2  Chron.  xxvi. 
10  (Sept.),  where  the  word  is  applied  to  King  Uzziah.  So  of 
Koah,  Qen.  ix.  20.  In  Matt.  xxi.  33-41,  the  yetopyoi  represent 
the  chiefs  and  leaders  of  the  Jews.    Wye,  an  earth-tiller. 

2.  Branch  (/c\Q/u»).  Occurring  only  in  this  chapter.  Both 
this  and  /c\a8o9»  hrwnch  (see  on  Matt.  xxiv.  32 ;  Mark  xi.  8)  are 
derived  from  iv\a6>»  to  break.  The  word  emphasizes  the  ideas 
of  tenderness  and  flexibility. 

Purgeth  ijca^pei).     Clea/nsethy  Bev. 

3.  Clean  (KoBapot).  Etymologically  akin  to  icaSalpeh  pwrg- 
eth.    The  Bev.  indicates  this  by  rendering  KoBcUpet,  cLecmseth. 

4.  Of  itself  (o^*  iauToO).  'Proj^rlj,  from  itself.  See  on  vii. 
17. 

No  more  can  ye  {oSiw^  ov8i  vfiek).  lit,  so  neither  can  ye. 
So  Rev. 

5.  Without  me  (xi^pU  ifwO).  Properly,  apart  from  me. 
So  Bev.    Compare  i.  3 ;  Eph.  ii.  12. 

6.  He  is  cast  forth  (ifi^^^  l^fto).  The  aorist  tense.  Lit, 
VHZS  cast  forth.  The  aorist,  denoting  a  momentary  act,  indi- 
cates that  it  was  cast  forth  at  the  moment  it  ceased  to  abide  in 
the  vine.    Forth  ^gai&e8from  the  vineyard;  l|o»>  outside. 

As  a  branch  (<&9  ri  xXSifia).  Strictly,  the  branch :  the  un- 
fruitful branch. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


250  WORD  8TUDIBB  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Is  withered  {i^pdvSri).  The  aorist,  as  in  waa  coat  forth. 
Wye,  %ha]l  toaa  dry. 

Men  gather.  Or,  as  Bev.,  they  gcUher.  Indefinite.  Com- 
pare Isa.  xxviL  11 ;  Ezek.  xy.  5. 

7.  Ye  shall  ask  (alnia-eaSe).  The  best  texts  read  the  im- 
perative, aln^ao'Se,  ask,* 

Shall  be  done  unto  you  (yeviiirerai  vfiSv).  Lit.,  U  shall 
come  topaaa  for  you. 

8.  Herein  {h  tovt^).  Commonly  referred  to  what  follows. 
JILj  Father  is  glorified  in  thisj  namely,  that  ye  bear  mach  f mit. 
It  is  better  to  refer  it  back  to  ver.  7.  In  the  perfect  nnity  of 
will  between  the  Son  and  the  disciple,  which  results  in  the  dis- 
ciple's obtaining  whatever  he  asks,  the  Father  is  glorified.  To 
this  effect  is  xiv.  18,  ^^  Wliatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  my  name, 
that  will  I  do,  that  the  Father  niay  he  glorified  in  the  Son.^^ 
The  design  of  this  glorification  is  that  (Jva)  yoa  may  bear  much 
fruit.  This  retrospective  reference  of  ip  rovrtp,  in  this,  or 
herein,  occurs  in  iv.  87 ;  xvi.  30 ;  1  John  iv.  17. 

Is  glorified  {iBo^do'Sfj).  The  aorist  tense;  toas  glarijled. 
As  in  ver.  6,  marking  the  point  when  the  Father's  glory  was 
realized  in  the  perfect  union  of  the  believer's  will  with  Christ's. 

So  shall  ye  be  {/col  yepiia-ea-Se).  Lit,  and  ye  shaU  heoome. 
Some  editors,  however,  read  yhnjo'Se,  and  connect,  in  the  same 
construction  with  the  preceding  clause,  rendering,  ^'  Herein  is 
(was)  my  Father  glorified,  that  ye  might  bear  much  fruit  and 
become  my  disciples."  Note  that  the  word  is  heoome,  not  he. 
Christian  discipleship  implies  progress  and  growth. 

9.  In  my  love  (iv  r§  arfanrrf  r$  ifi§).  Lit,  in  the  love,  that 
which  is  mine.    Not  only  the  love  of  the  disciple  for  Christ, 

*Thi8  does  not,  as  Oodet  sajs,  turn  the  promise  into  '<a  moral  preoept** 
It  is  a  hortatory  enoooragement     But  then  the  reading  ooonrs  in  Cod.  A. ! 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


OOSPBL  OF  JOHN.  251 

nor  the  love  of  Christ  for  the  disciple,  but  the  Christ-jnincvple 
of  love  which  includes  both.  See  the  same  form  of  expression 
in  the  joy  that  is  mine,  ver.  11 ;  iii.  29 ;  xvii.  13 ;  theJudgmerU 
(v.  30 ;  viii.  16) ;  the  oorrMnandmerUs  (xiv.  15) ;  jpeaoe  (xiv.  27). 

11.  My  joy.  The  joy  that  is  mine ;  characteristic  of  me. 
See  on  ver.  9. 

Might  remain  ip^lvji)*    The  best  texts  read  ^,  rriay  he. 

Might  be  full  (7rXi7pQ>.9$).  Bev.,  more  correctly,  may  he 
fulJhUed,  The  A.  V.  loses  the  distinction  between  the  absolute 
joy  which  is  Christ's,  and  the  jyrogreasvve,  but  iSnally  consum- 
mated joy  which  is  the  disciple's. 

12.  My  commandment  (ij  hnoTJi  ff  ifirf).  The  command- 
ment which  is  mine. 

That  ye  love  (&a).  Indicating  not  merely  the  nature  of  the 
commandment,  but  its  jmrport. 

13.  Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this,  that  (iva).  Some  of 
the  more  subtile  phases  of  John's  thonght  cannot  be  appre- 
hended without  a  careful  study  of  this  often-recurring  conjunc- 
tion. It  is  still  claimed  by  some  grammarians  that  it  is  used 
to  mark,  not  only  design  and  end,  but  also  residt.*  But  it  may 
fairly  be  claimed  that  its  predominant  sense  is  intent,  jmrpose, 
pwrpovt^  or  object.  Hence  lAcU,  as  representing  ha,  is  to  be 
taken  in  the  sense  oi  tothe  end  or  intent  that;  in  order  that. 
Here  the  use  of  the  word  is  very  subtile  and  suggestive,  as 
well  as  beautiful.  No  man  hath  greater  love  than  this  (love), 
which,  in  its  original  conception,  was  intended  and  designed  to 
reach  to  the  extent  of  sacrificing  life  for  a  friend.  Christ,  there- 
fore, here  gives  us  more  than  a  mere  abstract  comparison,  and 
more  than  a  merely  human  gauge  of  love.  He  measures  love 
according  to  its  divine,  original,  far-reaching  intent 

*  The  teohnioal  terms  are  rcXucdt  (teUoos),  of  the  dmgn  and  end^  and  iKfio" 
rtnAs  (ekbatikoB),  of  the  reeult. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


252  WORD  STUDIBS  IN  THB  'SEW  TBBTAMENT. 

Lay  down  his  life.    See  on  x.  11. 

14.  I  oommand  (iirriKKofuu).  Of  several  words  for  eam- 
mand  in  the  'New  Testament,  this  one  is  always  osed  of  giving 
a  specifio  injunction  or  jprecept.  The  kindred  noun,  iproXii, 
means  an  orderj  a  ohargej  a  j>reoept,  and  hence  is  used  of  a 
separate  precept  of  the  law  as  distinguished  from  the  law  as  a 
whole  (v6/i09).  See  Matt.  xxii.  36, 88.  It  is,  however,  sometimes 
used  of  the  whole  body  of  the  moral  precepts  of  Christianity. 
See  on  xiii.  34.  The  sense  of  specific  commands  here  falls  in 
with  the  reading  of  the  Bee.  Text,  ^o^  whatsoever,  lit.,  a$ 
many  things  as. 

16.  Henceforth — not  {oviUti).  "Rev.,  hetterj  no  longer.  No 
longer  servants^  as  you  were  under  the  dispensation  of  the  law. 
Compare  Gal.  iv.  7. 

Servants  {hovXots).    Strictly,  bond-servants. 

Knoweth  not  {oifx  oTSi).  Has  no  instinctive  j^erception. 
See  on  iL  24. 

You.  The  position  of  the  pronoun  in  the  Oreek  is  em- 
phatic :  ^^  You  I  have  called  friends." 

16.  Ye — chosen.  The  pronoun  is  emphatic :  *^  It  was  not  ye 
that  diose  me." 

Ordained  (iSffKa).  Bev.,  a^ppointed  is  better,  because  it 
divests  the  word  of  its  conventional  meaning.  Ordain  is  from 
the  Latin  ordinare^  and  means  to  set  in  order.  Thus,  Robert 
of  Gloucester's  "Chronicle:"  *^He  began  to  ordain  his  folk," 
t.tf.,  Sethis  people  in  order.  Hakluyt,  "Voyages:"  "He  or- 
dained a  boat  made  of  one  tree."  The  Greek  verb  means  to 
setf  put,  or  place.  Hence  of  appoiniing  one  to  service.  See 
1  Tim.  i.  12.  Wye,  Matt  xxiv.  47:  "Upon  all  his  goods  he 
shall  ordain  him." 

Should  go  {vTrdrprre).  Withdraw  from  His  personal  society 
and  go  out  into  the  world. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  253 

That  whatsoever,  etc  (hfa).  Co-ordinated  with  the  preced- 
ing &a»  tkatj  as  marking  another  resnlt  of  their  choice  and  ap- 
pointment by  Christ  He  has  appointed  them  thai  they  shonld 
bring  forth  fruit,  and  that  they  shonld  obtain  snch  answers  to 
their  prayer  as  would  make  them*  fruitful. 

17.  That  {tpa).  All  my  teachings  are  ^  ^  end  thai  you 
should  love  one  another. 

18.  If  the  world  hate  {el  fumZ).  Lit,  hcOes.  The  indicative 
mood  with  the  conditional  particle  assumes  the  fact  as  existing : 
If  the  world  hates  you,  cu  it  does. 

Ye  know  {ywaHrtcere).  This  may  also  be  rendered  as  imper- 
ative: £hawye. 

It  hated  (jAefAioff/cev).  The  perfect  tense,  hath  hated.  The 
hatred  continues  to  the  present  time. 

Before  it  hated  you  {irp&Tw  vfjt&v).  lit,  ^st  in  regard 
of  you.    See  on  i.  16. 

19.  Of  the  world  {he  roO  icdaiMw).  Sprung  oti^  ^the  world. 
See  on  of  the  earthy  iii.  81. 

Would  love  {ttif  i^tKii).  The  verb  for  natural  affection. 
See  on  v.  20. 

20.  Persecuted  {i&U^^).  The  verb  means  originally  to 
jput  to  fiight ;  thence  to  run  swifUy  in  order  to  overtaJce  or  at' 
tain,  as  the  goal  or  the  competitor  in  the  race.  Thus  Sophocles 
("Electra,"  738) :  «  He  urged  his  swift  steeds  vehemently  with 
shouts  that  pierced  their  ears,  and  makes  for  him  {Suoteei).^ 
Compare  I  follow  after  {huoic»,  Philip,  iii.  12).  Hence  to  pur- 
sue  with  hostile  intent,  and,  generally,  to  molest,  harass,  j^erse- 
eute.  Persecvite  is  from  the  equivalent  laXiix  persegttor,  tofoU 
low  vp,  and  is  used  earlier,  in  the  sense  oi pursue,  while  jEn^r^t^ 
in  turn,  is  used  in  the  sense  oi  persecute.    Thus  Wye,  Matt  v. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


254  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

44,  for  inen  pursuing  you.  Sir  Thomas  More  ("  Utopia ''), 
"  Whiles  their  enemies  rejoicing  in  the  victory  hsLYeperseoiUed 
(i.e.,  pv/rvued)  them." 

21.  For  my  name's  sake  (Se^  to  Svofid  fiov).  Lit,  on  ac- 
count of  my  name.  The  name  of  Christ  represented  the  faith, 
the  attitude,  the  claims,  and  the  aim  of  the  disciples.  His 
name  was  their  confession.  Lather  sajs :  '^  The  name  of  Christ 
from  yonr  month  will  be  to  them  nothing  but  poison  and 
death." 

22.  Had  sin  {afjLapriav  elxpv).     See  on  ix.  41 ;  1  John  i.  8. 

Cloke  {irp6<f>aa'af).  From  ir/xS,  heforej  in  front  of  and  ^/iA 
to  say  or  affirm.  Hence  something  which  is  placed  in  front 
of  the  true  cause  of  a  thing,  a  pretext.  Compare  1  Thess.  ii. 
6;  Acts  xxvii.  30.  Pretext  carries  the  same  idea,  Latin,  j^rcs- 
textumy  something  woven  in  fronts  with  a  view  to  concealment 
or  deception.  Rev.,  excuse.  Wye,  excusation.  The  A,V.  fol- 
lows Tyndale:  nothing  to  cLohe  their  sin  withal.  Latimer 
("  Sermons  ") :  "  By  such  cloaked  charity,  when  thou  dost  offend 
before  Christ  but  once,  thou  hast  offended  twice  herein."  The 
word  appears  in  the  low  Latin  doca^  a  hell  (compare  the  French 
dochcy  and  English  cloch)y  and  the  name  was  given  to  a  horse- 
man's cloak  because  of  its  resemblance  to  a  belL  The  word 
palliate  is  from  the  JjdXixipallvumj  a  dodk. 

25.  Without  a  cause  (Sapedp).  Oraluitousiy.  Akin  to 
BlSmfii^  to  give.    Their  hatred  was  a  volunta/ry  i 


27.  Shall  bear  witness  Qutfyrvpeire).  Present  tense,  bear 
witness.  So  Bev.  Or,  it  may  be  taken  as  imperative :  hear  ye 
witness. 


CHAPTER  Xri. 

1.  Be  ofFended  (<rirav5aXio'^^).  Bev.,  made  to  stumble. 
In  this  Gtospel  only  here  and  vi.  61.  See  on  Matt.  v.  29.  Wye, 
he  not  slandered. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  255 

2.  They  shall  put  you  out  of  the  synagogues.  See  on 
ix.22. 

Yea  (oXX*).  Lit,  ha.  They  shall  excommnnieate  yon,  InU 
worse  than  this,  the  honr  oometh,  etc. 

The  honr  coraeth  that  (&»)•  Lit,  "  there  cometh  an  honr  in 
order  that.^  The  honr  is  ordained  with  that  end  in  view :  it 
comes  franght  with  the  fnlfilment  of  a  divine  pnrpose. 

Whosoever  {^a^  o).    Lit,  every  one  who. 

Doeth  service  (^Karpelav  irpoa^pew).  Lit,  hringeth  or  offer- 
eth  service.  Aarpeia  means,  strictly,  service  for  Atre,  bnt  is  nsed 
of  any  service,  and  frequently  of  the  service  of  God. 

3.  Unto  you.    Omit 

4.  But  (oXX^).  Marks  a  breaking  off  of  the  enumeration  of 
fearfnl  details;  hU  (to  say  no  more  of  these  things),!  have 
spoken  these,  etc. 

At  the  beginning  {i^  ^H^xn^)-  Properly,  from  the  begin- 
ning.   So  Rev.    The  phrase  only  here  and  vi.  64. 

7.  It  is  expedient  {frvfi^pei).  From  ow  together,  and 
^/M»  to  bear  or  Mng.  The  underlying  idea  of  the  word  is 
concurrence  of  circumstances. 

Go  away  (airiK^).  The  different  words  for  go  should  be 
noted  in  this  verse,  and  ver.  10.  Here,  expressing  simple  de- 
parture from  a  point. 

Depart  (iropeuSS).  Rev.,  go.  With  the  notion  of  going  for  a 
purpose,  which  is  expressed  in  IwiU  send  him. 

8.  Will  reprove  {(Kirf^i).    See  on  iiL  20.    Bev.,  cowoict. 

Of  sin — ^righteousness — ^judgment  {vepl).  Lit,  concerning. 
Rev.,  in  respect  of.     Of  gives  a  wrong  impression,  viz.,  that 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


256  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  KEW  TESTAMENT. 

He  wUl  convict  the  world  of  being  sinf nl,  nnrighteons,  and  ex- 
posed to  judgment  This  is  true,  but  the  preposition  implies 
more.  He  will  convict  the  world  as  respects  these  three ;  that 
is,  will  convict  it  of  ignorance  of  their  real  nature. 

Righteousness  (Bucaunnhnf^).  Only  here  and  ver.  10  in  the 
GK>speL    It  occurs  in  the  First  Epistle  and  in  the  Apocalypse. 

10.  I  go  {{nrdffod).  Withdraw  from  their  sight  and  earthly 
fellowship.    See  on  viii.  21,  and  foot-note. 

Ye  see  {Se^petre).    Bev.,  behold.    See  on  L  18. 

11.  Is  judged  {fchcptroi).  Perfect  tense.  Bev.,  therefore, 
rightly,  hath  been  judged. 

12.  Bear  (fia(rr6fyiv).    See  on  x.  81 ;  zii.  6. 

Now  {aprC).  See  on  xiii.  33.  With  reference  to  a  future 
time,  when  they  will  be  able  to  bear  them. 

13.  Spirit  of  truth.    lit.,  of  the  truth.    See  on  xiv.  7. 

Will  guide  (oSif^crei).  From  0S69,  way^  and  fjyiofuu,  to 
lead  The  kindred  noun,  oSiffo^,  guidej  leader^  occurs  Matt  xv. 
14 ;  Acts  i.  16,  etc. 

Into  all  truth  (cfe  iraaav  rifv  oKi^Seuiv).  Rev.,  more  c<Jr- 
rectly,  into  all  the  truth.  Some  editors  read,  iv  ry  oKffSeif 
ircuTQi  in  all  the  truth.  Others,  e^  r^v  oK^iBeuw  iraaeuf,  join- 
ing irSurav  in  an  adverbial  sense  with  will  guide  you  :  i.e.,  will 
guide  you  wholly  into  the  truth.  The  Spirit  does  not  reveal 
all  truth  to  men,  but  He  leads  them  to  the  ti*uth  as  it  is  in 
Christ 

Of  himself.    Rev.,  rightly,  from  himself.    See  on  vii.  17. 

He  shall  hear  {&v  cueovay).  Some  read,  axovei,  hearethj 
and  omit  &v,  the  conditional  particle.    "Oaa  &v  cucovarf,  the 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOfiPEL  OF  JOHN.  257 

reading  of  the  Bee.  Text,  is,  strictly,  wTuUsower  ihvng%  he  may 
have  heard. 

Will  shew  {coHVffeKet).  Better,  as  Bev.,  dedare.  Compare 
Mark  v.  14, 19 ;  Acts  xx.  27 ;  2  Cor.  vii.  7.  Also  to  rehearse  ; 
Acts  xiy.  27.  Used  of  the  formal  proclamation  of  the  Chris- 
tian religion  (Acts  xx.  20 ;  1  Pet  L  12 ;  1  John  i.  6).  See  on 
Acts  xix.  18. 

Things  to  come  {rh  ipxpfieva).  The  article,  omitted  by 
A.  Y.,  is  important.  The  meaning  is  not.  He  will  show  yon 
eome  things  to  come,  but  the  things  that  are  to  come,  or  the 
things  that  are  oarmng.  These  things  are  whatsoever  He  shall 
hear.    The  phrase  occurs  only  here  in  the  Kew  Testament 

14.  8hall  receive  (Xif^cu).    Bev.,  take.    See  on  iii.  83. 

15.  All  things  that  {irdifra  Sea).  lit,  aU  things  as  many 
<u.    Bev.,  aU  things  whatsoever. 

Shall  take  (Xi^^o*).  The  best  texts  read  Xofifidpti,  taketh. 
The  relation  between  the  Son  and  the  Spirit  is  put  by  Jesus 
as  present  and  constant 

16.  Ye  shall  not  see  (ov  .ScwpeSre).  The  present  tense: 
^^  ye  behold  me  no  more."    So  Bev. 

Ye  shall  see  {i^^a-Be).  A  different  verb  for  seeing  is  used 
here.  For  the  distinction,  see  on  L  18.  Oeaspim  emphasizes 
the  act  of  vision,  opdn^  the  resuU.  Oetopim  denotes  deliberate 
contemplation  conjoined  with  mental  or  spiritual  interest 
"The  vision  of  wondering  contemplation,  in  which  they 
observed  little  by  little  the  outward  manifestation  of  the  Lord, 
was  changed  and  transfigured  into  sight,  in  which  they  seized 
at  once,  intuitively,  all  that  Christ  was.  As  long  as  His  eartlily 
presence  was  the  object  on  which  their  eyes  were  fixed,  their 
view  was  necessarily  imperfect  His  glorified  presence  showed 
Him  in  His  true  nature ''  (Westcott). 
Vol.  n.— 17 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


258  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Because  I  go  unto  the  Father.    The  best  texts  omit. 

17.  Then  (ofo).  Eev.,  correctly,  therefore.  It  is  a  particle 
of  logical  connection^  not  of  time. 

18.  He  saith  (Aiye^)*  Emphasizing  the  jpurport  of  the  say- 
ing. 

A  little  while  {rb  fwcpov).  In  vy.  16, 17,  without  the  article. 
Here  the  article  the  or  this  little  while  defines  the  special 
point  of  their  difficulty;  this  "little  while"  of  which  He 
speaks. 

We  cannot  tell  {oitc  cXSofiev).  Bey.,  more  simply  and  liter- 
ally, toe  know  not. 

He  saith  (XoXe!).    Emphasizing  the  form  of  the  saying. 

19.  Knew  (*yiw).    Better,  'Rev.^ perceived.    See  on  ii.  24. 

20.  Weep— lament— be  sorrowful  {tcXava-ere—Spriviia-ere — 
Xuwffl^a'ea-!^).  Of  these  three  words,  the  last  is  the  most 
general  in  meaning,  expressing  eyery  species  of  pain,  of  body 
or  of  soul,  and  not  necessarily  the  outward  manifestation  of 
sorrow.  Both  the  other  words  denote  aadible  expressions  of 
grief.  Ofnivifo  marks  the  more  formal  expression.  It  means 
to  utter  a  dirge  oyer  the  dead.  Thus  Homer,  of  the  mourning 
oyer  Hector  in  Troy : 

"  On  a  fair  oonoli  they  laid  the  corse,  and  placed 
Singers  beside  it,  leaders  of  the  dirge  {pp4iww\ 
Who  sang  (Idp^Mor)  a  sorrowful,  lamenting  8to«in, 
And  aU  the  women  answered  it  with  sobs.'* 

"  niad,"  xxiy.,  720-723. 

The  yerb  occurs  Matt.  xi.  17 ;  Luke  yii.  32 ;  xxiii  27.  KXaIm 
means  cmdible  weeping,  the  crying  of  children,  as  distinguished 
from  hcucpwoy  to  aJied  tearSy  to  weep  silently^  which  occurs  but 
once  in  the  Kew  Testament,  of  Jesus'  weeping  (John  xl  35). 
See  on  Luke  yii.  32. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPBL  OF  JOHN.  <  259 

21.  A  woman   {/j  ywij).    lit,  the  woman.    The  generic 
-article  marking  the  woman  as  representing  Iier  sex:  woman  as 

sach. 

She  is  in  travail.  A  common  Old  Testament  image  of  sor- 
row issuing  in  joy.  See  Isa.  xxi.  3 ;  xxvL  17 ;  IxvL  7 ;  Hos. 
xiii.  13;  Mic.  iv.  9, 10. 

The  anguish  (1%  SfKt^m).  Commonly  rendered  affliction 
or  trilnUcUian  in  A.  Y.    See  on  Matt  xiiL  21. 

Joy  {t^v  xoLphti).  Properly,  the  joy  which  answers  to  the 
angnish. 

A  man  {avSpaom^^).    See  on  i.  80. 

22.  Have  sorrow  ^vmfv  ^erc).  This  form  of  expression 
occars  frequently  in  the  New  Testament,  to  denote  the  posses- 
sion or  experience  of  virtues,  sensations,  desires,  emotions,  in- 
tellectual or  spiritual  faculties,  faults,  or  defects.  It  is  stronger 
than  the  verb  which  expresses  any  one  of  these.  For  instance, 
to  ham  faith  is  stronger  than  to  believe  :  to  have  life^  than  the 

act  of  living.  It  expresses  a  dietinct^j^ersonal  realisation  of 
^the  virtue  or  fault  or  sentiment  in  question.  Hence,  to  have 
sorrow  is  more  than  to  be  sorrowful.  In  Matt  xvii.  20,  Christ 
does  not  say  if  ye  beUevCj  but  if  ye  have  faith  f  if  faith,  in  ever 
so  small  a  degree,  is  possessed  by  you  as  a  conscious,  living 
principle  and  motive.  Compare  have  love  (xiii  35;  1  John 
iv.  16) ;  have  peace  (xvi.  33) ;  have  trust  (2  Cor.  iii.  4) ;  ha/ve 
boldness  (Heb.  x.  19 ;  1  John  ii.  28). 

23.  Ye  shall  ask  {ipwr/itrere).  Or,  as  Eev.,  in  margin,  a**— 
qxiestion.  To  question  is  the  primary  meaning  of  the  verb, 
from  which  it  runs  into  the  more  general  sense  of  request^  be- 
seech.  So  Mark  vii.  28;  Luke  iv.  38;  John  xvii.  15,  etc 
Here  the  meaning  is,  ye  shaU  ash  me  no  question  (compare  ver. 
19,  where  the  same  verb  is  used).  Compare  Matt.  xvi.  13 ;  xxi. 
24 ;  John  i.  19.  Ask^  absolutely,  Luke  xxii.  68.  Note,  more- 
over, the  selection  of  the  word  here  as  mai*king  the  asking  on 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


WORD  8TUDIBB  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

famUiar  terms.  See  on  xL  22.  Another  verb  for  ask  occurs 
in  the  following  sentence :  ^^  If  je  shall  oak  {(uniimfre)  any- 
thing/' etc.  Here  the  sense  isyif  ye  shall  make  any  requesL 
Compare  Matt  v.  42 ;  vii.  7,  9,  10,  etc.  Kote,  also,  that  this 
word  for  asking  the  Father  marks  the  asking  of  an  inferior 
from  a  superior,  and  is  the  word  which  Christ  never  uses  of 
Sis  awn  requests  to  the  Father.    Compare  1  John  iii«  22. 

Verily,  verily.    See  on  L  51 ;  x.  1. 

Whatsoever  ye  shall  asic— in  my  name— give.  The  best 
texts  change  iaa  Av,  whatsoever ^  to  ivri,,  if(j^  Bhall  ask)  any- 
thing';  and  place  in  my  name  after  give  it  you.  So  Rev.  Jf 
ye  shall  ask  anything  of  the  Father ^  He  wiU  give  it  you  in  my 
nam£.  Not  only  is  the  prayer  offeredi  but  the  answer  is  given 
in  Christ's  name. 

24.  Ask  {alretre).  The  present  imperative,  implying  con^ 
tmuous  asking.  Be  asking.  Compare  Mark  vi.  22,  aXTtfoov, 
the  aorist  imperative,  marking  a  single,  definite  petition. 

May  be  full  (3  vmKqpssiJihni).  Yery  literally,  may  le  h<mh 
ing  been  fulfilled.  Rev.,  more  correctly,  yti(/2K«i  Compare 
XV.  11. 

25.  Proverbs  {irapoifjUani).  See  on  pardUes,  Matt  xiiL  3. 
He  had  spoken  under  figures,  as  the  vine,  and  the  woman  in 
travail. 

Shall  shew  (ovarfYeKS).  Rev.,  tell.  See  on  ver.  18.  The 
best  texts  read  cnrafffeK&j  the  original  force  of  which  is  to 
bring  tidingsyrom  {airS)  something  or  some  one* 

Plainly  (irap^la).    See  on  viL  18. 

26.  Ye  shall  ask— I  will  pray.  Kote  again  the  use  of  the 
two  verbs  for  asking.  Ye  shall  ask  (oinjo-ecr^c) ;  /will  pray 
(ipc^niaw).    See  on  ver.  23. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  261 

27.  Loveth  (^Xe!).  Ab  sons,  with  the  love  of  natural  affec- 
tion. See  on  v.  20.  The  same  verb  in  the  following  clause,  of 
the  love  of  the  disciples  for  Christ. 

From  God.  Some  editors  resAjfrom  the  Father.  Uapd, 
/ram  beeide. 

28.  From  the  Father  {irapd).    The  best  texts  read,  he,  out 

Go  {irop€vofuu).    See  on  ver.  7. 

29.  Speakest— speakest  (XoXeS;— X^k).  The  first,  of  the 
farm ;  the  second,  of  the  jmrpart.    See  on  yer.  18. 

80.  We  are  sure  {aXSafiev).    Better,  as  Bev.,  toe  knaw. 

By  this  {iv  tovt^).  lit.,  in  this.  Oompare  1  John  ii.  8,  6 ; 
iii  16, 19,  24 ;  It.  9, 10, 18, 17 ;  v.  2. 

81.  Now  {ifyn)*  See  on  xiiL  88.  With  reference  to  the 
coming  time  of  greater  trial 

82.  That  (Tva).  See  on  ver  2,  and  tv.  12.  In  the  divine 
connsel  the  hour  cometh  that  ye  may  be  scattered,  and  may 
leave,  etc. 

To  his  own  {ek  rA  ZSmi).    To  his  own  home.     See  on  i.  11. 

88.  Ye  shall  have  (!^ere).  The  best  texts  read,  ^ere,  ye 
have. 

Be  of  good  cheer  {Sapaem).    Only  here  in  John. 

I  have  overcome  (yei^iw).  The  verb  occurs  only  three 
times  ontside  of  John's  writings.  Only  here  in  the  Gospel, 
and  frequently  in  First  Epistle  and  Apocalypse.  Uniformly 
of  spiritoal  victory. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


CHAPTER  XVIL 

The  Hioh-Pbie8tly  Prates. 

"  Oat  of  Christ's  divinely  rich  prayer-life  there  emerge,  as 
from  an  ocean,  the  pearls  of  those  single  prayers  of  Bis  that 
are  preserved  to  ns ;  the  prayer  given  in  the  Sermon  on  the 
Mount  for  the  use  of  His  people — Our  Father f  the  ascription 
of  praise  to  God  at  the  departure  from  Galilee  (Matt  xi.  25) ; 
the  prayers  at  the  grave  of  Lazarus,  and  within  the  precincts  of 
the  temple ;  our  Iiigh-priestly  prayer ;  the  supplication  in  Geth- 
semane,  and  the  prayer-words  of  the  Crucified  One — FcUher^ 
forgi/oe  them^Miy  Miy — and  the  closing  prayer,  Fatker^  into 
thy  handsy  etc.,  to  which  the  exultant  cry,  Jt  is  finished^  at- 
taches itself,  inasmuch  as  from  one  point  of  view,  it  may  be  re- 
garded as  a  word  of  prayer.  Add  to  these  the  mentions  of  the 
prayings,  the  thanksgivings,  the  heavenward  sighings  of  Christ, 
as  also  His  summonses  and  encoui*agements  to  prayer,  and  He 
appears  as  the  Prince  of  humanity  even  in  the  realm  of  prayer ; 
in  the  manner,  likewise,  in  which  He  has  concealed  His  prayer- 
life,  exhibiting  it  only  as  there  was  necessity  for  its  present- 
ment. If  we  regard  His  work  as  a  tree  that  towers  into 
heaven  and  overshadows  the  world.  His  prayer-life  is  the  root 
of  this  tree ;  His  overcoming  of  the  world  rests  upon  the  infi- 
nite depth  of  His  self -presentation  before  God,  His  self-devo- 
tion to  God,  His  self-immersion  in  God,  His  self-certitude 
and  power  from  God.  In  His  prayer-life  the  perfect  truth  of 
His  human  nature  has  also  approved  itself.  The  same  who,  as 
the  Son  of  God,  is  complete  revelation,  is,  as  the  Son  of  Man, 
complete  religion  "  (Lauge). 

In  the  "Lord's  Prayer''  (Matt  vi.)  Christ  sets  forth  what 
His  disciples  should  desire  for  themselves.  In  this  prayer  He 
indicates  what  He  desires  for  them.  It  is  interesting  to  study 
the  forms  in  which  the  ideas  of  the  Lord's  Prayer  are  repro* 
duced  and  developed  in  this. 

1.  These  words  (rofira).    lit.,  these  ihvnye.    So  Bev. 


Digitized  by  (^OOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  263 

Said.  John  nowhere  says  that  Jesus  prayed^  as  the  other 
Evangelists  do. 

Thy  Son — ^thy  Son  {trov  tov  vtou — c>  vlosi).  Properly,  thy 
Son — the  Son.  The  second  phrase  marks  a  change  from  the 
thought  of  personal  relationship  to  that  of  the  relation  in 
which  Jesus  manifests  the  Father's  glory. 

2.  Power  {i^ovclav).    Key.,  rightly,  cnUAority.    See  on  i.  12. 

All  flesh.  A  Hebrew  phrase,  denoting  the  whole  of  hu- 
manity in  its  imperfection.  See  Gen.  yi.  12 ;  Ps.  licv.  2 ;  Isa. 
xl.  5,  etc 

That  He  should  give  eternal  life  to  as  many  as  Thou 
hast  given  Him  {ha  irav  h  hthnoKo^  avr^,  Sokti;  airroU  Ho^v 
aldviov).  Lit,  that  all  that  Thou  host  given  Sim,  to  them  He 
should  give  eternal  life.  All  {vav)y  singular  number,  regards 
the  body  of  Christian  disciples  ooUectvoely:  to  thern^  indvvid' 
ually, 

3.  Life  eternal.  With  the  article:  the  life  etemaL  Defin- 
ing the  words  in  the  previous  verse.  The  life  eternal  {ot  which 
I  spoke)  is  this. 

That  (&a).  Expressing  the  aim. 

Might  know  {yivwr/ewri).  Might  recognise  or  perceive^ 
This  is  striking,  that  eternal  life  consists  in  knowledge,  or 
rather  the  jmrsuil  of  knowledge,  since  the  present  tense  marks 
a  conti/mumce,  a  jprogressvve  perception  of  God  in  Christ.  That 
they  might  Uam  to  know.  Compare  ver.  23 ;  x.  38 ;  1  John  v. 
20;  iv.7,  8. 

'*  I  nj,  the  aoknowledgment  of  Ood  in  Christ 
Accepted  by  thy  reason,  solves  for  thee 
All  questions  in  the  earth  and  ont  of  it, 
And  has  so  far  advanced  thee  to  be  wise. 
Wouldst  thon  improve  this  to  re-prove  the  proved  f 
In  life's  mere  minute,  with  power  to  use  that  proof» 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


264  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

Leave  knowledge  and  rerert  to  how  it  spning  t 
Thou  hast  it ;  nae  it,  and  forthwith,  or  die. 
For  this  I  say  is  death,  and  the  sole  death, 
When  a  man's  loss  oomes  to  him  from  his  gain, 
Darkness  from  light,  from  knowledge  ignorance, 
And  lack  of  lore  from  love  made  manifest** 

Bobert  Browning,  «  A  Death  in  the  Desert " 

The  relation  of  perception  of  God  to  character  is  stated  in  1 
John  iiL  2,  on  which  see  note. 

True  (oKffl^ufov).  See  on  L  9.  Oompare  1  Cor.  viii.  4 ;  1 
Tim.  vL  15. 

Jesus  Christy  whom  Thou  hast  sent*  The  Bey.  brings 
ont  better  the  emphasis  of  the  Greek  order:  and  £Rm  whom 
TTiou  didst  sendy  even  Jeetia  Christ.  Didst  send  {airioTeCKafl). 
The  aorist  tense,  emphasizing  the  historic  fact  of  Christ's  mis- 
sion. 

4.  I  have  glorified— I  have  finished  (^86^<»— ^eXcWa). 
The  best  texts  read,  TeXeMMra99  hamng  jmished;  the  participle 
defining  the  manner  in  which  He  had  glorified  the  Father  npon 
earth.    So  Bev. 

To  do  (Jva  imffyrti).    lit,  in  order  that  I  should  do  {j£). 

6.  With  Thyself  i^irapk  aeavrf).    In  fellowship  with  Thy-, 
sell    So  vnth  Thee  {wapk  aoi). 

I  had.    Actnallj  possessed. 

8.  The  words  {rh  ^fiara).  Compare  thy  ivord  (Koyov)^ 
ver.  6.  That  signified  the  gospel  message  in  its  entirety.  This, 
the  message  considered  in  its  constituent  parts.  See  on  Loke 
i.  87.  Compare  v.  88,  47 ;  vL  60,  68,  68 ;  viii.  48,  47,  61 ;  xii. 
47,48;  XV.  8,  7. 

9.  I  pray  (ipurrA).  More  strictly,  I  make  request.  See  on 
xvi  28.    l^e  /is  emphatic,  as  throoghout  the  prayer. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSFBL  OF  JOHN.  265 

10.  All  mine  (rA  if^  irdifra).  All  things  that  are  mine. 
SoEev. 

11.  I  come  (ipx^f^*  I  ^^™^  coming.  Spoken  of  Hib  de- 
parture to  the  Father. 

Holy  (^i€).  See  on  eavnts^  Acts  zzvi  10;  also  on  1  Pet. 
L  15.  Compare  1  John  iL  20,  and  righteaw  Father  {BiKaie)^ 
ver.  25.  This  epithet,  now  first  applied  to  the  Father,  contem- 
plates Gk>d,  the  holy  One,  as  the  agent  of  that  which  Christ 
desires  for  His  disciples — hoUneea  of  heart  and  life ;  being  kept 
fi*om  this  evil  world. 

Those  whom  (o(^).  The  correct  reading  is  f,  referring  to 
name.  Thy  name  which  Thou  host  gi/oen  me.  So  in  ver.  12. 
Compare  Philip,  ii.  9, 10 ;  Apoc.  iL  17 ;  zix.  12 ;  xxiL  4. 

12.  In  the  world.    Omit. 

I  kept  (inipovp).  Imperfect  tense.  /  oontimted  to  keq>. 
The  /  is  emphatic:  /kept  them,  now  do  Thou  keep  them. 

I  kept  (i^vKa^).  Eev.,  rightly,  I  guarded.  The  A.  V. 
OTerlooks  the  distinction  between  the  two  words  for  keeping. 
The  former  word  means,  I  preserved  them ;  the  latter,  Igvao'ded 
them  as  a  means  to  their  preservation.  See  on  reserved,  1  Pet 
i4. 

Is  lost— perdition  {cmriXeTo—inmXelai).  A  play  of  words: 
**None  of  tiiem  perished,  but  thesonofj^erishing^  (Westcott). 

The  scripture  (i^  "ipa^).  See  dose  of  note  on  v.  47,  and  on 
Mark  ziL  10. 

15.  From  the  evil  (tov  irovripov).  Or,  the  evU  one.  This 
rendering  is  according  to  John's  usage.  See  1  John  iL  18, 14 ; 
lit  12 ;  V.  18, 19 ;  and  compare  xii.  81 ;  xiv.  80 ;  xvi.  11.  J^hmh 
{i/c),  lit,  out  of,  means  out  of  the  hands  qf. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  KEW  TESTAMENT. 

17.  Sanctify  {aryiaaov).  Constantly  used  in  the  Septoagint 
to  express  the  entire  dedication  and  consecration  of  both  per- 
sons and  things  to  Ood.  See  Exod.  xxix.  1,  36 ;  xl.  13 ;  Lev. 
xxiL  2|  3.    Eev.,  in  margin,  consecrate.    See  on  x.  36. 

Through  thy  truth  {iv  rg  0X17^*9  aov).  The  best  texts 
omit  CA]/.  Through  (ip)  is  to  be  rendered  literally,  in^  marking 
the  sphere  or  element  of  consecration.  Bev.,  sanctify  them  in 
thetnUh. 

Thy  word  (0  Xoyo^  6  irisi).  Properly,  the  word  which  is  thine. 
See  on  xv.  9. 

18.  Sent  {am-iaruXtK — airiareiXa).  On  a  mission.  See  on 
Matt.  X.  16. 

Sanctify.    See  on  ver.  17. 

20.  Shall  believe  {irurreva-ovrmp).  The  best  texts  read 
'n-urr€v6vT(DP,  the  present  participle,  that  believe.  The  f ntore 
body  of  believers  is  conceived  as  actually  existing. 

On  me  through  their  word.  The  Greek  order  is,  hdieve 
through  their  wo^^d  on  me.  "  Believe  through  their  word  '^  forms 
a  compound  idea. 

21.  One.    Omit. 

24.  They — ^whom  {ot^).  The  best  texts  read  h,  that  which. 
The  construction  is  similar  to  that  in  ver.  2,  ^^  that  He  shonld 
give  etiBrnal  life,"  etc.  Like  irap,  all,  in  that  passage,  that  which 
hei-e  refers  to  the  body  of  believers  taken  collectively. 

I  will  (^\o>).    See  on  Matt.  L  19.« 

My  glory.    The  glory  which  is  mine. 

*  Godet  flajs  that  this  expression  ^^  is  nowhere  else  found  in  the  month  of 
Jesofl."    Bat  see  Matt  viU.  8 ;  Mark  ziv.  86  ;  John  zxi.  22. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOBFBL  or  JQHH.  367 


CHAPTER  XYIIL 

1.  Compare  Matt.  xxvL  30 ;  36-46 ;  Mark  xiv.  26 ;  32-42 ; 
Luke  xxii.  39-46. 

1.  Brook  (x€ifM£/J^v).  From  xeS/ui,  win^^  and  /5&>,  to  flow. 
Properly,  a  vxinter  torrent.  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 
Bev.,  in  margin,  ramne.  In  classical  Greek  it  occurs  in  De- 
mosthenes in  the  sense  of  a  dram  or  conduit.  It  may  be  taken 
as  equivalent  to  the  Arabic  wadj/j  which  means  a  stream  and 
its  bed,  or  properly,  the  valley  of  a  stream  even  when  the 
stream  is  dry. 

Kidron  {KiB/xDv).  Which  might  also  be  rendered  of  the 
cedars^  which  some  editors  prefer.  There  is  some  imcertainty 
as  to  the  exact  meaning  of  the  word  cedar,  which  occurs  fre- 
quently, some  supposing  it  to  be  a  general  name  for  the  pine 
family.  A  tree  of  dark  foliage  is  mentioned  in  the  Talmud  by 
the  name  of  cednm.  The  ravine  of  Eidron  separated  the 
Mount  of  Olives  from  the  Temple-Mount.  Westcott  cites 
from  Derenbourg  ("  On  the  History  and  Geography  of  Pales- 
tine ")  a  passage  of  the  Talmud  to  the  effect  that  on  the  Mount 
of  Olives  there  were  two  cedars,  under  one  of  which  were 
four  shops  for  the  sale  of  objects  legally  pure ;  and  that  in  one 
of  them  pigeons  enough  were  sold  for  the  sacrifices  of  all 
Israel.  He  adds :  ^  Even  the  mention  of  Kidron  by  the  sec- 
ondary and  popular  name  of  '  the  ravine  of  the  cedars '  may 
contain  an  allusion  to  a  scandal  felt  as  a  grievous  burden  at  the 
time  when  the  priests  gained  wealth  by  the  sale  of  victims  by 
the  t^oo  cedarsJ^  The  Kidron  is  the  brook  over  which  David 
passed,  barefoot  and  weeping,  when  fleeing  from  Absalom  (2 
Sam.  XV.  23-30).  There  King  Asa  burned  the  obscene  idol  of 
his  mother  (1  Kings  xv.  13).  It  was  the  receptacle  for  the  im- 
purities and  abominations  of  idol-worship,  when  removed  from 
the  temple  by  the  adherents  of  Jehovah  (2  Chron.  xxix.  16) ; 
and,  in  the  time  of  Josiah,  was  the  common  cemetery  of  the 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


268  WOBD  STUDIES  IK  THB  NBW  TBSTAMBNT. 

city  (2  Kings  xxiii.  6).  In  the  vision  of  Ezekiel  (xlviL  5,  6,  7) 
he  goes  round  to  the  eastern  gate  of  the  temple,  overhanging 
tlie  defile  of  Kidron,  and  sees  the  waters  mshiug  down  into 
the  valley  until  the  stream  becomes  a  mighty  river. 

A  garden.  Neither  John  nor  Luke  give  the  name  Qethr 
sema/ne. 

2-12.  Compare  Matt.  xxvL  47-66 ;  Mark  xvL  43-52 ;  Luke 
xxii.  47-63. 

2.  Which  betrayed  (o  irapaSiBoi^).  The  present  participle, 
markmg  the  betrayal  as  in  progress.    Lit,  who  is  hetraying. 

Resorted  {^rwifix^)'  ^^-^  ct^sembled.  The  items  of  this 
verse  are  peculiar  to  John. 

8.  A  band  (t^^  cirelpav).  Properly,  ihe  band.  See  on 
Mark  XV.  16 ;  also  on  centurion^  Luke  vii.  2 ;  and  Acts  xxi.  31. 
The  bandy  or  cohort^  was  &om  the  Boman  garrison  in  the  tower 
of  Antonia. 

Officers  {ymipira/i;).  See  on  Matt.  v.  25.  Sent  from  the 
Sanhedrim.  The  temple  police.  The  Synoptists  speak  of  the 
body  which  arrested  Jesus  as  ^Xo9>  a  muUUxide  or  rabble;  but 
both  Matthew  and  Mark  mention  the  band  {aireipa)  later  in  the 
narrative  (Matt  xxvii.  27 ;  Mark  xv.  16). 

Lanterns  (^KUf&v).  Only  here  in  the  !N'ew  Testament  A 
detail  peculiar  to  John.  Though  it  was  full  moon,  it  was 
feared  that  Jesus  might  hide  and  escape. 

4.  That  should  come  (r^  ifyxpfi^vti).  Lit,  that  are  coming. 
The  details  in  4-9  are  peculiar  to  John. 

5.  Of  Nazareth  {jhv  Na^mpaiov).    Lit,  the  Nazarene. 

Stood  {eum/iieei).  Imperfect  tense.  Bev.,  correctly,  wa9 
9tanding. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN. 

8.  These.    The  disciples. 

Go  their  way  {yirdrfew).    Withdraw. 

10.  Simon  Peter.  The  names  of  Simon  Peter  and  Mal- 
chos  are  mentioned  only  by  John  in  connection  with  this  inci- 
dent.   The  incident  itself  is  related  by  all  the  Evangelists. 

A  sword.  Contrary  to  the  role  which  forbade  the  carrying 
of  weapons  on  a  feast-day. 

The  high-priest's  servant.    See  on  Matt.  xxvL  61. 

Right  ear.  Lnke  and  John.  The  others  do  not  specify 
which  ear.  For  ear  John  and  Mark  have  imipiov^  a  diminu- 
tive ;  Lake,  od9>  and  Matthew,  imi/ovt  a  diminutive  in  form,  but 
not  in  force.    See  on  Matt  zxvi  51. 

11.  Thy  sword.    Omit  ihy^  and  read,  the  sword. 

Sheath  {^icqv).  Only  here  in  the  Kew  Testament  From 
rlSfffu,  to  put.    That  into  which  the  sword  isjnU. 

The  cup.  Compare  Matt  zxvi  89 ;  Mark  xiv.  86 ;  Luke 
zxiL  43.    Peculiar  to  John. 

12.  The  captain  (x^'^'^^VX^)*  ^^  ^^  Mark  vi.  21,  and  on 
centurion^  Luke  viL  2. 

Took  {(TwiKafiov).  Rev.,  better,  seized.  It  is  the  technical 
word  for  arresting.  Lit,  took  with  them^  of  which  there  is  a 
suggestion  in  the  modem  policeman's  phrase,  go  along  with  me* 
Compare  Luke  xxii.  54. 

18-18.  Compare  Matt  xxvi.  57,  58 ;  69-75 ;  Mark  xiv.  53, 
64 ;  66-72  ;  Luke  xxii.  54-62. 

13.  Annas  first.  This  supplies  the  detail  of  an  examina- 
tion  preliminary  to  that  before  the  high-priest,  which  is  omit- 
ted by  the  Synoptists. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


270  WOBD  STUDIES  IK  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Father-in-law  {irevSepb^:).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. 

That  same  year.    See  on  xL  49. 

15.  Followed  {i^'^XovBei).    Imperfect,  woBfottowmg. 

The  other  disciple.  The  correct  reading  omits  the  article. 
Another.    Probably  John  himself. 

Palace  (avX^y).  Not  palace^  bnt  wuH^  as  Bev.  See  on 
Matt  xxvi.  3 ;  Luke  xi.  21. 

16.  Stood.    Properly,  vxu  standing. 

Door.    The  door  opening  from  the  street  into  the  conrt. 
Her  that  kept  the  door  (t$  Svfwp^).    See  on  x.  3. 

17.  The  damsel  {^  iroAZCaicri).    See  on  Acts  xii.  13. 

Art  thou  0^^  (rif).  Tlie  question  is  put  in  a  negative  form, 
as  if  expecting  a  negative  answer :  thou  art  noty  art  thou  f 

Also.    Sliowing  that  she  recognized  John  as  a  disciple. 

18.  Stood.  It  is  discouraging  to  see  how  the  A.  Y.  habitu- 
ally ignores  the  imperfect  tense,  and  thus  detracts  from  the 
liveliness  of  the  narrative.    Render,  as  Rev.,  toere  standing. 

Fire  of  coals  {hv^paxthv).  Only  here  and  xxi.  9.  Matthew 
does  not  mention  tlie  fire.  Mark  has  ro  <f>&^,  strictly,  the  light 
of  the  fire.    Luke  says  they  had  kindled  afire  {'Tvp). 

Warmed.  Rev.,  correctly,  were  warming.  So,  ver.  25,  was 
standing  and  was  warming^  for  stood  and  warmed. 

19-24.  Compare  Matt.  xxvi.  59-68 ;  Mark  xiv.  65-65 ;  Luke 
xxii.  63-71. 

19.  Asked  {ripoivriaev).    Or,  questioned. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  271 

Doctrine  (StSa^^).     Kev.,  better,  teackmg. 

20.  In  the  synagogue  {h  if  ^rwarpay^).  The  best  texts 
omit  the  article.  Bender,  m  synagogue:  when  the  people  were 
assembled.    Like  our  phrase,  in  church. 

Always  resort  {^dmorre  awipxovrtu).  For  iriurore  always^ 
read  Tromre?  aU.  Xvvify)(pvTai  is  rather  come  tbgether^  iuaernMe. 
Rev. J  where  all  the  Jews  come  together. 

22.  Struck— with  the  palm  of  his  hand  (2Sa>/c€  j>inn^iui). 
Lit.,  gcuve  a  blow.  Interpreters  differ  as  to  whether  it  was  a 
blow  with  a  rody  or  with  the  hand.  The  kindred  verb  pairi^to, 
from  pcvirk,  a  rodj  is  etymologically  related  to  fta/SBi^,  from 
/^38o9,  a  rody  and  occnrs  Matt.  v.  89,  of  smiting  on  the  cheeky 
and  Matt.  xxvi.  67,  where  it  is  distinguished  from  KoXa^^lfyn,  to 
strike  with  the  fist.  This  latter  passage,  however,  leaves  the 
qnestion  open,  since,  if  the  meaning  to  smite  with  a  rod  can  be 
defended,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  its  being  understood 
there  in  that  sense.  The  earlier  meaning  of  the  word  was,  un- 
doubtedly, according  to  its  etymology,  to  smite  with  a  rod.  So 
Herodotus  of  Xerxes.  ^'  It  is  certain  that  he  commanded  those 
who  scourged  (Junri^ovra^)  the  waters  (of  the  Hellespont)  to 
utter,  as  they  lashed  them,  these  barbarian  and  wicked  words" 
(vii.,  35).  And  again  :  "  The  Corinthian  captain,  Adeimantus, 
observed,  ^  Themistocles,  at  the  games  they  who  start  too  soon 
are  scourged  (Junrt^ovrcu) ' "  (viii.,  59).  It  passes,  in  classical 
Greek,  from  this  meaning  to  that  of  a  light  blow  with  the 
hand.  The  grammarian  Phrynichus  (a.d.  180)  condemns  the 
use  of  the  word  in  the  sense  of  striking  with  the  handy  or  slajh 
jnngy  as  not  according  to  good  Attic  usage,  and  says  that  the 
proper  expression  for  a  blow  on  the  cheek  with  the  open  hand 
is  hrl  /e6ppfi^  irard^a*.  This  shows  that  the  un-Attic  phrase  had 
crept  into  use.  In  the  Septnagint  the  word  is  clearly  used  in 
the  sense  of  a  blow  vnth  the  hand.  See  Isa.  1.  6  :  "I  gave  my 
cheeks  to  blows  {ek  pairlc/AaTa).  Hos.  xi.  4,  '^  As  a  man  that 
smiteth  (JmttI^v)  upon  his  cheeks  "  (A.  V.  and  Kev.,  that  take 
off  the  yoke  on  their  jaws).    In  1  Kings  xxiL  24,  we  read, 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


272  WOBD  8TX7DIE8  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

*^  Zedekiah — smote  Micaiah  on  the  cheek  (hrara^  M  ri/y  truvp 
6iHi)P  The  word  in  ver.  28,  hkp^i^^  )i.\».yfiaye9t^  hence,  U>  beat  or 
thrash  (compare  Luke  xiL  47),  seems  better  to  snit^  the  meaning 
strike  with  a  rod;  yet  in  2  Cor.  xi.  20,  that  verb  is  used  of 
smiting  in  the  face  {eh  irp6awnvv  Sipe&),  and  in  1  Cor.  ix.  27, 
where  Fanl  is  nsing  the  fignre  of  a  hooBer^  he  says,  ^^  So  Jiffht 
I  {irvtcretw,  of  boxing^  or  fighting  vnth  thejists)y  not  as  one 
that  heateth  (Bipfov)  the  air.''  These  examples  practically  de- 
stroy the  force  of  the  argument  from  Sipet^.  It  is  impossible 
to  settle  the  point  conclusively ;  but,  on  the  whole,  it  seems  as 
well  to  retain  the  rendering  of  the  A.  V.  and  Bev.* 

24.  Annas  had  sent  {airiareiXep  o^Amwi).  The  best  texts 
insert  oSr,  therefore.  The  rendering  of  the  aorist  by  the  plu- 
perfect here  is  inadmissible,  and  is  a  device  to  bring  this  ex- 
amination of  Jesus  into  harmony  with  that  described  in  Matt, 
xxvi.  56-68,  and  to  escape  the  apparent  inconsistency  between 
the  mention  of  the  high-priest  (Caiaphas)  as  conducting  this 
examination  and  the  statement  of  ver.  13,  which  implies  that 
this  was  merely  a  preliminary  examination  before  Annas. 
Bender,  Annas  therefore  sent  him. 

Bound.  Probably  He  had  been  imbound  during  His  ex- 
amination. 

27.  The  cock  crew.  The  Greek  has  not  the  definite  article. 
See  on  Matt  xxvi.  34.  The  use  of  the  article  would  seem  to 
mark  the  tims^  cock-crowing,  rather  than  the  incident. 

28-88.  Compare  Matt  xxviL  1,  2 ;  11-14 ;  Mark  xv.  1-6 ; 
Luke  xxiii.  1-6. 

28.  Led  {Srfovaaf).    Present  tense,  lead. 

Hall  of  judgment  (irpcurdpiov).  A  Latin  word,  prcstoriumj 
transcribed.   Originally,  the  generaPs  tent.   In  the  Boman  prov- 

*  Mr.  Field's  remark  (*<  Otiam  Korrioense  '0  that  it  is  improbable  that  the 
word  woald  continne  to  be  nsed  in  the  older  sense  (rod)  after  it  had  acquired 
the  later  meaning  (hand),  can  hardlj  be  called  conclosiTe. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  278 

inces  it  was  the  name  for  the  official  residence  ofihe  Homan 
governor^  as  here.  Compare  Acts  xxiii.  35.  It  came  to  be  ap- 
plied to  any  spacious  vUla  or pcUcice.  So  Jnvenal :  "To  their 
crimes  they  are  indebted  for  tlieir  gardens,  palaces  (prcBtoria)^ 
etc."  ("  Sat.,"  i.,  75).  In  Rome  the  term  was  applied  to  the 
jprastorian  gua/rd^  or  imperial  body-guard.  See  on  Philip.  L 13. 
Rev.,j>afood. 

Early  {ir(wi).  Used  technically  of  ^  fourth  watch^  3-6 
A.M.  See  Mark  xiii.  35.  The  Sanhedrim  could  not  hold  a 
legal  meeting,  especially  in  capital  cases,  before  sunrise ;  and  in 
such  cases  judicial  proceedings  must  be  conducted  and  termi- 
nated by  day.  A  condemnation  to  death,  at  night,  was  techni- 
cally illegal.  In  capital  cases,  sentence  of  condemnation  could 
not  be  legally  pronounced  on  the  day  of  trial.  If  the  night 
proceedings  were  merely  preliminary  to  a  formal  trial,  they 
would  have  no  validity ;  if  formal,  they  were,  ipsofouAo^  illegal. 
In  neither  case  was  the  law  observed  in  reference  to  the  second 
council.  According  to  the  Hebrew  computation  of  time,  it  was 
held  on  the  same  day. 

Be  defiled  (jiMvS&irai).  Originally,  to  etaiuj  as  with  color. 
So  Homer :  "  Tinges  {jurivrf)  the  white  ivory  with  purple."  Kot 
necessarily,  therefore,  in  a  bad  sense,  like  fioXvpto,  to  heemear 
or  besmirch  with  filth  (1  Oor.  viiL  7 ;  Apoc.  iii.  4).  In  classical 
Greek,  fuabw,  the  verb  here  used,  is  the  standing  word  for 
profa/avng  or  v/rJwXUnjoing.    So  Sophocles : 

*'  Kot  eyen  fearing  this  ^(XLulion  (/lioff/ia)  dire, 
WUl  I  consent  to  burial     WeU  I  know 
That  man  is  powerless  to  poUtUe  (putUpwf)  the  gods." 

"Antigone,*' 1042-1044. 

And  Plato:  ^^  And  if  a  homicide  .  .  .  without  purification 
PoVaxUs  the  agora,  or  the  games,  or  the  temples,"  etc.  ("  Laws,** 
868).  See  on  1  Pet.  L  4.  The  defilement  in  the  present  case 
was  apprehended  from  entering  a  house  from  which  all  leavea 
had  not  been  removed. 
Vol.  IL— 18 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


374  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  ISfEW  TESTAMENT. 

Eat  the  Passover.  The  parpose  of  this  work  forbids  our 
entering  upon  tlie  much-vexed  question  of  the  apparent  incon- 
sistency between  John  and  the  Sjnoptists  as  to  the  time  of 
celebrating  the  Passover. 

29.  Pilate.  Kote  the  abruptness  with  which  he  is  introduced 
as  one  well  known.  Two  derivations  of  the  name  are  given. 
l^UcUuSy  one  armed  with  i\\Qj>ilum  or  javdin^  like  TorquaiuSy 
one  adorned  with  a  coUar  {torques).  Or,  a  contraction  from 
PileatuSy  wearing  the  pUevs  or  cap^  which  was  the  badge  of 
manumitted  slaves.  Hence  some  have  supposed  that  be  was  a 
freedman.  Tacitus  refers  to  him  as  connected  with  Christ's 
death.  ^'Tlie  author  of  that  name  (Christian),  or  sect,  was 
Christ,  who  was  capitally  punished  in  the  reign  of  Tiberius, 
by  Pontius  Pilate "  ("  Annals,"  xv.,  44).  He  was  the  sixth 
lioman  procurator  of  Judsea. 

What  accusation.  Not  implying  Pilate's  ignorance  of  the 
charge,  but  his  demand  for  the  formal  accusation. 

30.  Malefactor  {Ktucoirout^).  Rev.,  evil-doer.  From  scokov, 
evily  and  voUta,  to  do.  Luke  uses  a  different  word,  KOKovpjo^, 
from  scatcov,  evil^  and  epyoi,  to  work.    See  on  1  Pet  iL  12. 

31.  Take  ye  him  (Kdfiere  avrhv  vfiek).  The  A.  V.  obscures 
the  emphatic  force  of  vfieU,  you.  Pilate's  words  display  great 
practical  shrewdness  in  forcing  the  Jews  to  commit  themselves 
to  the  admission  that  they  desired  Christ's  death.  ^'  Take  him 
yourselves  (so  Rev.),  and  judge  him  according  to  your  law." 
♦•  By  our  law,"  reply  the  Jews,  "  he  ought  to  rf?^."  But  this 
penalty  they  could  not  inflict     "  It  is  not  lawful,"  etc. 

32.  By  what  death  (iroltp  Savdrtp).  More  correctly,  hy  wh/xt 
manner  of  death.  So  Rev.  Compare  xii.  32 ;  Matt  xx.  19. 
Crucifixion  was  not  a  Jewish  punishment 

'   33.  Art  thou  (<n^  eZ).    TAou  is  emphatic   Thou,  the  despised 
malefactor. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  275 

iCing  of  the  Jews.  The  chU  title.  The  theocratic  title, 
king  of  Israel  (i.  49 ;  xii.  13)  is  addressed  to  Jesus  on  the  cross 
(Matt,  xxvii.  42 ;  Mark  xv.  32)  in  mockery. 

35.  Am  I  a  Jew?  As  if  Jesns'  question  implied  that  Pilate 
had  been  taking  counsel  with  the  Jews. 

36.  Servants  {uTnjpircu).  Only  in  this  passage  in  the  Gk>B- 
pels,  of  Christians.  Compare  Acts  xiii.  5 ;  1  Cor.  iv.  1,  Cor- 
responding with  Christ  as  a  king. 

Fight  {'nyfovi^opTo).  The  imperfect  tense,  denoting  action  in 
progress :  wovld  now  he  etrvving. 

37.  Art  thou  then  {oifKovv  etav).  The  interrogative  particle 
ovtcovp,  not  therefore^  occurs  only  here  in  the  New  Testament 
It  is  ironical.  In  ver.  33  the  emphasis  is  on  thov,:  here  upon 
king.    So  then^  after  aU^  thou  art  a  king. 

Was  I  born— came  I  {yeyhnn/fuu — iki^vSa).  Both  perfects. 
Hi(we  I  been  horn — am  I  come.  So  Rev.  The  Greek  order  is  I 
for  this  ha/ve  heen  hom^  etc.,  throwing  the  emphasis  on  Christ's 
person  and  destiny.  The  perfect  describes  His  birth  and  com- 
ing not  merely  as  historical  facts,  but  as  abiding  in  their  results. 
Compare  this  confession  before  Pilate  (1  Tim.  vi.  13)  with  the 
corresponding  confession  before  the  high-priest  (Matt.  xxvL 
64).  '^  The  one,  addressed  to  the  Jews,  is  framed  in  the  language 
of  prophecy  ;  the  other,  addressed  to  a  Roman,  appeals  to  the 
universal  testimony  of  conscience.  The  one  speaks  of  a  future 
manifestation  of  glory,  the  other  speaks  of  a  present  manifes- 
tation of  truth.  The  one  looks  forward  to  the  Return,  the  other 
looks  backward  to  the  Incarnation''  (Westcott). 

Of  the  truth  {ix  rrjf;  aXi/Se/iK).  Lit.,  out  of:  sprung  from : 
whose  life  and  words  issue  from  the  truth.  See  on  xiv.  6, 
and  compare  viii.  47. 

38.  Truth.  Not  with  the  article  as  in  the  previous  verse, 
the  truth.    Jesus  meant  the  ahsohUe  truth :  Pilate,  truth  in  any 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


276  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  KBW  TESTAMENT. 

particular  case.  ^'  Pilate's  exclamation  is  neither  the  expres- 
sion of  an  ardent  thirst  for  truth,  nor  that  of  the  despair  of  a 
soul  which  has  long  songht  it  in  vain ;  it  is  the  profession  of  a 
frivolous  scepticism,  such  as  is  frequently  met  with  in  the  man 
of  the  world,  and  especially  in  the  statesman  "  (Godet). 

Fault  (alrtav).  Properly,  oan96  of  aoousaiion.  Bev.,  crime* 
See  on  Matt  xxvii.  37,  and  compare  on  Matt.  xix.  10. 

39,  40.  Compare  Matt  xxvii.  16-26 ;  Mark  vi.  16. 

89,  Ye  have  a  custom.  The  word  avpijSeuh  otistom^  origin- 
ally means  irUimacyy  habitual  intercourse^  and  thence  naturally 
passes  into  the  meaning  of  habit  or  custom.  Only  John  puts 
the  statement  of  this  custom  into  the  mouth  of  Pilate.  Mat- 
thew and  Mark  relate  it  as  a  fact. 

At  the  Passover  (&T^^<i<T%a).  More  specific  than  Mat- 
thew and  Mark,  where  the  expression  is  general,  xarh  iofm^v, 
at/east-time. 

40.  Cried  (iKpavyaa-ap).  Peculiarly  of  a  Umdy  importunate 
cry ;  a  shout.  Plato  uses  it  of  the  howling  of  a  dog :  "  The 
yelping  hound,  howling  {xpavyiU^ovaa)  at  her  lord  "  ("  Repub- 
lic,'' 607).  Others,  of  the  cries  of  spectators  in  the  theatres  and 
of  the  croak  of  a  raven.    See  on  Matt.  xv.  22. 

Again.  Assuming  John's  recoUection  of  a  previous  ^^ crying 
out,"  which  he  has  not  recorded. 

Robber  (Xjycmy?).  See  on  Matt  xxvi.  65 ;  Mark  xi.  17 ; 
Luke  x.  30.  Matthew  calls  him  a  "  notable  prisoner  "  (xxvii.  16). 
Mark  states  that  be  had  made  insurrection,  and  had  committed 
murder  (xv.  7),  speaking  of  the  insurrection  as  a  well-known 
event.  Luke  says,  "  for  some  insurrection  {criaiv  rivii)  that 
had  arisen  in  the  city,  and  for  murder "  (xxiii.  19).  Writing 
for  Oentiles,  Luke  would  not  refer  to  the  event  as  something 
familiar.  Bandits  of  this  kind  were  numerous  in  the  neighbor- 
hood of  Jerusalem  under  the  Boman  dominion.    Their  leaders 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  277 

were  well  known.  Josephns  describes  them  by  tlie  same  word 
which  Matthew  uses,  hrl(Trjfioi,  notable.  Their  depredations 
were  often  committed  under  patriotic  pretences,  so  diat  Barab- 
bas  might  have  had  influential  friends  among  the  people. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 
1-3.  Compare  Matt,  xxvii  26-30 ;  Mark  xv.  16-19. 

1.  Scourged  {ifuurrlrioixTev).  Matthew  and  Mark  use  the 
Greek  form  of  the  Latin  word  flageUarej  ^paryeXKoto,  which 
occurs  only  in  those  two  instances  in  the  New  Testament. 
John  uses  the  more  common  Greek  word,  though  he  has  <l>p€^ 
yeTJdov  {JlagMum)^  scourge^  at  ii.  15.  Matthew  and  Mark, 
however,  both  use  fuumr/oio  elsewhere  (Matt.  x.  17 ;  xx.  29 ; 
Mark  x.  34).  Its  kindred  noun,  fuiari^,  occurs  several  times  in 
the  metaphorical  sense  of  a  plague.  See  on  Mark  iii.  10,  and 
compare  Mark  v.  29,  34 ;  Luke  vii.  21.  The  verb  is  used  meta- 
phorically only  once,  Heb.  xii.  6.  Scourging  was  the  legal  pre- 
liminary to  crucifixion,  but,  in  this  case,  was  inflicted  illegally 
before  the  sentence  of  crucifixion  was  pronounced,  with  a  view 
of  averting  the  extreme  punishment,  and  of  satisfying  the  Jews. 
(Luke  xxiii.  22).  The  punishment  was  horrible,  the  victim  be- 
ing bound  to  a  low  pillar  or  stake,  and  beaten,  either  with  rods, 
or,  in  the  case  of  slaves  and  provincials,  with  scourges,  called 
soorpionSy  leather  thongs  tipped  with  leaden  balls  or  sharp 
spikes.  The  severity  of  the  infliction  in  Jesus'  case  is  evident 
from  His  inability  to  bear  His  cross. 

2.  Crown  (ori^ovoy).  So  Matthew  and  Mark.  Luke  does 
not  mention  tlie  crown  of  thorns.    See  on  1  Pet.  y.  4. 

Of  thorns  {i^  iuccof^&v).  So  Matthew.  Mark  has  cuedifStPov, 
the  adjective,  made  qftAome^  which  John  also  uses  in  xix.  6. 
All  attempts  to  defiine  the  botanical  character  of  the  thorns 
used  for  Christ's  crown  are  guesses.  The  word  for  thorns  used 
here  is  the  only  one  that  occurs  in  the  New  Testament;  the 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


27SE  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

axoXoy^  {thorn  in  the  flesh)  of  2  Cor.  xiL  7,  being  properly  af( 
impalmg'Stake. 

Both  tlie  crowning  with  thorns  and  the  flagellation  are  favor- 
ite sabjects  in  Christian  art.  Some  of  the  earliest  representa- 
tions of  the  latter  depict  the  figure  of  the  Lord  as  f ullj  draped, 
and  standing  unbound  at  the  column,  thus  illustrating  the  vol- 
untariness of  His  sacrifice.  In  a  MS.  of  the  fourteenth  century, 
in  the  British  Museum,  He  stands,  wholly  clothed,  holding  a 
book  in  one  hand,  and  blessing  with  the  other.  The  more  de- 
vout feeling  which  predominated  in  such  representations  was 
gradually  overpowered  by  the  sense  of  physical  suffering.  The 
earlier  paintings  represented  the  back  turned  toward  the  spec- 
tator, and  the  face,  turned  in  a  forced  attitude,  exhibited  in 
profile.  Later,  the  face  and  figure  are  turned  full  to  the  front, 
and  the  strokes  fall  upon  the  chest  Hence  Jerome,  in  his  com- 
mentary on  Matthew,  says  that  the  capacious  chest  of  God  {/) 
was  torn  with  strokes.  The  standing  position  is  the  accepted 
one,  but  instances  occur  in  which  the  Saviour  is  on  the  ground 
attached  to  the  column  by  one  hand.  Such  is  the  revolting  pict- 
ure  by  L.  Caracci  in  the  Bologna  gallery,  in  which  the  soldier 
clatclies  Jesus  by  the  hair  as  he  plies  the  bundle  of  twigs.  In 
a  Psalter  of  the  fifteenth  century  the  Saviour  stands  in  front 
of  the  column,  covering  His  face  with  His  hands. 

According  to  the  later  type,  the  moment  chosen  is  when  the 
execution  of  the  sentence  is  just  beginning.  One  roan  is  bind- 
ing the  hands  to  the  pillar,  another  is  binding  together  a  bundle 
of  loose  switches.  The  German  representations  are  coarser  than 
the  Italian,  but  with  more  incident.  They  lack  the  spiritual 
feeling  which  appears  in  the  best  Italian  specimens. 

A  field  for  a  higher  feeling  and  for  more  subtile  treatment  is 
opened  in  the  moments  succeeding  the  scourging.  One  of  the 
very  finest  examples  of  this  is  the  picture  of  Velasquez,  "Christ 
at  the  Column,*'  in  the  National  Gallery  of  London.  The  real 
grandeur  and  pathos  of  the  conception  assert  themselves  above 
certain  prosaic  and  realistic  details.  The  Saviour  sits  upon  the 
ground,  His  arms  extended,  and  leaning  backward  to  the  full 
stretch  of  the  cord  which  binds  His  crossed  hands.  The  face 
is  turned  over  the  left  shoulder  full  upon  the  spectator.    Bods, 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  279 

ropes,  and  broken  twigs  lie  apon  the  gronnd,  and  slender  streama 
of  blood  appear  upon  the  body.  A  guardian  angel  behind  the 
%ui*e  of  tlie  Lord,  stands  bending  slightly  over  a  child  kneel- 
ing with  clasped  hands,  and  points  to  the  6uffei*er,  fi*om  whose 
head  a  ray  of  light  passes  to  the  child's  heart  The  angel  is  a 
Spanish  nai*sery-maid  with  wings,  and  the  face  of  the  child  i& 
of  the  lower  Spanish  type,  and  is  in  striking  contrast  with  the 
exquisite  countenance  of  Murillo's  Christ-cbild,  which  hangg 
next  to  this  pictui'e,  and  which  is  of  the  sweetest  type  of  An- 
dahisian  beauty.  The  Saviour's  face  is  of  a  thoroughly  manly, 
indeed,  of  a  robust  type,  expressing  intense  sufFering,  but  with- 
out contortion.  The  large,  dark  eyes  are  ineffably  sad.  The 
strong  light  on  the  right  arm  merges  into  the  deep  shadow  of 
the  bound  hands,  and  the  same  shadow  falls  with  startling  effect 
across  the  full  light  on  the  left  arm,  marked  at  the  wrist  by  a 
slight  bloody  line. 

In  the  portrayal  of  the  crowning  with  thorns,  in  a  few  in- 
stances, the  moment  is  chosen  after  the  crown  has  been  placed, 
the  action  being  in  the  mock-worship ;  but  the  prevailing  con- 
ception is  that  of  the  act  of  crowning,  which  consists  in  pressing 
the  crown  upon  the  brow  by  means  of  two  long  staves.  A 
magnificent,  specimen  is  Luini's  fresco  in  the  Ambrosian  Library 
at  Milan.  Christ  sits  upon  a  tribune,  clad  in  a  scarlet  robe.  His 
face  wearing  an  expression  of  infinite  sweetness  and  dignity^ 
while  a  soldier  on  either  side  crowds  down  the  crown  with  a 
staff.  The  Italian  artists  represent  tl^  crown  as  consisting  of 
pliable  twigs  with  small  thorns;  but  the  northern  artists  "have 
conceived,"  to  quote  Mrs.  Jameson,  "an  awful  structure  of  the 
most  unbending,  knotted  boughs,  with  tremendous  spikes  half 
a  foot  long,  which  no  human  hands  could  have  forced  into  such 
a  form."  In  a  few  later  instances  the  staves  are  omitted,  and 
the  crown  is  placed  on  the  head  by  the  mailed  hand  of  a 
soldier. 

Put  on  {irepUfiaXov).    Lit.,  threw  (iboiU.    Rev.,  arrayed* 

Purple  (Trop<t>vpoup).  An  adjective.  Found  only  here,  ver.  5, 
and  Apoc.  xviii  16.    Mark  uses  the  noun  vop^vpa,  jmrple^ 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


^80  WORD  8TUDIB8  IN  THB  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

which  also  occurs  in  Apoc  xriL  4 ;  xviiL  12.  See  on  Lake 
xvL  19.    Matthew  has  tcoiacliniv,  doarlet. 

Robe  {iftdriov).  Better,  as  Bev.,  garment^  since  robe  gives 
the  impression  of  a  trailing  garment  See  on  Matt  v.  40.  Mat- 
thew has  ;^Xa/ui8a»  a  short  military  dodk  (xxviii.  28).  Luke  de- 
scribes the  garment  as  XofArn-piitf,  gorgeavSy  bright  or  hrilUant 
(xxiiL  11). 

8.  And  said.  Add  tcaX  fify)ffnno  wp^  avr6v,  and  kept  comifig 
unto  Simj  before  and  said  or  kept  saying.  The  imperfect  de- 
notes the  successive  acts  of  homage  of  the  soldiers  as  they  came 
up  one  after  the  other. 

,  They  smote  Him  with  their  hands  (ihtBowavr^  ^irlafiar 
ra).  Lit,  kept  giving  Sim  blows  with  their  hands.  See  on 
xviiL22. 

5.  Came  Jesus  forth.    From  the  PrsBtorinm. 

Wearing  {(f>op&v).  Not  ^ptav^  bearing^  bnt  the  frequentative 
form  of  that  verb,  denoting  an  hdbitiud  or  oontinuons  bearing : 
hence,  toearingy  as  though  it  were  His  natural  dress. 

6.  They  cried  out.    See  on  xviiL  40. 

Crucify.    The  best  texts  omit  JBim. 

Take  ye  Him  {Xdfiere  ainov  vfiek).  According  to  the  Greek 
order,  ^^  take  Him  y^."  Bev.,  take  Him  yourselves.  See  on 
xviii  31. 

^  7.  We  have  a  law.  Wsy  emphatic  Whatever  your  decision 
may  be,  toe  have  a  law,  etc. 

By  our  law.  The  best  texts  omit  our:  Bead  by  that  lawy 
asBev. 

8.  The  more  afraid.  "  These  words  of  the  Jews  produced 
an  effect  on  Pilate  for  which  they  were  not  prepared.    The 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  281 

Baying  gives  strength  to  a  dreadful  presentiment  which  was 
giuduallj  forming  within  him.  All  that  he  had  heard  related 
of  the  miracles  of  Jesus,  the  mysterious  character  of  His  per- 
son, of  His  words  and  of  His  conduct,  the  strange  message 
which  he  had  just  received  from  his  wife — ^all  is  suddenly  ex- 
plained by  the  term  *'  Son  of  God.'*  Was  .this  extraordinary 
man  truly  a  divine  being  who  had  appeared  on  the  earth  ?  The 
truth  naturally  presents  itself  to  his  mind  in  the  form  of  pagan 
superstitions  and  mythological  legends''  (GK>det). 

11.  He  that  delivered.    Caiaphas. 

12.  From  thencefdrth  (^/eroi^ro];).  Incorrect.  Bev.,  rightly, 
tipon  this. 

Sought  (i^ijrei).    Imperfect  tense.    Made  repeated  attempts. 

Caesar's  friend.  A  title  conferred,  since  the  time  of  Au- 
gustus, upon  provincial  governors.  Probably,  however,  not 
used  by  the  Jews  in  this  technical  sense,  but  merely  as  a  way 
of  saying  "  Thou  art  not  true  to  the  emperor." 

Caesar  (r^S  KcUaapi).  Lit,  the  Caesar.  The  term,  which  was 
at  first  a  proper  name,  the  surname  of  Julius  Caesar,  adopted  by 
Augustus  and  his  successors,  became  an  appellative,  appropriated 
by  all  the  emperors  as  a  title.  Thus  the  emperor  at  this  time 
was  THhervus  Ccesar.  A  distinction  was,  however,  introduced 
between  this  title  and  that  of  Augustus,  which  was  first  given 
to  Octavianus  the  first  emperor.  The  title  "Augustus"  was 
always  reserved  for  tlie  monarch,  while  "Caesar"  was  more 
freely  communicated  to  his  relations ;  and  from  the  reign  of 
Hadrian  at  least  (a.d.  117-138)  was  appropriated  to  the  second 
person  in  the  state,  who  was  considered  as  the  presumptive 
heir  of  the  empire. 

13.  That  saying  (toDtov  rbv  Xiyop).  The  best  texts  read 
T&v  Xo7a>y  rotfra>i/,  these  words.  He  was  afraid  of  an  accusation 
at  Bome  before  Tiberius,  an  accusation  which  could  be  justified 
by  his  misrule. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Judgment-seat  (fiiifiaras:).  See  on  Acts  vii.  5.  The  best 
texts  omit  the  article,  which  inaj  indicate  that  the  tribunal  was 
an  improvised  one. 

The  Pavement  {AiMcrpwrov).  From  XiSo9>  stonCj  and 
aTpcyr6^,  strewn  or  spread. 

Gabbathi.  From  the  Hebrew  gab^  ^  back,"  and  meaning, 
therefoj'e,  a  raised  place.  Thus  the  Aramaic  term  is  not  a  trans- 
lation of  the  Greek  term,  which  indicates  that  the  place,  wher- 
ever it  was,  was  distinguished  by  a  mosaic  or  tesselated  pave- 
ment. Suetonius  relates  that  Julius  Csdsar  used  to  carry  about 
with  him  on  his  expeditions  a  portable  tesselated  pavement  for 
his  tribunal.  It  is  not  likely,  however,  that  there  is  any  allus- 
ion to  such  a  practice  here.  Westcott  explains  6abbath&  as  the 
ridge  oftiie  house. 

14.  Sixth  hour.    See  on  i.  39. 

15.  They  (o/).  The  best  texts  read  iiKwo^  those  (people). 
The  pronoun  of  remote  reference  isolates  and  sharply  distin- 
guishes them  from  Jesus.     See  on  xiii.  27. 

Away  with  him  (2/ooy).    Lit.,  take  a/way. 

We  have  no  king  but  Caesar.  These  words,  nttered  by 
the  chief  priests,  are  very  signiiicant.  These  chief  representa- 
tives of  the  theocratic  government  of  Israel  thus  formally  and 
expressly  renounce  it,  and  declare  their  allegiance  to  a  temporal 
and  pagan  power.  This  utterance  is  ^^  the  formal  abdication  of 
the  Messianic  hope." 

16-17.  Compare  Matt  xxvii.  31-84;  Mark  xv.  20-23;  Luke 
xxiii.  26-33. 

16.  Delivered.  Luke  says,  delivered  to  tJieirvnU  {xiaii.  25). 
Pilate  pronounced  no  sentence,  but  disclaimed  all  responsibility 
for  the  act,  and  delivered  Christ  up  to  them  (aurofe),  they  hav- 
ing invoked  the  responsibility  upon  themselves.  See  Matt 
xxvii.  24,  25. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  283 

And  led  Him  away.    The  best  texts  omit 

17.  Bearing  {fiaard^v).    See  on  xiL  6  ;  x.  31. 

His  cross  {rbv  trravphv  aSnov).  The  best  texts  read  avr^  or 
iavT^,  "  bearing  the  cross  for  Simsdf.^^  John  does  not  men- 
tion the  impressment  of  Simon  of  Cyrene  for  this  service. 
Compai*e  Matt  xxvii.  32 ;  Mark  xv.  21 ;  Luke  xxiiL  26. 

Skull.    See  on  Matt,  xxvii.  33. 

18-24.  Compare  Matt  xxvii.  35-38;  Mark  xv.  24-28; 
Luke  xxiiL  33,  34,  38. 

18.  In  the  midst.  All  the  Sjnoptists  describe  the  character 
of  the  two  who  were  crucified  with  Jesus.  Matthew  and  Mark, 
robbers;  Luke,  malefactors  {tcatcovpyov^).  All  three  use  the 
phrase,  07ie  on  the  rightj  the  other  on  the  lefty  and  so,  substan- 
tially, John :  on  either  side  one.  John  sajs  nothing  about  the 
chai*acter  of  these  two,  but  simply  describes  them  as  iAJOo  others. 

19.  Title  i^tlrlsjov).  Only  here  and  ver.  20,  in  the  New 
Testament  John  uses  the  technical  Roman  term  titultiSj  a 
placard  or  notice.  Used  for  a  bill  or  notice  of  sale  affixed  to  a 
house.  Thus  Ovid,  of  a  heartless  creditor :  "  She  sent  our 
household  goods  under  the  placard  {sub-titulum) ; "  i.e.,  put  the 
house  and  furniture  up  for  sale  (^^  Remedia  Amoris,"  302). 
Meaning  also  the  title  of  a  book;  an  epitaph.  Matthew  has 
alriav,  accusation;  Mark,  hnr/pa^  t^  alrlw:  superscription  of 
the  accusation;  Luke,  hrvfpa^  superscription.  John  alone 
mentions  the  fact  that  Pilate  wrote  the  inscription. 

Jesus  of  Nazareth  the  King  of  the  Jews.  The  wording 
of  the  title  is  differently  given  by  each  Evangelist 

Matthew :  This  is  Jesus  the  King  of  the  Jews. 

Mark:  The  King  of  the  Jews. 

Luke :  This  is  the  King  of  the  Jews. 

John  :  Jesus  the  Nazarene  the  King  of  the  Jews. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


284  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

The  essential  element  of  the  superscription,  King  of  the  J&wSj 
is  common  to  all.  It  expressed,  on  its  face,  the  main  intent  of 
Pilate,  which  was  to  cast  contempt  on  the  Jews.  "  In  the 
sense  of  the  man  Pilate,  it  meant :  Jesos,  the  King  of  the  Jew- 
ish fanatics,  cracified  in  the  midst  of  Jews,  who  should  all  be 
thus  executed.  In  the  sense  of  the  Jews :  Jesus,  the  sedition- 
ary,  the  King  of  the  rebels.  In  the  sense  of  the  political 
judge :  Jesus,  for  whose  accusation  the  Jews,  with  their  am- 
biguous accusation,  may  answer.  In  the  sense  of  the  divine 
irony  which  ruled  over  the  expression :  Jesus,  the  Messiah,  by 
the  crucifixion  become  in  very  truth  the  King  of  the  people  of 
God''(Lange). 

20.  Hebrew,  Greek,  Latin.  Some  editors  vary  the  order. 
Bev.,  Zatifiy  Oreek.  Such  inscriptions  in  different  languages 
were  not  uncommon.  Julius  Capitolinus,  a  biographer  (aj). 
820),  in  his  life  of  the  third  Gordian,  says  that  the  soldiera 
erected  his  tomb  on  the  Persian  borders,  and  added  an  epitaph 
(tituhm)  in  Latin,  Persian,  Hebrew,  and  Egyptian  characters, 
in  order  that  it  might  be  read  by  alL  Hebrew  was  the  national 
dialect,  Latin  the  official^  and  Greek  the  common  dialect.  As 
tlie  national  Hebrew,  King  of  the  Jews  was  translated  into 
Latin  and  Greek,  so  the  inscription  was  prophetic  that  Christ 
should  pass  into  civil  administration  and  common  speech  :  that 
the  Hebrew  Messiah  should  become  equally  the  deliverer  of 
Greek  and  Soman :  that  as  Ohrist  was  the  real  centre  of  the 
rdigious  civilization  of  Judaism,  so  He  should  become  the 
real  centre  of  the  world's  intellectual  movement  as  represented 
by  Greece,  and  of  its  legal  and  material  civilization  as  repre- 
sented by  Home.  The  three  civilizations  which  had  prepared 
the  way  for  Ohrist  thus  concentrated  at  His  cross.  The  cross 
is  the  real  centre  of  the  world's  history. 

21.  The  chief  prieats  of  the  Jews.  A  unique  expression, 
possibly  by  way  of  contrast  with  the  King  of  the  Jeios. 

23.  Four  parts.  All  the  Synoptists  relate  the  parting  of 
the  garments.     The  four  pieces  to  be  divided  would  be,  the 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHSr.  285 

head-gear,  the  sandals,  the  girdle,  and  the  taUith  or  square  enter 
garment  with  fringes.  Delitzsch  thns  describes  the  dress  of 
our  Lord :  ^'  On  His  head  He  wore  a  white  sudary  fastened 
under  the  chin  and  hanging  down  from  the  shoulders  behind. 
Over  the  tunic  which  covered  the  body  to  the  hands  and  feet, 
a  blue  taUith  with  the  blue  and  white  fringes  on  the  four  ends, 
so  thrown  over  and  gathered  together  that  the  gray,  red-striped 
undergarment  was  scarcely  noticeable,  except  when  the  sandal- 
shod  feet  came  into  view  "  ("  A  Day  in  Capernaum  '^. 

Coat  (x^T&va).    Or  ttmio.    See  on  Matt  v.  40. 

Without  seam  {appa^,  or  apa^).  Only  here  in  the 
New  Testament  From  a,  not^  and  ^irrm,  to  sew  together. 
Like  the  tunic  of  the  High-Priest.  Only  John  records  this 
detail. 

Woven  (t^vT^).    Only  here  in  the  New  Testament 

24.  Vesture  (IfMrurfAov).  Clothing,  collectively.  Eev., 
garment8y  for  ifAdruis  is  better  than  raimenty  which  is  collective, 
while  the  word  is  used  of  the  separate  jneoes  of  clothing. 

25.  There  stood.    Lnperfect  tense,  toere  standing.' 

Mary  Magdalene.  Strictly,  the  {^)  Magdalene.  She  is  in- 
troduced abruptly,  as  well  known. 

26.  Woman.    See  on  iL  4. 

1 

Behold.  Canon  Westcott  remarks  upon  the  four  exclama- 
tions in  this  chapter — Behold  the  man  !  Behold  your  King  I 
Behold  thy  son  !  Behdd  ihy  mother  /  sl&a  remarkable  picture 
of  what  Christ  is,  and  what  He  reveals  men  to  be. 

27.  His  own  home  (tA  ISui).    See  on  i.  11. 

28-30.  Compare  Matt  xxvii.  46-50 ;  Mark  xv.  33-37 ;  Luke 
zxiii.  11  16, 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

28.  Were  accomplished  {reriKeimu).  Rev.,  with  stricter 
rendering  of  the  perfect  tense,  or^  Jitiished,  finished  corre- 
sponds better  with  it  is  finishedy  ver.  30.  This  senteiiee  may 
be  taken  with  the  preceding  one,  or  with  that  which  follows. 

29.  Vinegar.    See  on  Matt  xxviL  48. 

Hyssop.  Matthew  and  Mark  have  tcaXifup,  a  reed.  Luke 
says  merely  that  they  offered  Him  vinegar.  The  vinegar  miiV' 
gled  with  gaU  (Matt  xxvii.  34),  or  the  wine  mingled  with 
myrrh  (Mark  xv.  23)  was  offered  to  Jesns  hefore  his  cmciiixion 
as  a  stnpefying  draught  The  hyssop  gives  a  hint  of  the 
height  of  the  cross,  as  the  greatest  length  of  the  hyssop  reed 
was  not  more  than  three  or  four  feet.  The  vinegar  in  this 
case  was  offered  in  order  to  revive  Christ.  John  does  not  men- 
tion the  stupefying  draught 

30.  Gave  up  the  ghost  {ircLpkZteice  r6  wveufui).  Rev.,  hie 
spirit.  Matt,  a/fnjKev,  dismissed.  Mark,  i^envevaev,  breeched 
forth  (his  life).  So  Luke,  who  adds,  "  Father,  into  thy  hands 
/  commend  {wapaTlSe/uu,  see  on  Luke  ix,  16)  my  spirit" 

31-42.  Compare  Matt  xxviL  57-61 ;  Mark  xv.  42-47 ;  Luke 
xxiii.  60-60. 

31.  The  Jews — Sabbath.  The  Jews,  who  had  so  recently 
asserted  their  sole  allegiance  to  Csesar,  are  now  scrupulous  about 
observing  the  letter  of  the  law. 

32.  Brake  the  legs.  A  detail  recorded  only  by  John.  Tliis 
crurifragiums  leg-hredlcvng^  consisted  in  striking  the  legs  with 
a  heavy  mallet  in  order  to  expedite  death.  It  was  sometimes 
inflicted  as  a  punishment  upon  slaves.  .  Some  horrible  illustra- 
tions are  furnished  by  Suetonius,  in  his  lives  of  Augustus  and 
Tiberius. 

34.  With  a  spear  (XoTXl^).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament 
Properly,  ihe  head  of  a  spear.  So  Herodotus,  of  the  Arabians : 
^'They  also  had  spears  (atx/Ji^si)  tipped  with  an  antelope's  horn 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  287 

sharpened  like  a  spear-point  (Xot^^^)^'  i^^-y  ^^)*  ^^  ^^>  ^ 
here,  for  the  spear  itself. 

Pierced  {hv^ep).  Only  here  in  the  Kew  Testament.  The 
question  has  been  raised  whether  the  Evangelist  means  to  de- 
scribe a  gash  or  sl prick.  Another  verb  is  rendered  pierced  in 
ver.  37,  the  quotation  from  Zech.  xii.  10,  i^e/ehntfaa^v,  which 
occurs  also  at  Apoc.  i  7,  with  reference  to  Christ's  crucifixion, 
and  is  used  in  classical  Greek  of  putting  otU  the  eyes^  or  stabbingy 
and  in  the  Septuagint  of  Saul's  request  to  his  armor-bearer: 
"  Draw  thj  sword  and  thrust  me  through  therewith  ^  (1  Chron. 
X.  4).  The  verb  used  here,  however,  vwram,  is  also  used  to 
describe  sevei'e  and  deadly  wounds,  as  in  Homer: 

^*  As  he  sprang 
Into  his  car,  Idomeneus,  expert 
To  wield  the  ponderous  javelin,  thmst  (w6f)  its  blade 
Through  his  right  shoulder.     From  the  oar  he  fell. 
And  the  dark  night  of  death  oame  over  him.** 

"Iliad,'' ▼.,  45-47, 

It  has  been  suggested  that  the  body  was  merely  pricked  with 
the  spear  to  ascertain  if  it  were  yet  alive.  There  seems,  on  the 
whole,  no  reason  for  departing  from  the  ordinary  understanding 
of  the  narrative,  that  the  soldier  inflicted  a  degi>  thrust  on  the 
side  of  Jesus  (compare  xx.  25, 27);  nor  is  it  quite  apparent  why, 
as  Mr.  Field  urges,  a  distinction  should  be  kept  up  between  the 
two  verbs  in  vv.  34  and  37.* 

Blood  and  water.  It  has  been  argued  very  plausibly  that 
this  was  a  natural  phenomenon,  the  result  of  a  rupture  of  the 


*Mr.  Field  ('<OtiumKorTioen8e*')<'l<Linis  that  rv^vM,  is  the  milder  word, 
and  cites  a  onrious  illustration  from  Plutarch  (*'  Life  of  Cleomenes'*).  Cleo- 
^menes  and  his  party  escape  from  prison,  and  endeavor  to  raise  the  town  and  to 
get  possession  of  the  citadel.  Failing  in  this,  they  resolve  npon  suicide.  It  is 
arranged  that  one  of  the  nnmher  is  not  to  kill  himself  nntil  he  shall  be  assnred 
that  all  the  rest  are  dead.  When  all  are  stretched  on  the  ground,  the  survivor 
goes  round  and  trie$  each  teith  hi$daffger{T^  ^ifM^mpetwrSfupos),  When  he 
comes  to  Cleomenes,  he  pricki  (i^{tef)  him  on  the  ankle  {rapk  rh  oi^vp^r),  and 
sees  him  contract  his  face. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

heart  which,  it  is  assnmed,  was  the  immediate  cause  of  death, 
and  which  was  followed  by  an  effusion  of  blood  into  ihej>eru 
ca?*dium.  This  blood,  separated  into  its  thicker  and  more  liquid 
parts,  flowed  forth  when  the  pericardium  was  pierced  by  the 
spear.*  I  think,  however,  with  Meyer,  that  John  evidently  in- 
tends to  describe  the  incident  as  something  entirely  unexpected 
and  marvellous,  and  that  this  explanation  better  suits  the  solemn 
asseveration  of  ver.  35.  That  the  fact  had  a  symbolic  meaning 
to  the  Evangelist  is  evident  from  1  John  v.  6. 

35.  He  that  8aw  it  bare  record  (6  impaK&^  ^fjMprvpfiKcv). 
Kev.,  rendering  the  perfect  tense  in  both  verbs,  he  that  haih 
seen  hath  home  tvUness.  This  can  refer  only  to  the  writer  of 
this  GospeL    Compare  1  John  L  1. 

True  (aKff^ivff).  Genumej  according  to  the  true  ideal  of 
what  testimony  should  be.    See  on  1.  9. 

And  he  {xa/cetvo^).  This  pronoun  is  urged  by  some  as  a 
reason  for  regarding  the  witness  as  some  other  than  John,  be- 
cause it  is  the  pronoun  of  remote  reference.  But  ix.  87  shows 
clearly  that  a  speaker  can  use  this  pronoun  of  himself ;  and  it 
is,  further,  employed  in  this  Grospel  to  indicate  a  person  ^'  as 
possessing  the  quality  which  is  the  point  in  question  in  an  emi- 
nent or  even  exclusive  degree''  (Godet).     See  i.  18 ;  v.  39. 

True  (oXi^).  Lit,  true  things.  As  distinguished  from 
false.  Thus,  by  the  use  of  the  two  words  for  true^  there  are 
brought  out,  as  Westcott  remarks,  ^^  the  two  conditions  which 
testimony  ought  to  satisfy ;  the  first,  that  he  who  gives  it  should 
be  competent  to  speak  with  authority ;  and  the  second,  that  the 
account  of  his  experience  should  be  exact." 

38.  A  disciple  of  Jeeus.  Matthew  calls  him  a  rich  man; 
Hark,  an  honorable  counsellor j  i.e.,  a  member  of  the  Sanhedrim; 
and  Luke,  a  counsellor^  good  and  just. 

*  See  Wmiam  Stroud,  «  Physical  Theory  of  the  Death  of  ChriBt** 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHK. 

Besought  {i^pdnffce).  Better,  as  Rev.,  asked.  See  on  xi.  22 ; 
xvi.  23.  Mark  adds  that  he  went  in  boldly ^  which  is  suggestive 
in  view  of  John's  statement  of  his  eeoret  discipleship,  a  fact 
which  is  passed  over  by  the  Sjnoptists. 

Gave  him  leave.  According  to  Soman  law.  XJlpian,  a 
Boman  jurist  of  the  third  century,  sajs :  ''  The  bodies  of  those 
who  are  capitally  punished  cannot  be  denied  to  their  relatives. 
At  this  day,  however,  the  bodies  of  those  who  are  executed  are 
buried  only  in  case  permission  is  asked  and  granted ;  and  some- 
times permission  is  not  given,  especially  in  the  cases  of  those 
who  are  punished  for  high  treason.  The  bodies  of  the  executed 
are  to  be  given  for  burial  to  any  one  who  asks  for  them."  Avaric- 
ious governors  sometimes  sold  this  privilege.  Cicero,  in  one  of 
his  orations  against  Yerres,  has  a  terribly  graphic  passage  de- 
scribing such  extortions.  After  dwelling  upon  the  tortures  in- 
flicted upon  the  condemned,  he  says :  "  Yet  death  is  the  end. 
It  shall  not  be.  Oan  cruelty  go  further?  A  way  shall  be  found. 
For  the  bodies  of  the  beheaded  shall  be  thrown  to  the  beasts. 
If  this  is  grievous  to  parents,  they  may  buy  the  liberty  of 
burial"  (v.,  45).    Compare  Matt.  xiv.  12 ;  Acts  viii.  2. 

89.  Came  Nicodemus — came  by  night.  The  contrast  is 
marked  between  his  first  and  his  second  coming. 

Mixture  (jjUyfia).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament  Some 
authorities  read  iKvyfia,  a  roll. 

Pounds.  Boman  pounds,  of  nearly  twelve  ounces.  The 
large  quantity  may  be  explained  by  the  intention  of  covering 
the  entire  body  with  the  preparation,  and  by  the  fact  that  a 
portion  was  designed  for  the  couch  of  the  body  in  the  grave. 
Compare  the  account  of  the  burial  of  Asa,  2  Chron.  xvL  14. 
^^Extraordinary  reverence  in  its  sorrowful  excitement  does  not 
easily  satisfy  itself ''  (Meyer). 

40.  Linen  cloths  (oSovtoisi).    Used  only  by  John,  if  Luke 
xxiv.  12  is  rejected,  as  by  some  editors.    The  Synoptists  all 
Vol.  n.— 19 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


290  «WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

have  aufSmv,  Unen  cloth.  See  on  Mark  xiv.  61.  Matthew  and 
Luke  have  hnvkifyv,  rolled  or  torapped^  and  Mark  ivethriaGf^ 
wov/ndj  instead  of  John's  l&tiatw,  howkd. 

With  the  spices.  Spread  over  the  sheet  or  bandages  in 
which  the  body  was  wrapped. 

The  manner  of  the  Jews.  As  contrasted  with  that  of  the 
Egyptians,  for  instance,  which  is  thus  described  by  Herodotus: 
"  They  take  first  a  crooked  piece  of  iron,  and  witi  it  draw  out 
the  brains  through  the  nostrils,  thus  getting  rid  of  a  portion, 
while  the  skull  is  cleared  of  the  rest  by  rinsing  with  drugs ; 
next  they  make  a  cut  along  the  flank  with  a  sharp  Ethiopian 
stone,  and  take  out  the  whole  contents  of  the  abdomen,  which 
they  then  cleanse,  washing  it  thoroughly  with  palm-wine,  and 
again,  frequently  with  an  infusion  of  pounded  aromatics. 
After  this  they  fill  the  cavity  with  the  purest  bruised  myrrh, 
with  cassia,  and  every  other  sort  of  spicery  except  frankincense, 
and  sew  up  the  opening.  Then  the  body  is  placed  in  natrum 
(snbcarbonate  of  soda)  for  seventy  days,  and  covered  entirely 
over.  After  the  expiration  of  that  space  of  time,  which  must 
not  be  exceeded,  the  body  is  washed,  and  wrapped  round,  from 
head  to  foot,  with  bandages  of  fine  linen  cloUi,  smeared  over 
with  gum ''  (ii.,  86).  Or,  possibly,  a  contrast  may  be  implied 
with  the  Boman  custom  of  burning  the  bodies  of  the  dead. 
Tacitus  says  of  the  Jews :  ^^  The  bodies  of  the  deceased  they 
choose  rather  to  bury  than  bum,  following  in  this  the  Egyptian 
custom ;  with  whom  also  they  agree  in  their  attention  to  the 
dead ''("History,"  v.,  6). 

To  bury  {hn-atJHd^e^v).  Properly,  to  prepare  for  burial. 
See  on  xii.  7.  Compare  Septuagint,  Gen.  1.  2,  where  the  same 
word  is  used  for  embalmmff  the  body  of  Joseph. 

41.  A  garden.    Mentioned  by  John  only. 

New  (lecuviv).  See  on  Matt  xxvi.  29.  John  omits  the  de- 
tail of  the  tomb  being  hewn  in  the  rock,  which  is  common  to 
all  the  Synoptists. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


G06PBL  OF  JOHN.  291 


CHAPTER  XX. 

1,  2.  Compare  Matt  zxviii.  1 ;  Mark  xvi.  2-4 ;  Luke  zxiv. 
1-3. 

1.  First  day  of  the  week  (rg  fuf  r&v  aafifidrwv).  The 
Hebrew  idiom,  day  one  of  the  week.  See  on  Luke  iv.  31 ; 
Acts  xz.  7. 

Dark.  Matthew  says,  cu  U  hegcm  to  domn;  Mark,  when  the 
sun  woB  risen;  Luke,  very  ea/rly  in  the  mominffj  or  <xt  deep 
danjon;  see  on  Lake  zxiv.  1. 

Taken  away  {i^pfdvop  ck).  lAfted  ottt  of.  All  the  Synop- 
tists  have  rolled. 

2.  Loved  {i(f>i\£().  The  word  for  personal  affection.  In 
ziii.  23  ;  xxL  7,  20,  tffiira  is  nsed.    See  on  v.  20. 

We  know  not.  The  plural  indicates  that  Mary  was  not 
alone,  thoogh  she  alone  is  mentioned  as  coming  to  the  tomb. 
She  may  have  preceded  the  others. 

3.  Came  to  {fipxovTo  ek).  "Wrong.  The  tense  is  the  im- 
perfect ;  they  were  coming,    Bev.,  they  went  toward. 

4.  They  ran  (irpexpp).  Still  the  imperfect,  they  were  run- 
ning. How  mnch  the  A.  Y.  loses  by  its  persistent  ignoring  of 
the  force  of  this  tense. 

Did  outrun  {irpoiSp<ifie  r&x^v).  Lit,  ram»  on  in  front  more 
guiokly.  Dante,  addressing  the  spirit  of  John  in  Paradise 
says: 

'*  O  holy  father,  spirit  who  beholdest 
What  thoQ  believedst  so  that  thou  o'eroamest^ 
Toward  the  sepolohre,  more  joathfal  feet" 

«  Paradise/'  zzIt.  124-lde. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

6.  Stooping  down  {irapcucv^tv;).  See  on  Jas.  L  25,  and 
compare  1  Pet.  i.  12.  See  also  Song  of  Solomon,  ii.  9  (Sept.). 
^'He  lookeih  forth  {wapcucvirrap)  at  the  windows." 

Seeth  ifiXAirei).  Simple  sifflU.  Compare  the  inierU  gaze  of 
Peter  {SempeZjy  ver.  6,  which  discovered  the  napkin,  not  seen 
by  John. 

7.  Napkin  (aovBdpMv).     See  on  Luke  xix.  20. 

Wrapped  together  {hrrervkuffUvov).  Eev.,  much  better, 
rolled  up.  The  orderly  arrangement  of  everything  in  the  tomb 
marks  the  absence  of  haste  and  precipitation  in  the  awakening 
and  rising  from  the  dead. 

8.  Believed.  This  word  is  explained  by  what  follows.  He 
believed  (at  length)  that  Jesus  was  risen  ;  for  up  to  this  time 
{oifBewoa)  he,  with  his  fellow-disciple  (plural,  ^Seurati)  knew  noty 
etc.  The  singular  number,  he  heUevedj  as  Meyer  profoundly 
remarks,  "  only  satisfies  the  never-to-be-forgotten  j?^M>naZ  ex- 
perience of  that  moment,  though  it  does  not  exclude  the  con- 
temporaneous faith  of  Peter  also."  On  hnevo  {^Se&awi)y  see  on 
ii.  24. 

9.  The  scripture  (r^  ypeuf^).  The  passage  of  scripture. 
See  on  v.  47.    The  reference  may  be  to  Ps.  xvL  10. 

Must.  On  this  necessity  attaching  in  the  divine  counsel  to 
the  sufferings,  death,  and  resurrection  of  Jesus,  see  Matt  xxvi. 
64 ;  Mark  viiL  31 ;  Luke  ix.  22 ;  xvii.  25 ;  xxiL  37 ;  xxiv.  7, 
26,  44 ;  John  iii.  14 ;  xiL  34 ;  Acts  L  16. 

11-18.  Compare  Mark  xvL  12, 13 ;  Luke  xxiv.  13-35. 

11.  Stood.  Imperfect,  t£^a««^(mt^i^,  or  ctm^jm^tftomftn^, 
after  the  two  apostles  had  gone  away. 

12.  Seeth  {StmpeZ).    Bev.,  hehcldeih.    See  on  ver.  5. 

Angels.  Angels  are  rarely  mentioned  in  John's  narrative. 
See  L  51 ;  xiL  29 ;  XX.  12. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  293 

13.  She  8aith.  She  is  so  absorbed  in  her  grief  and  love 
that  she  is  not  appalled  by  the  sapematoral  manifestation 
which,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  would  have  terrified  her, 
but  enters  into  conversation  as  if  addressed  by  a  human  being. 

14.  Turned  herself  back.  Oanon  Westcott,  with  that 
beautiful  subtilty  of  perception  which  so  eminently  character- 
izes him,  remarks:  ^^We  can  imagine  also  that  she  became 
conscious  of  another  Presence,  as  we  often  feel  the  approach 
of  a  visitor  without  distinctly  seeing  or  hearing  him.  It  may 
be,  too,  that  the  angels,  looking  toward  the  Lord,  showed  some 
sign  of  His  coming."  ^ 

Saw  (See/tpei).  Present  tense.  Bev.,  ieholdeth.  She  looks 
at  Him  steadfastly  and  inquiringly  as  at  a  stranger.  The  ob- 
servance of  these  distinctions  between  verbs  of  seemg^  is  very 
important  to  the  perception  of  the  more  delicate  shading  of  the 
narrative. 

Knew  not  (^Se^).  Indicating  a  knowledge  based  on  spiritual 
fellowship  and  affinity,  an  inward,  conscious,  sure  conviction  of 
His  identity. 

16.  Saith  unto  Him,  Rabboni.  Insert,  as  Rev.,  after  Em^ 
in  Hebrew. 

17.  Touch  me  not  (ji^  fiov  Smrov).  The  verb,  primarily, 
means  to  fasten  to.  Hence  it  implies  here,  not  a  mere  mom- 
entary touch,  but  a  (Hmgvng  to.  Mary  thought  that  the  old 
relations  between  her  Lord  and  herself  were  to  be  renewed ; 
that  the  old  intercourse,  by  means  of  sight,  sound,  and  touch, 
would  go  on  as  before.  Christ  says,  ^'  the  time  for  this  kind 
of  intercourse  is  over.  Henceforth  your  communion  with  me 
will  be  by  faith  through  the  Spirit  This  communion  will  be- 
come possible  through  my  ascending  to  the  Father." 

My  Father.  The  best  texts  omit  the  pronoun  and  read  the 
Father.    See  on  xii.  26.     This  expression,  emphasizing  the  re- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


294  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NBW  TESTAHEI7T. 

lation  of  God  to  hnmanity  rather  than  to  Christ  himeelf ,  is  ex- 
plained by  what  follows — "  my  Father  and  yomr  Father.^' 

My  brethren.  The  word  hretkreny  applied  to  the  disciples, 
occurs  before  (vii.  3,  5, 10),  but  not  the  phrase  my  hrethren^ 
which  follows  from  my  Father  and  yov/r  Father.  Compare 
Matt  2cxviii.  10. 

I  ascend  {pwi^aivfo).  The  present  tense  is  used,  not  in  the 
sense  of  the  near  future,  but  implying  that  He  had  already  en- 
tered upon  that  new  stage  of  being  which  the  actual  ascension 
formally  inaugurated.  The  resurrection  was  really  the  begin- 
ning of  the  ascension. 

18.  Came  and  told  (Ipxercu  ii^iKKovca).  lit,  cometh  tell- 
ing. 

19-23.  Compare  Mark  xvL  14-18 ;  Luke  xxiv.  36-49. 

19.  Assembled.    Omit 

21.  Hath  sent  {an-iaroKxev).  Kote  the  distinction  between 
this  verb  and  that  applied  to  the  sending  of  the  disciples  {irifin 
ira>).    See  on  i  6. 

22.  Breathed  on  them  {hej>varia€v).  Only  here  in  the 
New  Testament.  The  act  was  symbolic,  after  the  manner  of 
the  Hebrew  prophets.    Compare  Ezek.  xxzvii.  5. 

The  Holy  Ghost.  The  article  is  wanting.  The  gift  be- 
stowed was  not  that  of  the  personal  Holy  Spirit,  but  rather  an 
eckmeet  of  that  gift ;  an  effimon  of  the  Spirit. 

23.  Remit  {cufnire).  Only  here  in  this  Gtospel  in  connection 
with  sms.  Often  in  the  Synoptists  (Matt  vi.  12 ;  ix.  6 ;  Mark 
ii.  6 ;  Luke  v.  23,  etc.). 

25.  Print  {rxhrov).    See  on  1  Pet  v.  3. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  295 

Put— thrust  (fi£Koo).  The  same  verb  in  both  cases.  Hence 
better,  as  'Rev.yjpiU  for  thrust. 

I  will  not  (pi  fjki)).    Double  negative:  in  nowise. 

26.  Then  came  Jesus.  There  is  no  connecting  particle, 
then,  and  the  verb  is  in  the  present  tense.  The  abrapt  Jesus 
comeih  is  more  graphic 

27.  Be  not  (/a^  yivov).  Lit.,  became  not.  Thomas  was  in  a 
fair  way  to  become  unbelieving,  through  his  doubt  of  the  resur- 
rection. 

Faithless — believing  {Airurro^ — irurrS^).  There  is  a  corre- 
spondence of  the  words  here,  to  which,  perhaps,  the  nearest  ap- 
proach in  English  is  vmbdievvngy  believing. 

29.  Thomas.    Omit 

31.  Are  written  (yiypamrai).  Ha/oe  been  or  9tani  written. 
The  perfect  tense.  John's  intent  was  to  write  a  goypel  rather 
than  a  biography. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

1.  Shewed  {i<f>av4pwr€p).  This  rendering  might  easily  con- 
vey merely  the  sense  of  appearing;  but  its  meaning  is  much 
deeper.  Occurring  frequently  in  the  New  Testament,  it  is 
used  most  frequently  of  God  and  Christ,  or  of  men  in  their  re- 
lation to  these.  Thus,  of  Ohrist  in  person  while  upon  earth 
(Mark  xvi.  12, 14;  John  i.  81 ;  ii.  11 ;  1  Pet  i.  20;  1  John  i. 
2).  Of  the  works  of  Christ  (John  iL  11 ;  ix.  8  ;  1  John  iii.  6). 
Of  Christ  in  redemption  (1  John  iii.  6).  Of  Christ  in  His  sec- 
cond  coming  (1  John  ii.  28).  Of  Christ  in  glory  (1  John  iii.  2 ; 
Col.  iii.  4).  It  is  used  of  God.  Of  His  revelation  to  men  of  the 
knowledge  of  Himself  (Rom.  i  19).  Of  His  manifestation  in 
Christ  (1  Tim.  iii.  16).  Of  His  righteousness  (Rom.  iii.  21). 
Of  His  love  (1  John  iv.  9).    It  is  used  of  men.    As  epistles 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


296  WORD  STUDIBS  IN  THE  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

manifesting  the  character  and  spirit  of  Christ  (2  Cor.  iiL  3 ;  v. 
11).  In  the  judgment  (2  Cor.  v.  10).  In  all  these  cases  the 
appearing  is  not  merely  an  appeal  to  sense,  bat  is  addressed  to 
spiritual  perception,  and  contemplates  a  moral  and  spiritual 
eflFect.  It  is  the  setting  forth  of  the  law  or  will  or  character  of 
God;  of  the  person  or  work  of  Christ;  of  the  character  or 
deeds  of  men,  with  a  view  to  the  disclosure  of  their  quality  and 
to  the  producing  of  a  moral  impression.     Bev.,  rruimfestecL 

Sea.    See  on  Matt.  iv.  18. 

Of  Tiberias.  Not  elsewhere  in  the  Gospels.  The  Synop- 
tists  say,  Sea  of  Galilee  or  Zake  of  Genneaaret. 

3.  A  ship  (ri  irXoiov).  Kev.,  the  hoot;  restoring  the  article, 
which  indicates  a  familiar  implement.     See  on  Luke  v.  2. 

Immediately.    Omit. 

That  night.  The  emphatic  pronoun  that  {iKebrg)  may  in- 
dicate that  their  ill  success  was  unusual. 

Caught  {hrlaaav).  So  ver.  10.  The  verb  means  to  lay  hold 
of  and  is  nowhere  else  used  in  the  New  Testament  of  taking 
fish.  Elsewhere  in  this  Gospel  always  of  the  seizure  of  Christ 
by  the  authorities  (vii.  30,  32,  44 ;  viii.  20 ;  x.  39  ;  xi.  57).  Of 
apprehending  Peter  and  Paul  (Acts  xiL  4;  2  Cor.  xi.  32).  Of 
the  taking  of  the  beast  (Apoc.  xix.  20).  Of  taking  by  the  hand 
(Acts  iii.  7). 

4.  Was  come  (yepofUvrfsi).  The  best  texts  read  the  present 
participle,  yivofihny;,  is  coming.  Kev.,  when  day  was  now  break- 
ing. The  A.  Y.  does  not  agree  so  well  with  the  fact  that  Jesus 
was  not  at  once  recognized  by  the  disciples,  owing  in  part,  per- 
haps, to  the  imperfect  light. 

On  the  shore  (€^  rov  alyuikov).  Bev.,  heach.  See  on  Matt, 
xiii.  2.  The  preposition  ek,  to^  makes  the  phrase  equivalent  to 
^^  Jesus  came  to  the  beach  and  stood  there." 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  297 

5.  Children  (iroiSia).  Or,  litUe  children.  Used  also  by  John, 
in  address,  twice  in  the  First  Epistle  (ii.  13, 18),  where,  how- 
ever, the  more  common  word  is  retevla,  litUe  children. 

Have  ye  any  meat  (m"4  t*  irpwr^^iov  Ix^^)^  The  inter- 
rogative fi/ij  Ti  indicates  that  a  negative  answer  is  expected: 
you  han)e  not,  I  mppose,  amythvng.  npocifHiffuiv  is  equivalent 
to  iy^iipiov,  what  is  added  to  hread  at  a  mealy  especially  fish* 
See  on  vL  9.  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament  "Wye.,  any 
eifppinff'thing.* 

6.  The  net  (S&nw).    See  on  Matt.  iv.  18 ;  xiiL  47. 

Were  not  able  (od/r  trxyaav).  See  on  Luke  xiv.  80;  xvi 
3 ;  Jas.  V.  16. 

To  draw  (IXdVro*).  Into  the  boat  Compare  aHpovre^,  ver. 
8,  dragging  the  net  behind  the  boat 

7.  Fisher's  coat  {iirevBirfpi).  An  tipper  garment  or  blouse. 
Only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  In  the  Septaagint,  1  Sam. 
xviii.  4,  the  robe  which  Jonathan  gave  to  David.  2  Sam.  xiii. 
18,  the  royal  virgin  garment  of  Tamar.  The  kindred  verb, 
iirepSvofuu,  occurs  twice  (2  Cor.  v.  2,  4),  meaning  ^^tobe  clothed 
vfpon,'^  with  the  house  which  is  from  heaven,  i.e.y  clothed  as  with 
an  upper  garment     See  on  that  passage. 

Naked.  Not  absolutely,  but  clothed  merely  in  his  under- 
garment or  shirt 

8.  A  little  ship  (r^  ^Xoiop^).  The  noun  is  diminutive. 
Bev.,  the  little  hoot.  It  is  hardly  probable  that  this  refers  to  a 
smaller  boat  accompanying  the  vessel.  Compare  the  alterna- 
tion of  vXoiop  and  irXoidpiov  in  vi.  17, 19,  21,  22,  24. 

Two  hundred  cubits.    A  little  over  a  hundred  yards. 


*  lx«'  '>'<f  ^^oiM  you  anyfMng,  is  the  uenil  qnestion  addresBed  by  a  bjstander 
to  those  employed  in  fishing  or  bird-catching.  EqoiTalent  to  houce  you  had  amy 
ipoHf    See  Aristophanes,  **Cloads,*'  781. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


298  WORD  STUDDSS  IS  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

With  fishes  {r&v  Ix^iHov).  Or^tAeneioftheJlshes.  So  Wye 
Eev.,  full  ofjishes. 

9.  They  were  come  to  land  {airififfo-av  ek  ripf  yrjv).  Not 
of  the  arrival  of  the  boat,  bat  of  the  going  ashore  of  the  boat- 
men.   Rev.,  therefore,  correctly,  they  got  out  vpon  the  land. 

A  fire  of  coals.    Charcoal    See  xviiL  18. 

Fish  ipr^piov).    See  on  vi  9. 

Bread  {aprov).    Or,  a  loaf.    See  on  Matt.  iv.  1 ;  vii  9. 

10.  Of  the  fish  (rSi/  oy^ltov).  As  in  ver.  9.  Empliasizing 
the  fish  ^food. 

Ye  have  caught  {hriAaare).  See  on  ver.  3.  Bengel  says: 
"By  the  Lord's  gift  they  had  caught  them:  and  yet,  He  cour- 
teously says,  that  tfiey  have  caught  them." 

11.  Went  up.    Into  the  vessel. 

To  land  {hrl  1%  7^).     Strictly,  upon  the  land. 

Great  fishes.  All  authorities  agree  as  to  the  abundance  of 
fish  in  the  Lake  of  Galilee.  M.  Lortet,  cited  by  Dr.  Thomson, 
says  that  two  castings  of  the  net  usually  filled  his  boat.  Beth- 
saida  (there  were  two  places  of  that  name  on  the  lake)  means 
House  of  the  FiaJieriea.  The  fame  of  the  lake  in  this  partic- 
ular reached  back  to  very  early  times;  so  that,  according  to 
the  Rabbinical  legend,  one  of  the  ten  fundamental  laws  laid 
down  by  Joshua  on  the  division  of  the  country  was,  that  any 
one  might  fish  with  a  hook  in  the  Lake  of  Galilee,  so  that 
they  did  not  interfere  with  the  free  passage  of  boats.  The 
Talmud  names  certain  kinds  of  fish  which  might  be  eaten  with- 
out being  cooked,  and  designates  them  as  maaU  fiehee.  So 
oy^dpta  is  rendered  in  John  vi.  9.  Possibly  the  expression 
great  JUhee  may  imply  a  contrast  with  the  wnaU  fishes  which 
swarmed  in  the  lake,  and  the  salting  and  pickling  of  which  was 
a  special  industry  among  its  fishermen. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  299 

12.  Dine  {apumiiraTe).  Bather,  breakfast.  In  Attic  Greek 
ipuTTov  signified  the  midrday  meal;  the  evening  meal  being 
blown  as  hAmnw.  The  regular  hoar  for  the  Aparrov  can- 
not be  fixed  with  precision.  The  drift  of  aathority  among 
Greek  writers  seems  to  be  in  favor  of  noon.  The  meal  described 
here,  however,  evidently  took  place  at  an  earlier  honr,  and 
woold  seem  to  have  answered  more  nearly  to  the  cucparia-fia,  or 
breakfast  of  the  Greeks,  which  was  taken  directly  upon  rising. 
Plutarch,  however,  expressly  states  that  both  names  were  ap- 
plied to  the  morning  meal,  and  says  of  Alexander,  ^^He  was 
accustomed  to  breakfast  {^piara)  at  early  dawn,  sitting,  and  to 
sup  {ihehrvei)  late  in  the  evening."  In  Matthew  xxii.  4,  it  is  an 
Apiarop  to  which  the  king's  wedding-guests  are  invited. 

Ask  {i^daai).  Eev.,  ingrmre.  Implying  careful  and  pre- 
cise inquiry.  It  occurs  only  tiiree  times  in  the  New  Testament ; 
of  Herod's  command  to  search  diligenOy  for  the  infant  Christ 
(Matt  ii.  8),  and  of  the  apostles'  inquirmg  out  the  worthy  mem* 
bers  of  a  household  (Matt.  x.  11). 

13.  Bread— fish.  Both  have  the  article — iJie  loaf,  the  fish — 
apparently  pointing  to  the  provision  which  Jesus  himself  had 
made. 

Giveth  them.  Nothing  is  said  of  His  partaking  Himself. 
Compare  Luke  xxiv.  42,  43. 

14.  The  third  time.  The  two  former  occasions  being  re- 
corded in  XX.  19,  26.  The  appearance  to  Mary  Magdalene  is 
not  counted,  because  the  Evangelist  expressly  says  to  His  dis- 


15.  Simon,  son  of  Jonas.  Compare  Christ's  first  address 
to  Peter,  i.  43.  fie  never  addresses  him  by  the  name  of  Peter j 
while  that  name  is  commonly  used,  either  alone  or  with  Simon, 
in  the  narrative  of  the  Grospels,  and  in  the  Greek  form  PeteTj 
not  the  Aramaic  Cephas^  which,  on  the  other  hand,  is  always 
employed  by  PauL    For  Jonas  read  as  Bev.,  Joh/n. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


800  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

Lovest  {arfonra/i).  Jesus  nses  the  more  dignified,  really  the 
nobler,  bat,  as  it  seems  to  Peter,  in  the  ardor  of  his  afEection, 
the  colder  word  for  love.    See  on  v.  20. 

More  than  these.  More  than  these  disciples  love  me. 
Compare  xiiL  37;  Matt  xxvi.  33.  The  question  conveys  a 
gentle  rebuke  for  his  former  extravagant  professions. 

I  love  (^Xo)).  Peter  substitutes  the  warmer,  more  affection- 
ate word,  and  omits  all  comparison  with  his  fellow-disciples. 

Feed  {fiwrice).    See  on  1  Pet.  v.  2. 

Lambs  (af>i//a).  liimixmtiyB \  litUelanAa.  Godet  remarks: 
"  There  is  a  remarkable  resemblance  between  the  present  sit- 
uation and  that  of  the  two  scenes  in  the  previous  life  of  Peter 
with  which  it  is  related.  He  had  been  called  to  the  ministry 
by  Jesus  after  a  miraculous  draught  of  fishes;  it  is  after  a 
similar  draught  fhat  the  ministry  is  restored  to  him.  He  had 
lost  his  o£Sce  by  a  denial  beside  a  fire  of  coal ;  it  is  beside  a 
fire  of  coal  that  he  recovers  if 

16.  Lovest  {aryaiTf^).  Again  the  colder  word,  but  more  than 
these  is  omitted. 

I  love  {<l>t\&).  Peter  reiterates  his  former  word  expressive 
of  personal  affection. 

Feed  {iroC^uuve).  A  different  word :  tendy  as  Bev.  See  on 
1  Pet  V.  2. 

Sheep  {irpipard).  Some  of  the  best  texts  read  irpo/Sdrta, 
diminutive,  little  sheep. 

17.  Lovest  (ffnTiek).  Here  Jesus  adopts  Peter's  word.  Canon 
Westcott,  however,  ascribes  Peter's  use  of  ^iXio»  to  his  hu- 
mility, and  his  hesitation  in  claiming  that  higher  love  which 
is  implied  in  a/yairf^.  This  seems  to  me  to  be  less  natural,  and 
to  be  refining  too  much. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  801 

18.  Young  {vedrrepo^).  Lit^  yotmger.  Peter  was  apparently 
of  middle  age.    See  Matt  viiL  14. 

Thou  girdedat  thyself  {i^covwe;  aeavrbv).  The  word  may 
have  been  Bo^ested  by  Peter's  girding  his  fisher's  coat  round 
him.  The  imperfect  tense  signifies  something  habitual.  Thou 
vHut  foont  to  dothe  thyself  and  to  come  and  go  at  will. 

Walkedat  {irepieirdre^si).  Lit.,  vnUkedst  abovt.  Peculiarly 
appropriate  to  describe  the  free  activity  of  vigorous  manhood. 

Stretch  forth  thy  hands.  The  allusion  to  the  extending  of 
the  hands  on  the  cross,  which  some  interpreters  have  found 
here,  is  fanciful.  It  is  merely  an  expression  for  the  helpless- 
ness of  age. 

Whither  thou  wouldest  not.  According  to  tradition  Peter 
suffered  martyrdom  at  Eome,  and  was  crucified  with  his  head 
downward. 

19.  By  what  death  (mUp).  Properly,  ly  what  fMvnner  of 
death.    SoBev. 

20.  Leaned  (ov^eo-cy).  'Rev.y  leaned  hack.  Seeonxiii25. 
The  reference  is  to  the  special  act  of  John,  leaning  back  to 
whisper  to  Jesus,  and  not  to  his  position  at  table. 

21.  And  what  shall  this  man  do  (o&ro9  Sir/;)?  lit, 
and  ihie  one  what  t 

22.  Till  I  come  {h^  Ipxpfuu).  BAtiierjwhUelameoming. 
Compare  ix.  4 ;  xii.  35,  86 ;  1  Tim.  iv.  13. 

What  is  that  to  thee  (r/  irp^  ae ;)  t  Lit.,  what  a$  ooncerm 
iheet 

23.  Should  not  die  {oiic  i^oSpiia-icei).    Lit,  dieth  not. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


802  WORD  STUDIEB  IN  THB  ISHSW  TR8TAMENT. 

24^  25.  Many  interpreten  think  that  these  two  yerees  were 
written  by  some  other  hand  than  John's.  Some  ascribe  w.  24 
and  25  to  two  different  writers.  The  entire  chapter,  though 
bearing  unmistakable  marks  of  John's  authorship  in  its  style 
and  language,  was  probably  composed  subsequently  to  the  com- 
pletion of  the  Gospel 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN. 


CHAPTER  I. 


The  tenn  KoAoKucfi^  caihoUo  or  general^  applied  to  the  Epis- 
tles of  James,  Peter,  John,  and  Jade,  was  used  from  the  sec- 
ond centmy  onward  in  the  sense  of  something  addressed  to  the 
faithful  generally y  as  distinguished  from  Christians  of  particu- 
lar nations  or  cities,  as  the  Galatians  or  Ephesians.  Hence, 
Clement  of  Alexandria  speaks  of  the  letter  of  Acts  xv.  as  ^^  the 
cathoUc  letter  of  all  the  Apostles,  given  to  the  faithful."  The 
term  was  also  used  of  letters  specially  addressed,  but  with  a 
general  application,  which  made  no  claim  to  canonical  authority. 

In  the  later  Western  Church  the  group  of  letters  known  as 
catholic  was  called  canonical  through  a  mistaken  interpi*etation 
of  the  words  of  Junilius,*  who  referred  to  the  letters  of  James, 
2  Peter,  Jude,  2  and  3  John  as  added  by  many  to  the  collection 
of  canonical  books.  This  was  understood  to  mean  that  the 
term  canonical  applied  to  those  books  peculiarly. 

1.  Compare  John  i.  1,  9, 14.  The  construction  of  the  first 
three  verses  is  somewhat  involved.  It  will  be  simplified  by 
throwing  it  into  three  parts,  represented  respectively  by  vv.  1, 
2,  3.  The  first  part.  That  which  was  from  the  beginning — 
Wordofldfey  forms  a  suspended  clause,  the  verb  being  omitted 
for  the  time,  and  the  course  of  the  sentence  being  broken  by 
ver.  2,  which  forms  a  parenthesis :  and  the  I/ife — manifested 

*  About  A.D.  550,  generally  belieyed  to  haye  been  a  Bishop.  The  aathor 
of  a  work  **  Do  Partibns  DWinad  Legis,"  a  kind  of  introduction  to  the  lacred 
writings. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


304  WORD  8TUDIEB  IN  THB  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

unto  U8.  Ver.  3,  in  order  to  resnme  the  broken  sentence  of 
ver.  1,  repeats  in  a  condensed  form  two  of  the  clauses  in  that 
verse,  thai  which  we  have  seen  and  heard,  and  furnishes  the 
governing  verb,  ^De  dedare.  Thns  the  simple  sentence,  divested 
of  parenthesis  and  resamptive  words  would  be,  We  dedare  unto 
you  that  which  woe  from  the  heginnvng,  that  which  we  have 
eeen  wUh  our  eyee,  that  which  we  beheld,  and  omr  ha/nde  handled 
concerning  the  Word  of  Life. 

That  which  (ft).  It  is  disputed  whether  John  uses  this  in  a 
personal  sense  as  equivalent  to  He  whom,  or  in  its  strictly  neut- 
er sense  as  meaning  something  reUUmg  to  the  person  and  reve- 
lation of  Christ  On  the  whole,  the  irep/,  concerning  (A.  V., 
of),  seems  to  be  against  the  personal  sense.  The  successive 
clauses,  iJuit  which  was  from  the  beginning,  etc.,  express,  not 
the  Memal  Word  Himself,  but  something  relating  to  or predi- 
cated  concerning  (irept)  Him.  The  indefinite  that  which,  is  ap- 
proximately defined  by  these  clauses ;  that  about  the  Word  of 
life  which  was  from  the  beginning,  that  which  appealed  to 
sight,  to  hearing,  to  touch.*  Strictly,  it  is  true,  the  irepl  is  ap- 
propriate only  with  toe  have  heard,  but  it  is  used  with  the  other 
clauses  in  a  wide  and  loose  sense  (compare  John  xvi.  8).  ^^  The 
subject  is  not  merely  a  message,  but  all  that  had  been  made 
clear  through  manifold  experience  concerning  it "  (Westcott). 

Was  {fjv).  Not  iyhfero,  came  into  being.  See  on  John  i.  3 ; 
vii.  34 ;  viii.  58.  It  was  already  existing  when  the  succession 
of  life  began. 

From  the  beginning  (i'rr  ipx^).  The  phrase  occurs  twice 
in  the  Gospel  (viii.  44 ;  xv.  27) ;  nine  times  in  the  First  Epis- 
tle, and  twice  in  the  Second.  It  is  used  both  absohUeh/  (iiL  8 ; 
ii.  13, 14),  and  relatively  (John  xv.  27 ;  1  John  ii.  24).  It  is 
here  contrasted  with  "in  the  beginning"  (John  i.  1).  The 
difference  is  that  by  the  words  "  in  the  beginning,"  the  writer 

*  This  ia  the  yiew  of  Alf ord  and  Westcott.  Ebrard  and  Hather  maintain 
the  personal  sense. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  EPISTLE    OF  JOHK.  805 

places  himself  at  the  initial  point  of  creation,  and,  looking  back 
into  eternity,  describes  that  which  was  already  in  existence 
when  creation  began.  "  The  "Word  was  in  the  beginning."  In 
the  words  ^^from  the  beginning,''  the  writer  looks  back  to  the 
initial  point  of  time,  and  describes  what  has  been  in  existence 
from  that  point  onward.  Thus,  "in  the  beginning*'  charac- 
terizes the  absolute  divine  Word  as  He  was  before  the  founda- 
tion of  the  world  and  at  the  foundation  of  tlie  world.  "  FiH>m 
the  beginning  "  characterizes  His  development  in  time.  Note 
the  absence  of  the  article  both  here  and  in  John  i.  1.  Not  tiis 
beginning  as  a  definite,  concrete  fact,  but  as  apprehended  by 
man ;  that  to  which  we  look  as  "  beginning." 

Have  heard— have  seen  {hKffKoafieu — impdtcafuv).  Both  in 
the  perfect  tense,  denoting  the  still  abiding  effects  of  the  hear- 
ing and  seeing. 

With  our  eyes.  Emphasizing  the  direct,  personal  experi- 
ence in  a  marvellous  matter. 

Have  looked  upon  (H^ao'dfieSa).  Bev.,  correctly,  iehdd. 
The  tense  is  the  aorist ;  marking  not  the  abiding  effect  of  the 
vision  upon  the  beholder,  but  the  historical  manifestation  to 
special  witnesses.  On  the  difference  between  this  verb  and 
iotpdtcafiev,  toe  have  seen^  see  on  John  L  14, 18. 

Have  handled  {h^\6j^<Tav).  The  aorist  tense.  Bev., 
TumdUd.  For  the  peculiar  force  of  the  verb  see  on  Luke  xxiv. 
39.  The  reference  is,  probably,  to  hamdle  me  (Luke  xxiv.  39), 
and  to  John  xx.  27.  This  is  the  more  noticeable  from  the  fact 
that  John  does  not  mention  the  fact  of  the  Eesurrection  in  the 
Epistles,  and  does  not  use  the  word  in  his  own  naiTative  of  the 
Resurrection.  The  phrase  therefore  falls  in  with  the  numerous 
instances  in  which  John  assumes  the  knowledge  of  certain  his- 
toric facts  on  the  part  of  his  readers. 

Of  the  Word  (irepX  rov  Xoyov).  Better,  as  Bev.,  concerning 
the  Word. 

Vol.  n.— «0 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


806  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Of  life  (t^  ^my;).  Lit.,  the  life.  Bee  on  John  i.  4.  The 
phrase  o  Xiyo^  t^  ^wj^^  the  Word  of  the  Life^  occnrs  nowhere 
else  in  the  New  Testament.  The  nearest  approach  to  it  is 
Philip,  ii.  16 ;  but  there  neither  word  has  the  article.  In  the 
phrase  words  of  eternal  life  (John  vi.  68),  and  in  Acts  v.  20, 
all  the  words  of  this  Ufe^  fujfuiTa  is  used.  The  question  is 
whether  Xiyo^  is  used  here  of  the  Personal  Word,  as  John  i.  1, 
or  of  the  divine  message  or  revelation.  In  the  f  oar  passages  of 
tlie  Gospel  where  \6yo^  is  used  in  a  personal  sense  (John  i.  1, 
14),  it  is  used  absolvUelyy  the  Word  (compare  Apoc.  xix.  13). 
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  often  used  relatively  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament ;  as  word  of  the  kingdom  (Matt.  xiii.  19) ;  word  of 
this  salvation  (Acts  xiii.  26) ;  word  of  His  grace  (Acts  xx.  32) ; 
word  of  truth  (Jas.  L  18).  By  John  ^jd^  of  life,  is  often  used 
in  order  to  characterize  the  word  which  accompanies  it  Thus, 
crown  of  life  (Apoc.  ii.  10) ;  water  of  Ufe  (Apoc.  xxi.  6) ;  hook 
of  life  (Apoc.  iii.  6) ;  bread  of  l^e  (John  vi.  36) ;  t.^.,  the 
water  which  is  living  and  communicates  life  ;  the  book  which 
contains  the  revelation  of  life ;  the  bread  which  imparts  life. 
In  the  same  sense,  John  vL  68 ;  Acts  v.  20.  Compare  Titus 
i2,  3. 

Though  the  phrase,  ike  Word  of  the  Life^  does  not  elsewhere 
occur  in  a  personal  sense,  I  incline  to  regard  its  primary  refer- 
ence as  personal,*  from  the  obvious  connection  of  the  thought 
with  John  i.  1,  4.  "  In  the  beginning  was  the  Word, — in  ffim 
was  life.*'  "As  John  does  not  purpose  to  say  that  he  an- 
nounces Christ  as  an  abstract  single  idea,  but  that  he  declares 
his  own  concrete  historical  experiences  concerning  Christ,— so 
now  he  continues,  not  the  Logos  {Word),  but  concerning  tlie 
Word,  we  make  annunciation  to  you  "  (Ebrard).  At  the  same 
time,  I  agree  with  Canon  Westcott  that  it  is  most  probable 
that  the  two  interpretations  are  not  to  be  sharply  separated. 
<<  The  revelation  proclaims  that  which  it  includes ;  it  has,  an- 
nounces, gives  life.  In  Christ  life  as  the  street,  and  life  as 
the  character  of  the  revelation,  were  absolutely  united." 

*  So  Alfordi  Hatlier,  Ebrard. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIBST  EPISTLB  OF  JOHN.  807 

2.  This  verse  is  parenthetical.  (Compare,  for  similar  inter- 
niptions  of  the  constmction,  yer.  3 ;  John  i.  14 ;  iii.  16,  31 ; 
xix.85 

And  {ical).    See  on  John  L  10 ;  viii.  20. 

The  Life  {^  5^^).  The  Word  Hunself  who  is  the  life.* 
Compare  John  xiv.  6 ;  v.  26 ;  1  John  v.  11, 12.  Idfe  expresses 
the  nature  of  the  Ward  (John  i.  4).  The  phrase,  the  Life^  besides 
being  equivalent  to  the  Wordy  also  indicates,  like  the  IhUh  and 
the  Idghty  an  aspect  of  His  being. 

Was  manifested  (^^aye/x&Si;).  See  on  John  xxi.  1.  Corre- 
sponding with  the  Word  was  made  flesh  (John  L  14).  The  two 
phrases,  however,  present  different  aspects  of  the  same  truth. 
The  Word  became  flesh,  contemplates  simply  the  historic  fact 
of  incarnation.  The  life  was  ma^nifestedy  sets  forth  the  unfold- 
ing of  that  fact  in  the  various  operations  of  life.  The  one  de- 
notes the  objective  process  of  the  incarnation  as  such,  the  other 
the  result  of  that  process  as  related  to  human  capacity  of  re- 
ceiving and  understanding  it.  ^^  The  reality  of  the  incarnation 
would  be  undeclared  if  it  were  said,  *  The  Word  was  mani- 
fested;' the  manifoldness  of  the  operations  of  life  would  be 
circumscribed  if  it  were  said,  *  The  Life  became  flesh.'  The 
manifestation  of  the  Life  was  a  consequence  of  the  incarnation 
of  the  Word,  but  it  is  not  coextensive  with  it ''  (Westcott). 

Have  seen — bear  witness— shew.  Three  ideas  in  the 
apostolic  message :  eooperienoey  testimony y  Ofmotmoement. 

Bear  witness.    See  on  John  i.  7. 

Shew  {am-afffiXXofuv).  Better,  as  Bev.,  declare.  See  on 
John  xvi  25.    So  here.    The  message  comes  from  (oiro)  Gkxi. 

*  mie  rtndent  should  oonanlt,  on  John's  use  of  the  term  Lffe,  Oanon  Wesi- 
oott*8  **  ftddition«l  note  **  on  1  John  t.  20.  **  Ck>mmentar7  on  the  Epistles  of 
John/'p.d01 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


308  WORD  STUDIES  Df  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

That  eternal  life  (t^  ^a^fiv  riiv  auopiov).  A  particularly 
f aoltj  translation,  since  it  utterly  fails  to  express  the  develop- 
merU  of  the  idea  of  life,  which  is  distinctly  contemplated  by 
the  original.  Bender,  as  Bev.,  the  life^  the  eternal  life;  or  the 
lifey  even  the  eternal  life.  For  a  similar  repetition  of  the  art- 
icle compare  1  John  ii.  8 ;  iv.  9 ;  2  John  11.  This  particular 
phrase  occurs  only  here  and  ii.  25.  John  uses  ^mtf  aSdvto^ 
eternal  life^  and  fi  auovia^  ^(of^  the  eternal  life^  the  former  ex- 
pressing the  general  conception  of  life  eternal,  and  the  latter 
eternal  life  ae  the  special  gift  of  Christ.  Auovio^  eternal^  de- 
scribes the  life  in  its  quality  of  not  being  measured  by  timcj  a 
larger  idea  than  that  of  mere  duration. 

Which  (^t9).  Not  the  simple  relative  f|  whichy  but  delSn- 
ing  the  qualMy  of  the  life,  and  having  at  the  same  time  a  kind 
of  confirmatory  and  explanatory  force  of  the  word  eternal:  see- 
ing  that  it  was  a  life  divine  in  its  nature — "with  the  Father" — 
and  therefore  independent  of  temporal  conditions. 

With  the  Father  {trph^  rhv  waripa).  See  on  toith  God  (John 
L 1).  In  living,  active  relation  and  communion  with  the  Father. 
"  The  preposition  of  motion  with  the  verb  of  repose  involves 
eternity  of  relation  with  activity  and  life "  (Coleridge).  The 
life  eternally  tended  to  the  Father,  even  as  it  emanated  from 
Uim.  It  came  forth  from  Him  and  was  manifested  to  men, 
but  to  the  end  that  it  might  take  men  into  itself  and  unite  them 
with  the  Father.  The  manifestation  of  life  to  men  was  a  reve- 
lation of  life,  as,  first  of  all  and  beyond  all,  centring  in  God. 
Hence,  though  life,  abstractly,  returns  to  God,  as  it  proceeds 
from  Gk>d,  it  returns  bearing  the  redeemed  world  in  its  bosom. 
The  complete  divine  ideal  of  life  includes  iinpartation,  but  im- 
partation  with  a  view  to  the  practical  development  of  all  that 
receives  it  with  reference  to  God  as  its  vivifying,  impelling, 
regulating,  and  inspiring  centre. 

The  Father.  See  on  John  xiL  26.  The  title  ^'the  Father" 
occurs  rarely  in  the  Synoptists,  and  always  with  reference  to 
the  Son.    In  Paul  only  thrice  (Bom.  vL  4 ;  1  Cor.  viiL  6 ;  Eph. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  EPI8TLB  OF  JOHN.  309. 

ii.  18).  Nowhere  in  Peter,  James,  Jude,  or  the  Apocalypse. 
Frequent  in  John's  Gospel  and  Epistles^  and  in  the  latter,  nni- 
formly.* 

3.  The  regular  course  of  the  sentence,  broken  by  ver.  2,  is 
now  resumed,  by  the  repetition  of  tkcxt  widch  we  have  seen  and 
heard.  Only  the  order  is  reversed :  eeen  wnd  heard  instead  of 
hea/rd  and  eeen  (ver.  1),  and  the  two  elements  of  experience, 
sight  and  hearing,  are  thrown  together  without  the  repeated 
relative  that  which.  In  ver.  1,  the  climax  advanced  from  the 
lower  evidence  of  hearing  to  that  of  sight  Here,  in  recapitu- 
lating, the  process  is  reversed,  and  the  higher  class  of  evidence 
is  put  first 

Unto  you  also  {koL  vfup).  The  dleo  is  variously  explained. 
According  to  some,  referring  to  a  special  circle  of  Christian 
readers  beyond  those  addressed  at  the  conclusion  of  the  GospeL 
Others,  again,  as  referring  to  those  who  had  not  seen  and  heard 
as  contrasted  with  eye-witnesses.  Thus  Augustine  on  John 
XX.  26  sqq.  ^^  He  (Thomas)  touched  the  man,  and  confessed 
the  God.  And  the  Lord,  consoling  us  who,  now  that  He  is 
seated  in  heaven,  cannot  handle  Him  with  the  hand,  but  touch 
Him  by  faith,  says,  ^  Because  thou  hast  seen  thou  hast  believed ; 
blessed  are  they  who  have  not  seen  and  believe.'  It  is  we 
that  are  described ;  toe  that  are  pointed  out  May  there  there- 
fore come  to{)ass  in  us  that  blessedness  which  the  Lord  pre- 
dicted should  be :  the  Life  itself  has  been  manifested  in  the 
flesh,  so  that  the  thing  which  can  be  seen  with  the  heart  alone 
might  be  seen  with  the  eyes  also,  that  it  might  heal  our  hearts." 

Fellowship  {koowvCop).  This  word  introduces  us  to  one  of 
the  main  thoughts  of  the  Epistle.  The  true  life  in  man,  which 
comes  through  the  acceptance  of  Jesus  as  the  Son  of  God,  con- 
sists in  fellawehip  with  God  and  with  man.  On  the  word,  see 
on  Acts  ii.  42 ;  Luke  v.  10.  The  verb  /coivtovim,  to  came  into/el' 
laicehipj  to  he  made  a  jpartnery  to  he  partaker  of^  occurs  1  Pet 

*  Let  the  student  by  all  means  consult  Oanon  Westoott's  *'  additional  note  ^ 
on  p.  27,  of  liis  '*  Commentary  on  the  Epistles  of  John,** 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


810  WORD  STUDIES  Uf  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

iv.  18 ;  3  John  11 ;  Heb.  iL  14,  etc.  The  expression  here,  Sx^w 
Koivmvtav,  is  stronger^  since  it  expresses  the  enJat/merU  or  realiza- 
tion of  fellowship,  as  compared  with  the  mere  faot  of  fellow- 
ship.   See  on  John  xvi  22. 

Our  fellowship  {^  Koumvla  ^  ^fAeripa).  More  strictly^  the 
felloiMhip,  that  which  is  oursj  according  to  John's  character- 
istic practice  of  defining  and  emphasizing  a  noun  by  an  article 
and  possessive  pronoun.  See  on  John  x.  27.  Owr$  (possessive 
instead  of  personal  pronoun)  indicating  fellowship  as  a  disUn- 
guiahvng  mark  of  Christians  rather  than  as  merely  something 
enjoyed  by  them. 

With  the  Father  and  with  His  Son  (/mt^  toC  warpi^  /col 
litrk  Tov  viov  avrw).  Note  the  repeated  preposition  furd  withy 
distinguishing  the  two  persons,  and  co-ordinating  the  fellow- 
ship with  the  Father,  and  the  fellowship  with  the  Bon,  thus 
implying  sameness  of  essence.  The  fellowship  with  both  con- 
templates both  as  united  in  the  Godhead.  Plato  says  of  one 
who  lives  in  unrestrained  desire  and  robbery,  ^^Such  an  one  is 
the  friend  neither  of  Ood  nor  man,  for  he  is  incapable  of  com- 
mwnian  {icoawveiv  dSiWro?),  and  he  who  is  incapable  of  oorr^ 
TMmion  {/eoivfovta)  is  also  incapable  of  friendship ''  (^^  Gorgias," 
607).  So,  in  the  "Symposium  "  (188),  he  defines  divination  as 
"the  art  of  oommtinion  {/couf^pla)  between  gods  and  men." 

4.  These  things.    The  whole  Epistle. 

Write  we  unto  you  {ypd^fjteif  vpiv).  The  best  texts  read 
^fiek  toey  instead  of  vfup  to  you.  Both  the  verb  and  the  pro- 
noun are  emphatic.  The  writer  speaks  with  conscious  authority, 
and  his  message  is  to  be  not  only  announced  (am-arfyiXXofAePy 
ver.  3),  but  toritten.  We  write  is  emphasized  by  the  absence 
of  the  personal  object,  to  you. 

Your  joy  (^  %a/9^  vfi&v).  The  best  texts  read  ^/i&p,  our^ 
though  either  reading  gives  a  good  sense. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIBST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  811 

Full  {wewXafpwfLivff).  More  correcHyj fulfilled.  Freqaent  in 
John.  See  John  ilL  29 ;  yii  8 ;  xiL  38 ;  X7. 11 ;  2  John  12 ; 
Apoc.  vi.  11.  ^^  The  peace  of  reconciliation^  the  blessed  con- 
Bcioosness  of  sonship,  the  happy  growth  in  holiness^  the  bright 
prospect  of  future  completion  and  glory, — ^all  these  are  but 
simple  details  of  that  which,  in  all  its  length  and  breadth  is 
embraced  by  one  word,  Eternal  Life^  the  real  possession  of 
which  is  the  immediate  source  of  our  joy.  We  have  joy, 
Christ's  joy,  because  we  are  blessed,  because  we  have  life  itself 
in  Christ"  (Dusterdieck,  cit.  by  Alford).  And  Augustine: 
"  For  there  is  a  joy  which  is  not  given  to  the  ungodly,  but  to 
those  who  love  Thee  for  thine  own  sake,  whose  joy  Thou  thy- 
self art  And  this  is  the  happy  life,  to  rejoice  to  Thee,  of 
Thee ;  this  is  it  and  there  is  no  other ''  ("  Confessions,''  x.,  98). 
Alford  is  right  in  remarking  that  this  verse  gives  an  epistolaiy 
character  to  what  follows,  but  it  can  hardly  be  said  with  him 
that  it  ^^flUs  the  place  of  the  x^P^^  greetmjg^  lit,  refoioey  so 
common  in  the  opening  of  Epistles."  * 

5.  This  then  is  {tcdi  aini  iarXv).  Bev.,  correctly  and  liter- 
ally, a/nd  this.  According  to  the  proper  reading  the  verb 
stands  first  in  order  {iarXv  aiTrj)y  with  emphasis,  not  merely  as 
a  copula,  but  in  the  sense  ^^  there  exists  diis  as  the  message." 
For  a  similar  use  of  the  substantive  verb,  see  v.  16, 17 ;  ii.  15 ; 
John  viiL  50. 

IMessage  {hrarfyeXla).  This  word,  however,  is  invariably 
used  in  the  New  Testament  in  the  sense  oi  promise.  The  best 
texts  read  arfyeXla,  message^  which  occurs  only  at  iiL  11 ;  and 
the  correq>onding  verb,  offfihD^,  only  at  John  xx.  18. 

We  have  heard  of  Him  {oicfficSafAeif  anf  ain-ov).  A  form  of 
expression  not  found  elsewhere  in  John,  who  commonly  uses 
trap  avTov.  See  on  John  vi.  46.  The  phrase  here  points  tq 
the  tUtimate  and  not  necessarily  the  immediate  source  of  the 
message.    Not  only  John,  but  others  in  earlier  times  had  heard 

*  But  not  New  Testament  epistles.  Xaiptw  greeting^  ooonra  in  no  addreiB  of 
an  Apottolio  epistle,  except  in  that  of  Jamea.    See  on  Jas.  i.  1. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


312  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NBW  TBSTAMBNT. 

this  message.  Compare  1  Peter  i  10, 11.  ^Aird  points  to  Ihe 
souro6y  irapd  to  the  giver.  Thus,  John  v,  41,  "  I  receive  not 
honor^wm  (wapd)  men.'*  They  are  not  the  heetatoers  of  honor 
npon  me.  Ver.  44,  "  How  can  ye  believe  which  receive  honor 
from  {wapd)  one  another ;  ^  the  honor  whidi  men  have  to  give^ 
<<  and  seek  not  the  honor  that  oometh  from  {irctpd)  Ood  ; "  the 
honor  which  God  alone  bestows.  On  the  other  hand,  1  John 
iii.  22,  "  Whatsoever  we  ask  we  receive  from  {aw6)  Him,"  the 
ultimate  source  of  our  gifts.  So  Matt.  xviL  25 :  ^^  (}f  {am'6) 
whom  do  the  kings  of  the  earth  take  custom — of  {anrS)  their 
own  children  or  of  {cvrrS)  strangers  t "  What  is  the  legitimate 
and  ultimate  source  of  revenue  in  states  t 

Declare  (oiwfyiXXofAep).  Compare  the  simple  verb  irffiK- 
Xeuf  to  bring  tidings^  John  xx.  18,  and  only  there.  ^AvtvyyiK- 
Xeiv  is  to  bring  the  tidings  up  to  {ova)  or  back  to  him  who  re- 
ceives them.  *Air<vffiKKeaf  is  to  announce  tidings  as  coming 
f'om  (cM)  some  one,  see  Matt.  ii.  8 ;  John  iv.  51.  Karoff' 
yiXXei^v  is  to  proclaim  toUh  authority y  so  as  to  spread  the  tid- 
ings dofjon  among  {xard)  those  who  hear.  See  Acts  xvii.  23. 
Found  only  in  the  Acts  and  in  FauL 

God  is  Light  (6€^  ^ek  i<rrUi).  A  statement  of  the  absolute 
nature  of  God.  Kot  a  light,  nor  the  light,  with  reference  to 
created  beings,  as  the  light  of  man,  the  light  of  the  worlds  but 
simply  and  absolutely  Ood  is  Ughty  in  His  very  natmre.  Com- 
pare Ood  is  spiritj  and  see  on  John  iv.  24 :  Ood  is  love^  1  John 
iv.  8, 16.  The  expression  is  not  a  metaphor.  ^^  All  that  we 
are  accustomed  to  term  Ughi  in  the  domain  of  the  creature, 
whether  with  a  physical  or  metaphysical  meaning,  is  only  an 
effluence  of  that  one  and  only  primitive  LigJU  which  appears 
in  the  nature  of  God "  (Ebrard).  Light  is  immaterial,  dif- 
fusive, pure,  and  glorious.  It  is  the  condition  of  life.  Physic- 
ally, it  represents  glory ;  intellectually,  i/ruih;  morally,  holi-- 
ness.  As  immaterial  it  corresponds  to  God  as  spi^;  as 
diffusive,  to  God  as  love;  as  the  condition  of  life,  to  God  as 
l^e;  as  pure  and  illuminating,  to  God  as  holiness  and  truth. 
In  the  Old  Testament,  light  is  often  the  medium  of  GK>d'8  visi- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  BPISTLB  OF  JOHN.  813 

ble  revelations  to  men.  It  was  the  first  manifestation  of  God 
in  creation.  The  burning  lamp  passed  between  the  pieces  of  the 
parted  victim  in  God's  covenant  with  Abraham.  God  went 
before  Israel  in  a  pillar  of  fire,  descended  in  fire  upon  Sinai, 
and  appeared  in  the  Inminous  cloud  which  rested  on  the  mercy- 
seat  in  the  most  holy  place.  In  classical  Greek  <l>m  Ugkty  is 
used  metaphorically  for  deUghtj  ddvoerance^  victory j  and  is  ap- 
plied to  persons  as  a  term  of  admiring  affection,  as  we  say  that 
one  is  the  Ugkt  ofov/r  Ufe^  or  the  deUgkt  of  our  eyes.  So  Ulys- 
ses, on  seeing  his  son  Telemachus,  says,  ^^  Thou  hast  come, 
Telemachns,  sweet  Ugkt  {ykuKepiv  <f>dosi) "  (Homer,  "Odyssey,'' 
xvi.  23).  And  Electra,  greeting  her  returning  brother,  Orestes, 
"0  dearest  light  {^rarov  ^  **  (Sophocles,  "  Electra,"  1223). 
Occasionally,  as  by  Euripides,  of  ^  light  of  truth  ("  Iphigenia 
at  Tauris,"  1046).  No  modem  writer  has  developed  the  idea 
of  God  as  light  with  such  power  and  beauty  as  Dante.  His 
"  Paradise  "  might  truthfully  be  called  a  study  of  light.  Light 
is  the  only  visible  expression  of  Gk>d.  Radiating  from  Him,  it 
is  diffused  through  Uie  universe  as  the  principle  of  life.  This 
key-note  is  struck  at  the  very  opening  of  "  the  Paradise." 

**  The  glorj  of  Him  who  moTeth  eTerything 
Doth  penetrate  the  universe,  and  Bhine 
In  one  part  more  and  in  another  leM. 
Within  that  heaven  which  i^^oet  His  light  reoeives 
WasL" 

"  Paradiso^"  i,  1-4J. 

In  the  final,  beatific  vision,  God  Himself  is  imagined  as  a  lum- 
inous point  which  pours  its  rays  through  all  the  spheres,  upon 
which  the  spirits  gazed,  and  in  which  they  read  the  past,  the 
present,  and  the  future. 

*'  O  grsoe  abundant,  bj  which  I  presumed 
To  fix  mj  sight  upon  the  Light  Eternal, 
8o  that  the  seeing  I  consumed  therein  t 
I  saw  that  in  its  depth  far  down  is  lying 
Bound  up  with  Ioto  together  in  one  Tolume, 
What  through  the  universe  in  leayes  is  scattered; 
Substance,  and  accident,  and  their  operations, 
AU  interfused  together  in  such  wise 
That  what  I  speak  of  is  one  simple  light** 

*«  Paradiso,"  xzziii.,  SMa 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


814  WORD  BTUDQSS  IN  THB  NHW  TESTAMENT. 

*'  In  preeeiioe  of  thai  light  one  snoh  becomoB, 
Thftt  to  withdmr  therefrom  for  other  proepeot 
It  ie  impoeeible  he  e'er  oonient ; 
Beoaoae  the  good,  which  objeot  is  of  will. 
Is  gathered  all  in  thit,  and  out  of  it 
That  is  defeotlTe  whieh  is  peifeet  thwe.** 

''  Paradiso^"  zzxilL,  100-100. 

**  O  Light  eteme,  sole  in  thjself  that  dwellest, 
Bole  knoweet  thyself,  and,  known  nnto  thjself 
And  knowing,  loTist  and  smilest  on  thjself  I "  ^ 

<«  Paradiso,**  yrriii,,  ld4-12e. 

light  enkindles  love. 

**  If  in  the  heat  of  lore  I  flame  upon  thee 
Be jond  the  measure  that  on  earth  is  seen» 
So  that  the  Talor  of  thine  ejes  I  Tanqnish, 
HarTel  thoa  not  thereat ;  for  this  proceeds 
From  i>erfeot  sight,  which,  as  it  apprehends, 
To  the  good  apprehended  moTes  its  feel 
Well  I  peroeiye  how  is  alreadj  shining 
Into  thine  intellect  the  eternal  Light, 
That  odIj  seen  enkindles  alwajs  Ioto.** 


••Pa«idiso,»'T.,l-0. 


See  also  ^^  Paradiso,'^  cantos  xxx.,  xxxL 


In  Him  is  no  darkness  at^all  {/eaX  tncorCa  oisc  Jhrw  h  avr^ 
ovBefjila).  It  is  characteristic  of  John  to  express  the  same  idea 
positively  and  negatively.  See  John  i.  7,  8,  20 ;  iiL  15, 17,  20 ; 
iv.  42;  V.  24;  viii.  86;  x.  28;  1  John  i.  6,  8;  ii.  4,  27;  v.  12. 
According  to  the  Greek  order,  the  rendering  is :  *^  And  dark- 
ness there  is  not  in  Him,  no,  not  in  any  way."  For  a  similar 
addition  of  ovSek  not  one,  to  a  complete  sentence,  see  John  vL 
63 ;  xiL  19 ;  xix.  IL     On  aicoria  darknesSj  see  on  John  i.  5. 

6.  If  we  say  {iitp  ch-mfiai).  The  subjunctive  mood  puts  the 
case  as  sttippoaedj  not  as  aesvmed. 

Walk  in  the  darkness.  The  phrase  occurs  only  in  John's 
Gospel  and  First  Epistle.  Darknew  here  is  tricoTo^,  instead  of 
ctcorrla  (ver.  5).  See  on  John  i.  5.  Walk  (TrepiTrar&fiai),  is, 
literally,  toalk  about;  indicating  the  habitual  course  of  the  life, 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  EFISTLB  OF  JOHN.  315 

outward  and  inward.  The  verb,  with  this  moral  sense,  is  com- 
mon in  John  and  Paul,  and  is  found  elsewhere  only  in  Mark 
vii.  5 ;  Acts  zzi.  21. 

We  lie  and  do  not  the  truth.  Again  the  combination  of 
the  positive  and  negative  statements.  See  on  ver.  5.  The 
phrase  to  do  the  truth  occurs  only  in  John's  Gospel  and  First 
Epistle.  See  on  John  iii.  21.  All  walking  in  darkness  is  a  not 
doing  of  the  truth.  ^^  Right  action  is  true  thought  realized. 
Every  fragment  of  right  done  is  so  much  truth  made  visible" 
(Westcott). 

7.  We  walk  in  the  light  (ip  r^  ^ttrrj  vepim'ar&fiep).  The 
phrase  occurs  only  in  the  First  Epistle.  Widky  as  above.  In 
the  lighty  having  our  life  in  God,  who  is  light 

He  ie  in  the  light.  God  is  forever  and  unchangeably  in 
perfect  light.  Compare  Ps.  civ.  2  ;  1  Tim.  vi.  16.  We  walk^ 
advancing  in  the  light  and  by  means  of  the  light  to  more  light. 
^^  The  path  of  the  just  is  as  the  shining  light,  that  shineth  more 
and  more  unto  the  perfect  day  ^  (Prov.  iv.  18). 

One  with  another  {jier  iXkifkoDv).  Not,  v>e  wUh  God  and 
Ood  with  ti«,  but  with  owr  Irethren.  Fellowship  with  Gk>d  ex- 
hibits and  proves  itself  by  fellowship  with'  Christians.  See  iv. 
7,12;  iii.  11, 23. 

Of  Jesua  Christ  Hie  Son.  Omit  Christ.  The  human 
name,  Jesue^  shows  that  His  blood  is  available  for  man.  The 
dwme  name.  Hie  Son^  shows  that  it  is  e£Scacious.  I  shall  be 
rendering  a  service  to  students  of  John's  Epistles  by  giving,  in  a 
condensed  form.  Canon  Westoott's  note,  classifying  the  several 
names  of  our  Lord  and  their  uses  in  the  Epistles. 

The  name  in  John,  as  in  the  Bible  elsewhere,  has  two  distinct^ 
but  closely  connected  meanings. 

1.  The  Bevelation  of  the  Divine  Being  by  a  special  title. 

2.  The  whole  sum  of  the  manifold  revelations  gathered  up  so 
as  to  form  one  supreme  revelation. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


816  WORD  STUDQS8  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

The  latter  sense  is  illnstrated  in  3  John  7,  where  '^  the  name'' 
absolately  includes  the  essential  elements  of  the  Christian  creed, 
the  complete  revelation  of  Christ's  work  in  relation  to  God  and 
man.    Compare  John  xx.  31 ;  Acts  v.  41. 

In  ii.  12,  the  term  is  more  limited,  referring  to  Christ  as  He 
lived  on  earth  and  gave  Himself  for  ^^  the  brethren."  In  iii.  23 ; 
v.  13,  the  exact  sense  is  defined  bj  what  follows. 

AOTUAL  NAMES  USED. 

(I.)  HU  Son  Je8U8  Christ,  i.  3 ;  iii.  23 ;  v.  20.  The  divine 
antecedent  is  differently  described  in  each  case,  and  the  differ^ 
ence  colors  the  phrase.  In  i.  23,  the  Father  {compv^re  John  3). 
In  iiL  23,  Ood.  In  v.  20,  He  that  is  trtie.  Thus  the  sonship  of 
Christ  is  regarded  in  relation  to  God  as  Father,  as  God,  and  as 
satisfying  the  divine  ideal  which  man  is  able  to  form.  The 
whole  phrase.  Sis  Son  Jesus  Christj  includes  the  two  elements 
of  the  confessions  which  John  makes  prominent. 

1.  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God  (iv.  15 ;  v.  5). 

2.  Jesus  is  the  Christ  (ii.  22 ;  v.  1). 

The  constituents  of  the  compressed  phrase  are  all  used  sep- 
arately by  John. 

(1.)  Jesus,  ii.  22 ;  V.  1 ;  iv.  3  (where  the  correct  reading  omits 
Christ).  The  thought  is  that  of  the  Lord  in  His  perfect  his- 
toric humanity. 

(2.)  Christ.  2  John  9.  Pointing  to  the  preparation  made 
under  the  old  covenant 

(3).  Jesus  Christ,  ii.  1 ;  v.  6 ;  2  John  7.  Combining  the  ideas 
of  true  humanity  and  messianic  position. 

In  iv.  16,  the  reading  is  doubtful :  Jesus  or  Jesus  Christ. 

On  iv.  2,  see  note. 

(4.)  The  Son.  ii.  22, 23, 24;  iv.  14;  v.  12.  The  absolute  re- 
lation  of  Sonship  to  Fatherhood. 

{h.)  The  Son  of  God.  iii.  8 ;  v.  10, 12, 13, 20.  Compare  5w 
Son  (iv.  10 ;  v.  9),  where  the  immediate  antecedent  is  o  Seo^ 
Ood;  and  v.  18,  Se  that  was  begotten  of  God,  Combination 
of  the  ideas  of  Christ's  divine  dignity  and  divine  sonship. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  BPI8TLB  OP  JOHN.  317 

(6.)  Je^a%  EU  (God's)  Son.  i.  7.  Two  truths.  The  blood  of 
Christ  is  available  and  efficacious, 

(7).  His  (God's)  Son^  His  ordy  Son.  iv.  9.  The  uniqueness 
of  the  gift  is  the  manifestation  of  love. 

The  Son  in  various  forms  is  eminently  characteristic  of  the 
First  and  Second  Epistles,  in  which  it  occurs  more  times  than 
in  all  Paul's  Epistles. 

Kvpio^  Lordj  is  not  found  in  the  Epistles  (omit  from  2  John 
3),  but  occurs  in  the  Gospel,  and  often  in  the  Apocalypse. 

The  expression,  the  hlood  of  Jesus  His  Son,  is  chosen  with  a 
profound  insight  Though  Ignatius  uses  the  phrase  blood  of 
Godj  yet  the  word  blood  is  inappropriate  to  the  Son  conceived 
in  Sis  divine  nature.  The  word  Jesus  brings  out  His  human 
nature,  in  which  He  assumed  a  real  body  of  flesh  and  blood, 
which  blood  was  shed  for  us. 

Cleanseth  {/eaSapl^ei).  See  on  Mark  viL  19.  Not  only^or- 
gvves  but  removes.  Compare  Tit  ii.  14 ;  Heb.  ix.  13  sq. ;  22  sq. ; 
Eph.  v.  26  sq. ;  Matt.  v.  8;  1  John  iii.  3.  Compare  also  ver.  9, 
where Jbrffvve{a<f)f^)  and  clea/nse  {KaBapicji)  occur,  with  an  obvious 
difiFerence  of  meaning.  Note  the  present  tense  deanseth.  The 
cleansing  is  present  and  contmv>ous.  Alexander  (Bishop  of 
Derry)  cites  a  striking  passage  from  Victor  Hugo  ("  Le  Parri- 
cide"). The  usurper  Canute,  who  has  had  a  share  in  his 
father's  death,  expiring  after  a  virtuous  and  glorious  reign, 
walks  towards  the  light  of  heaven.  But  first  he  cuts  with  his 
sword  a  shroud  of  snow  from  the  top  of  Mt.  Savo.  As  he 
advances  towards  heaven,  a  cloud  forms,  and  drop  by  drop  his 
shroud  is  soaked  with  a  rain  of  blood. 

All  8in  i^diTTj^  ifMipria^).  The  principle  of  sin  in  all  its 
forms  and  manifestations;  not  the  separate  manifestations. 
Compare  aU  joy  ( Jas.  i.  2) ;  aU  patience  (2  Cor.  xii.  12) ;  aU 
wisdom  (Eph.  i.  8) ;  a22  diligence  (2  Pet.  L  5). 

8.  That  we  have  no  sin.  ''On  that^  may  be  taken  merely 
as  a  mark  of  quotation :  "K  we  say,  sin  toe  have  not?^  On  the 
phrase  to  home  m,  see  on  John  xvi.  22,  and  compare  ha/oefd' 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


318  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NBW  TB8TAKENT. 

htoahtpj  ver.  3.  Sin  (aiiaprrltw)  is  not  to  be  understood  of 
original  sin,  or  of  9in  before  oonvernortj  bat  generally.  ^^  It  is 
obvions  that  this  ixj^iv  aiutp/rUw  {to  have  sin),  is  infinitely 
diversified,  according  to  the  saceessive  measnre  of  the  porifica- 
tion  and  development  of  the  new  man.  Even  the  apostle 
John  does  not  exclude  himself  from  the  universal  if  toe  eay^ 
(Ebrard). 

Heathen  authors  saj  very  little  about  sin,  and  classic  pagan- 
ism had  little  or  no  conception  of  sin  in  the  Gk>spel  sense.  The 
nearest  approach  to  it  was  by  Plato,  &om  whose  works  a  toler- 
ably complete  doctrinal  statement  might  be  gathered  of  the 
origin,  nature,  and  effects  of  sin.  The  fundamental  idea  of 
ifiaprta  (sin)  among  the  Greeks  is  physical;  the  missing  of  a 
ma/rk  (see  on  Matt  i.  21 ;  vi  14) ;  from  which  it  develops  into 
a  metaphysical  meaning,  to  wander  in  the  understanding.  This 
assumes  knowledge  as  the  basis  of  goodness ;  and  sin,  there- 
fore, is,  primarily,  ignorance.  In  the  Platonic  conception  of 
sin,  intellectual  error  is  the  prominent  element  Thus :  '^  What 
then,  I  said,  is  the  result  of  all  this  ?  Is  not  this  the  result — 
that  other  things  are  indifferent,  and  that  wisdom  is  the  only 
good,  and  Ignorance  the  only  evil!"  ("Euthydemus,"281).  "The 
business  of  the  founders  of  the  state  will  be  to  compel  the  best 
minds  to  attain  that  knowledge  which  has  been  already  declared 
by  us  to  be  the  greatest  of  all — they  must  continue  to  rise  until 
they  arrive  at  the  good"  ("  Republic,"  vii.,  519).  Plato  repre- 
sents sin  as  the  dominance  of  the  lower  impulses  of  the  soul, 
which  is  opposed  to  nature  and  to  God  (see  "  Laws,"  ix.,  863. 
"  Republic,"  i.  361).  Or  again,  as  an  inward  want  of  harmony. 
"May  we  not  regard  every  living  being  as  a  puppet  of  the  gods, 
either  their  plaything  only  or  created  with  a  purpose — which 
of  the  two  we  cannot  certainly  know  ?  But  this  we  know,  that 
these  affections  in  us  are  like  cords  and  strings  which  pull  us 
different  and  opposite  ways,  and  to  opposite  actions;  and  herein 
lies  the  difference  between  virtue  and  vice  "  ("  Laws,"  i.,  644). 
He  traces  most  sins  to  the  influence  of  the  body  on  the  soul. 
"  In  this  present  life,  I  reckon  that  we  make  the  nearest  ap- 
proach to  knowledge  when  we  have  the  least  possible  commun- 
ion or  fellowship  with  the  body,  and  are  not  infected  with  the 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  319 

bodilj  nature,  but  remain  pure  until  the  hour  when  Ood  him- 
self is  pleased  to  release  us.  And  then  the  foolishness  of  the 
body  win  be  cleared  away,  and  we  shall  be  pure,  and  hold  con- 
verse with  other  pure  souls,  and  know  of  ourselves  the  clear 
light  everywhere,  which  is  no  other  than  the  light  of  truth" 
("Ph»do,"67)* 

We  find  in  the  classical  writers,  however,  the  occasional  sense 
of  the  universal  f anltiness  of  mankind,  though  even  Plato  fur- 
nishes scarcely  any  traces  of  accepting  the  doctrine  of  innate  de- 
pravity. Thus  Theognis :  ^'  The  sun  beholds  no  wholly  good  and 
virtuous  man  among  those  who  are  now  living  "  (615).  ^  But 
having  become  good,  to  remain  in  a  good  state  and  be  good,  is 
not  possible,  and  is  not  granted  to  man.  God  only  has  this 
blessing ;  but  man  capiiot  help  being  bad  when  the  force  of 
circumstances  overpowers  him  "  (Plato,  "  Protagoras,"  344), 
^'How,  then :  is  it  possible  to  be  sinless !  It  is  impossible ;  but 
this  is  possible,  to  strive  not  to  sin"  (^^  Epictetus,"  iv.,  12, 19). 

We  deceive  ourselvee  {iavroif^  wXav&fiev).  Lit,  we  lead 
oursehea  astray.  Bee  on  Mark  xii.  24 ;  Matt,  zxvii.  63,  64 ; 
Jnde  13.  Not  only  do  we  err,  we  are  responsible  for  it.  The 
phrase  only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  For  the  verb  as  ap- 
plied to  deceivers  of  various  kinds,  see  Matt.  xxiv.  4;  Apoc  ii. 
20 ;  ziii.  14 ;  xix.  20 ;  xii.  9 ;  xx.  3.  Compare  irXdvoi  deceivers 
(2  John  7) ;  'irXdinf  error  (Jude  11 ;  1  John  iv.  6). 

The  truth.  The  whole  Gospel.  All  reality  is  in  God.  He 
is  the  only  tnie  God  (oKffStvS^,  John  xvii.  3 ;  see  on  John  i.  9). 
This  reality  is  incarnated  in  Christ,  the  Word  of  God,  "  the 
very  image  of  His  substance,"  and  in  His  message  to  men. 
This  message  is  the  tnUhy  a  title  not  found  in  the  Synoptists, 
Acts,  or  the  Apocalypse,  but  in  the  Catholic  Epistles  (Jas.  v.  19 ; 
1  Pet  i.  22 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  2),  and  m  Paul  (2  Cor.  xiii.  8 ;  Eph.  i. 
13,  etc).  It  is  especially  characteristic  of  the  Gospel  and  Epis- 
tles of  John. 

*  The  stadent  maj  proflUbl j  oonsnlt  on  Plato^s  riew  of  Bin,  Aokermann, 
'<  The  ChriBtian  Blement  in  Plato,**  p.  57,  sq. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


S20  WORD  STUDIES  m  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

The  truth  is  represented  by  John  objectively  and  subjec- 
tively. 

1.  ObjeetiA)dy.  In  the  person  of  Christ.  He  is  ^  Truths 
the  perfect  revelation  of  God  (John  i.  18 ;  xiv.  6).  His  man- 
hood is  true  to  the  absolute  law  of  right,  which  is  the  law  of 
love,  and  is,  therefore,  our  perfect  pattern  of  manhood. 

Truth,  absolutely  existing  in  and  identified  with  Gk>d,  was 
also,  in  some  measure,  diffused  in  the  world.  The  Word  was  in 
the  world,  before  as  after  the  incarnation  (John  i.  10.  See  on 
John  i.  4,  5).  Christ  often  treats  the  truth  as  something  to 
which  He  came  to  bear  witness,  and  which  it  was  His  mission 
to  develop  into  clearer  recognition  and  expression  (John  xviii. 
37).  This  He  did  through  the  embodiment  of  tnith  in  His 
own  person  (John  i.  14, 17 ;  xiv.  6),  and  by  His  teaching  (John 
viii.  40 ;  xvii.  17) ;  and  His  work  is  carried  out  by  the  Spirit  of 
Truth  (John  xvi.  13),  sent  by  God  and  by  Christ  himself  (John 
xiv.  26 ;  xvi.  7).  Hence  the  Spirit,  even  as  Christ,  is  t?ie  TnUh 
(1  John  V.  6).  The  whole  sum  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  and 
of  the  Spirit,  is  the  Truth  (1  John  ii.  21 ;  2  John  1). 

This  truth  can  be  recognized,  apprehended,  and  appropriated 
by  man,  and  can  be  also  rejected  by  him  (John  viii.  32 ;  1  John 
ii.  21 ;  John  viii.  44). 

2.  Subjectively.  The  truth  is  lodged  in  man  by  the  Spirit,  and 
communicated  to  his  spirit  (John  xiv.  17 ;  xv.  26 ;  xvi.  13).  It 
dwells  in  man  (1  John  i.  8 ;  ii.  4;  2  John  2),  as  revelation,  com- 
fort, guidance,  enlightenment,  conviction,  impulse,  inspiration, 
knowledge.  It  is  the  spirit  of  truth  as  opposed  to  the  spirit 
of  error  (1  John  iv.  6).  It  translates  itself  into  act.  God's  true 
children  do  the  truth  (John  iii.  21 ;  1  John  i.  6).  It  brings 
sanctification  and  freedom  (John  viii.  32 ;  xvii.  17).  See  on 
John  xiv.  6, 17. 

9.  Confess  (ofjMkoy&fiai).  From  ofiS^,  one  wnd  the  aamej 
and  Xiyta,  to  say.  Hence,  primarily,  to  say  the  same  thing  as 
another^  and,  therefore,  to  admit  the  truth  of  an  accusation. 
Compare  Ps.  Ii.  4.  The  exact  phrase,  ofioXoyeiv  r^  ojjMfnla^ 
confess  the  sinsy  does  not  occur  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment   Compare  i^/JtoXoyeiaJ^  afJMfnia^  {irapa^imifiara)  Matt. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  BPISTLB  OF  JOHN.  331 

iii.  6 ;  Mark  i.  5 ;  Jas.  ▼.  16.    See  on  Matt.  iii.  6 ;  xi.  25 ;  Luke 
xxii.  6 ;  Acts  xix.  18 ;  Jas.  v.  16. 

Sins.  'Note  the  plural,  as  compared  with  the  singular,  gifij  in 
the  previous  verse.  See  note.  The  plural  indicates  that  the 
confession  is  to  be  speci/io  as  well  as  general.  Augustine's 
words  ai-e  exactly  to  the  point,  but  his  play  upon  pardon  and 
confess  cannot  be  reproduced  in  English.  "Vis  ut  ille  ignoscatt 
Tu  agnosce."   Do  you  wish  Him  toforgi/oe  f  Do  you  confess. 

Faithful  (irurrrf?).  True  to  His  own  nature  and  promises; 
keeping  faith  with  Himself  and  with  man.  The  word  is  ap- 
plied to  God  as  fulfilling  His  own  promises  (Heb.  x.  23 ;  xL  11); 
as  fulfilling  the  purpose  for  which  He  has  called  men  (1  Thess.  v. 
24 ;  1  Cor.  i.  9) ;  as  responding  with  guardianship  to  the  trust 
reposed  in  Him  by  men  (1  Cor.  x.  18 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  19).  "  He 
abideth  faithful  He  cannot  deny  Himself"  (2  Tim.  iL  13). 
The  same  term  is  applied  to  Christ  (2  Thess.  iii.  3  ;  Heb.  iii.  2 ; 
ii.  17).  Ood's  faithfulness  is  here  spoken  of  not  only  as  essen- 
tial to  His  own  being,  but  as  faithfulness  toward  us;  '^fidelity 
to  that  nature  of  truth  and  light,  related  to  His  own  essence, 
which  rules  in  us  as  far  as  we  confess  our  sins  "  (Ebrard).  The 
essence  of  the  message  of  life  is  fellowship  with  God  and  with 
His  children  (ver.  3).  God  is  ligJU  (ver.  5).  Walking  in  the  light 
we  have  fellowship^  and  the  blood  of  Jesus  is  constantly  ap- 
plied to  cleanse  us  from  sin,  which  is  darkness  and  which  inter- 
rupts fellowship.  If  we  walk  in  darkness  we  do  not  the  truth. 
If  we  deny  our  sin  the  truth  is  not  in  us.  If  we  confess  our 
sins,  "  God,  by  whom  we  were  called  unto  ihe  fellowship  of  His 
Son  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  x^faiihfuL^^  (1  Cor.  L  9)  to  forgive 
our  sins,  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness,  and  thus  to  re- 
store and  maintain  the  interrupted  fellowship. 

Just  (8Lc«uo9).  Eev.,  righteous.  From  hlicffi  right.  The 
term  is  applied  both  to  God  and  to  Christ.  See  Apoc  xvi.  6 ; 
John  xvii.  25 ;  1  John  ii.  1 ;  iii.  7 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  18.  The  two 
words,  faithful  and  righteous^  imply  each  other.  They  unite 
in  a  true  conception  of  God's  character.  God,  who  is  aHml/uU 
Vol.  H— 21 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

rightnesSj  must  be  Jatikfid  to  His  own  nature,  and  His  right- 
eons  dealing  with  men  who  partake  of  that  nature  and  walk  in 
fellowship  with  Him,  is  simply  fidelity  to  Himself.  *^  Kight- 
eousuess  is  truth  passing  into  action  "  (Westcott). 

To  forgive  (&a  cuf>§).  See  John  xx.  23;  1  John  ii.  12. 
Primarily  the  word  means  to  send  awat/y  dismiss ;  hence  of 
sius,  to  remitj  as  a  debt.  Clecmsing  (ver.  7)  contemplates  the 
personal  character  of  the  sinner ;  remission^  his  ooto.  See  on 
Matt.  vi.  12 ;  Jas.  v.  16.  To  forgive  is,  literally,  that  he  may 
forgive.  On  John's  use  of  &a  in  order  that,  see  on  John  xv. 
13 ;  xiv.  31.  Forgiveness  answers  to  the  essential  jpurpose  of 
His  faithful  and  righteous  being. 

Our  sins  (r^  af/LOfnta^).  Sin  is  defined  by  John  as  apofiltn, 
lawlessness.  Compare  Horn.  vL  19.  A.  V.,  transgression  of  the 
law  (1  John  iii.  4).  It  may  be  regarded  either  as  condition  or 
as  act ;  either  with  reference  to  the  normal,  divine  ideal  of  man- 
hood, or  to  an  external  law  imposed  upon  man  by  God.  Any 
departure  from  the  normal  ideal  of  man  as  created  in  God's 
image  puts  man  out  of  true  relation  and  harmony  with  his  true 
self,  and  therefore  with  God  and  with  his  fellow-man.  He  thus 
comes  into  false,  abnormal  relation  with  right,  love,  truth,  and 
light.  He  walks  in  darkness  and  forfeits  fellowship  with  God. 
Lawlessness  is  darkness,  lovelessness,  selfishness.  This  false 
principle  takes  shape  in  act.  He  doeth  (woiet)  or  committeth  sin. 
lie  doeth  lawlessness  {riiv  avoiilav  irou!i\  1  John  iii.  4,  8).  He 
transgresses  the  words  (Jy^fuiTo,  John  xvii.  8)  of  God,  and  His 
commandments  {ivroXal,  1  John  ii.  3)  as  included  and  expressed 
in  His  one  word  or  message  (K6yo<;,  1  John  ii.  7, 14).  Similarly 
the  verb  a/juifyrdveip  to  sin,  may  signify  either  to  he  mfvl  (1 
John  iii.  6),  or  to  commit  sin  (1  John  i.  10).  Sin,  regarded  both 
as  principle  and  act,  is  designated  by  John  by  the  term  ofiofyrla. 
The  principle  expressed  in  the  specific  acts  is  ^  dfutprla  (John 
i.  29),  which  occurs  in  this  sense  in  Paul,  but  not  in  the  Synop- 
tists,  nor  in  Acts.  Many  of  the  terms  used  for  sif^  by  other 
New  Testament  writers  are  wanting  in  John ;  as  aa-i/Seui  un* 
godliness  (see  on  Jude  14) ;  aaefietv  to  be  ungodly  (2  Pet.  ii.  6) ; 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHl^.  323 

wapafialveiv  to  trcmgresa ;  irapafiaai^  tranagresaion ;  wapa- 
fidrtf^  transgressor  (see  on  Matt,  vi  14 ;  Jas.  ii.  11) ;  irapavo- 
fielv  to  act  coniflfwry  to  the  la/vo  ;  irapavofila  hreach  of  law  (see 
on  Acts  xxiii.  3 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  16) ;  irapwirrcufui  trespass  (see  on 
Matt  vi.  14). 

To  cleanse.    See  on  ver.  7. 

Unrighteousness  (aSt«cia9).  With  reference  to  ZIkom^ 
righteous.  The  righteons  One  who  calls  ns  into  fellowship  with 
Himself,  purges  away  the  vmrighJUousness  which  is  contrary  to 
His  nature,  and  which  renders  fellowship  impossible.  The 
word  occurs  in  John's  writings  only  at  John  vii.  18 ;  1  John  v. 
17. 

10.  We  have  not  sinned  (ou^  fifuifynfjicaiiai).  Committed 
sins.  Sin  regarded  as  an  act.  The  state  is  expressed  by  afjLap- 
rlav  ovK  Sx^fJtof  we  have  no  (or  not)  sm  (ver.  8). 

We  make  Him  {woiovfimf  ainov).  A  phrase  characteristic  of 
John.    See  John  v.  18 ;  viii.  63 ;  x.  33 ;  xix.  7, 12. 

His  word  (o  Xoyf^i  ainov).  ISot  the  personal  Word,  as  John 
i.  1,  but  the  divine  message  of  the  Gospel.  See  Luke  v.  1 ; 
viii.  11 ;  Acts  iv.  31 ;  vi.  2,  7,  etc.  Compare  "  the  truth  is  not 
in  us  "  (ver.  8).  The  truth  is  the  substance  of  the  word.  The 
word  carries  the  truth.  The  word  both  moves  the  man  (John 
viii.  31,  32)  and  abides  in  him  (John  v.  38 ;  viii.  37).  The 
man  also  abides  in  the  word  (John  viii.  31). 


CHAPTER  II. 

1.  My  little  children  {rexvia  /jmv).  Teicvlov,  UtUe  chUd^ 
diminutive  of  ritcvav  child,  occurs  in  John  xiii.  33 ;  1  John  ii. 
12, 28 ;  iii.  7, 18 ;  iv.  4 ;  v.  21.  This  particular  phrase  is  found 
only  here  (best  texts  omit  rm/  in  1  John  iii.  18).  Used  as  a  term 
of  affection,  or  possibly  with  reference  to  the  writer's  advanced 
age.     Compare  Christ's  word,  iroiBia  children  (John  xxi.  5) 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


824  WOBD  STUDIBB  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

which  John  also  uses  (1  John  ii.  13, 18).  In  the  familiar  story 
of  John  and  the  young  convert  who  became  a  robber,  it  is  re- 
lated that  the  aged  apostle  repaired  to  the  robber's  haunt,  and 
that  the  young  man,  on  seeing  him,  took  to  flight.  John,  for- 
getful of  his  age,  ran  after  him,  crying :  "  O  my  son,  why  dost 
thou  fly  from  me  thy  father!  Thou,  an  armed  man, — I,  an  old, 
defenceless  one  I  Have  pity  upon  me!  My  son,  do  not  feart 
There  is  still  hope  of  life  for  thee.  I  wish  myself  to  take  the 
burden  of  all  before  Christ.  K  it  is  necessary,  I  will  die  for 
thee,  as  Christ  died  for  us.  Stopt  Believe  1  It  is  Christ  who 
sends  me.''  * 

I  write.  More  personal  than  tos  write  (i.  4),  and  thus  better 
suiting  the  form  of  address,  my  UtUe  children. 

If  any  man  sin,  we  have.  The  change  from  the  indefinite 
third  person,  cmy  mcm^  to  the  first  person,  we  have,  is  signifi- 
cant. By  the  we  home,  John  assumes  the  possibility  of  sinful 
acts  on  the  part  of  Christians,  and  of  himself  in  common  with 
them,  and  their  common  need  of  the  intervention  of  the  divine 
Advocate.  So  Augustine:  "He  said,  not  ^ye  have,' nor  *ye 
have  me^  nor  ^ye  have  Christ  himself ; '  but  he  put  Christ,  not 
himsdf,  and  said  ^we  have,'  and  not  ^ye  have.'  He  preferred 
to  place  himself  in  the  number  of  sinners,  so  that  he  might 
have  Christ  for  his  advocate,  rather  than  to  put  himself  as  the 
advocate  instead  of  Christ,  and  to  be  found  among  the  proud 
who  are  destined  to  condemnation." 

An  advocate  (irapdickfiTov).    See  on  John  xiv.  16. 

With  the  Father  {irpo^  rbv  iraripa).  See  on  with  God,  John 
i.  1.  An  active  relation  is  indicated.  On  the  terms  the  Father 
and  my  Father,  see  on  John  iv.  21. 

The  righteous.  Compare  righteottSy  i.  9.  There  is  no 
article  in  the  Greek.    Jeaus  Christ  righteous.     See  on  i.  9. 

*  The  story  maj  be  found  at  length  In  Godet*f  **  Commentary  on  John,** 
vol.  1.,  p.  68. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  SPISTliB  OF  JOHN.  825 

2.  And  He  {icdL  aSnh).  The  He  is  emphatic :  tiuU  same 
Jesus:  He  himself . 

The  propitiation  (xXoct/a^).  Only  here  and  iv.  10.  From 
tKouTicofMu  to  appeasSj  to  oorunliate  to  otufs  sdfy  which  occurs 
Luke  zviiL  13 ;  Heb.  ii.  17.  The  noun  means  originally  om  a^ 
peasmg  or  propitiating^  and  passes,  through  Alexandrine  asage, 
into  the  sense  of  the  means  qfappeasinffj  as  here.  The  construct- 
ion is  to  be  particularly  noted ;  /oTj  in  the  matter  of  {irepi)  our 
sins;  the  genitive  case  of  that  for  which  propitiation  is  made. 
In  Heb.  ii.  17,  the  accusative  case,  also  of  the  sins  to  be  pro- 
pitiated. In  classical  usage,  on  the  other  hand,  the  habitual 
construction  is  the  accusative  (direct  objective  case),  of  the  per- 
son propitiated.  So  in  Homer,  of  the  gods.  Oeoy  iX^/reo-^cu 
is  to  make  a  god  propitious  to  one.  See  "  Liad,*'  i.,  886,  472. 
Of  men  whom  one  wishes  to  conciliate  by  divine  honors  after 
death.  So  Herodotus,  of  Philip  of  Crotona.  ^*His  beauty 
gained  him  honors  at  the  hands  of  the  Egestsaans  which  they 
never  accorded  to  any  one  else ;  for  they  raised  a  hero-temple 
over  his  grave,  and  they  still  propitiate  him  {cUnov  iKcuncovTOi) 
with  sacrifices  "  (v.,  47).  Again,  "  The  Parians,  having  pro- 
pitiated Themistodes  {OefuaroKXia  iKaadiioHiC)  with  gifts, 
escaped  the  visits  of  the  army  "  (viii.,  112).  The  change  from 
this  construction  shows,  to  quote  Canon  Westcott,  ^^  that  the 
scriptural  conception  of  the  verb  is  not  that  of  appeasing  one 
who  is  angry,  with  a  personal  feeling,  against  the  offender ;  but 
of  altering  the  character  of  that  which,  from  without,  occasions 
a  necessary  alienation,  and  interposes  an  inevitable  obstacle  to 
fellowship.  Such  phrases  as  ^propitiating  God,'  and  God 
^  being  reconciled '  are  foreign  to  the  language  of  the  New 
Testament.  Ma/n  is  reconciled  (2  Cor.  v.  18  sqq. ;  Kom.  v. 
10  sq.).  There  is  a  propitiation  in  the  matter  of  M^  ^  or  of 
iAe  sinner  P 

For  the  sine  of  the  whole  world  (irepl  Skov  roS  tcSa-fuw). 
The  sins  of  (A.  Y.,  italicised)  should  be  omitted ;  as  in  Bev., 
for  the  whole  world.  Compare  1  John  iv.  14 ;  John  iv.  42 ; 
ziL  32.    ^^The  propitiation  is  as  wide  as  the  sin''  (Bengel). 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


326  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

If  men  do  not  experience  its  benefit,  the  f anlt  is  not  in  its  ef- 
ficacy. Diisterdieck  (cited  by  Huther)  says,  "  The  propitiation 
has  its  real  efficacy  for  the  whole  world  ;  to  believers  it  brings 
life,  to  unbelievers  death."  Luther :  '^  It  is  a  patent  fact  that 
thou  too  art  a  part  of  the  whole  world  ;  so  that  thine  heart  can- 
not deceive  itself,  and  think,  the  Lord  died  for  Peter  and  Paul, 
but  not  for  me."    On  icoafiov  worlds  see  on  John  i.  9. 

3.  Hereby  (iv  rovrqi).  Lit.,  in  this.  Characteristic  of  John« 
See  John  xiii.  35  ;  xv.  8  ;  xvi.  30 ;  1  John  ii  6  ;  iii.  24 ;  iv. 
13  ;  V.  2 ;  iii.  16 ;  iii.  19 ;  iv.  2.  The  expression  points  to 
what  follows,  "  if  we  keep  His  commandments,"  yet  with  a 
covert  reference  to  that  idea  as  generally  implied  in  the  pre- 
vious words  concerning  fellowship  with  Grod  and  walking  in 
the  light. 

We  k  n 0 w  {ycvdxrKOfiev).  Or,  perceive.  By  experience,  from 
day  to  day ;  distinguished  from  otBafiev  we  hnow^  expressing 
absolute,  immediate  knowledge  of  a  fact  once  for  alL  Com- 
pare 1  John  iii.  2. 

That  we  know  (ort  eyi^«ca/iey).  Or,  more  literally,  Ka/oe 
come  to  know,  John  does  not  use  the  compound  forms  hrufiiH 
wcK€iv  and  hrlypaxn^:  (see  on  Matt.  vii.  16.  See  Luke  i.  4 ; 
Acts  iv.  13  ;  Eom.  i.  28  ;  Eph.  i.  17,  etc.),  nor  the  kindred  word 
yp&ari^  knowledge  (Luke  i.  77  ;  Bom.  ii.  20,  eta). 

We  keep  His  comm^ndmentB  {rh^  iproT^  ain-ov  TTjp&fiev). 
A  phrase  peculiar  to  John  and  occurring  elsewhere  only  Matt, 
xix.  17 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  14.  In  1  Cor.  vii.  19,  we  find  rrj/yqav; 
evroXAv  the  keeping  of  the  commandments.  On  rr^pim  to  keepy 
see  on  1  Pet.  i.  5. 

4.  A  liar.    Compare  we  Ue^  i.  6. 

In  him  (^i^  rovr^).  Emphatic.  lit.,  in  this  one  the  tntth  is 
not.     See  on  i.  8. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  EPISTLB  OF  JOHN.  327 

6.  Keepeth  His  word  (nyp^  atrrov  t6v  Urfov).  Note  the 
changed  phrase :  word  for  ootnmaiidiaenta.  The  word  is  the 
revelation  regarded  as  a  whole,  which  includes  all  the  separate 
commandmefUa  or  injunctions.  See  the  use  of  Xoyo^  word^  and 
hnoKli  jprecept^  in  John  xiv.  21-24. 

l8  the  love  of  God  perfected  (^  070^  rot)  OeoC  rereXeifib)- 
riu).  Bev.,  rendering  the  perfect  tense  more  closely,  hath 
Hie  love  of  Ood  been  perfected.  The  change  in  the  form  of  this 
antithetic  clause  is  striking.  He  who  claims  to  know  God,  jet 
lives  in  disobedience,  is  a  liar.  We  should  expect  as  an  offset 
to  this  :  He  that  keepeth  His  commandments  is  of  the  truth; 
or,  the  truth  is  in  him.  Instead  we  have,  '^  In  him  has  the  love 
of  God  been  perfected."  In  other  words,  the  obedient  child  of 
Gt>d  is  characterized,  not  by  any  representative  trait  or  quality 
of  his  own  personality,  but  merely  as  the  subject  of  the  work 
of  divine  love :  as  the  sphere  in  which  that  love  accomplishes 
its  perfect  work. 

The  phrase  fi  atfimi  rou  Seou  the  love  of  Oodj  may  mean 
either  the  love  which  Ood  shoios^  or  the  love  of  which  Ood  is  the 
objecty  or  the  love  which  is  characteristic  of  Ood  whether  mani- 
fested by  Himself  or  by  His  obedient  child  through  His  Spirit. 
John's  usage  is  not  decisive  like  PauPs,  according  to  which  t/ie 
love  of  Ood  habitually  means  the  love  which  proceeds  from 
and  is  manifested  by  God.  The  exact  phrase,  the  love  of  Ood 
or  the  love  of  the  Father^  is  found  in  iii.  16  ;  iv.  9,  in  the  un- 
doubted sense  of  the  love  of  Ood  to  men.  The  same  sense  is 
intended. in  iii.  1,  9,  16,  though  differently  expressed.  The 
sense  is  doubtful  in  ii.  5  ;  iii.  17 ;  iv.  12.  MerCs  love  to  God 
is  clearly  meant  in  ii.  15  ;  v.  3.  The  phrase  occni-s  only  twice 
in  the  Gospels  (Luke  xi.  42  ;  John  v.  42),  and  in  both  cases  the 
sense  is  doubtful.  Some,  as  Ebrard,  combine  the  two,  and 
explain  the  love  of  Ood  as  tke  mutual  relation  of  love  between 
Ood  and  men. 

It  is  not  possible  to  settle  the  point  decisively,  but  I  incline 
to  the  view  that  the  fundamental  idea  of  the  love  of  God  as  ex- 
pounded by  John  is  the  love  which  Ood  has  made  known  and 
whicli  answers  to  His  nature.    In  favor  of  this  is  the  general 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


WOHD  8TUDIBB  IN  THE  ISfEW  TESTAMENT. 

usage  of  arf<hrq  lov6j  in  the  New  Testament,  with  the  subjective 
genitive.*  The  olffeot  is  more  commonly  expressed  by  ek  to- 
wardsy  or  to.  See  1  Thess.  iii.  12 ;  Col.  i.  4 ;  1  Fet.  iv.  8. 
Still  stronger  is  John's  treatment  of  the  snbject  in  ch.  iv. 
Here  we  have,  ver.  9,  the  manifestation  of  the  love  of  God  in 
us  {hf  fiiiiv).  By  our  life  in  Christ  and  our  love  to  God  we  are 
a  manifestation  of  God's  love.  Directly  following  this  is  a 
definition  of  the  essential  nature  of  love.  ^^  In  this  is  love ; 
i.e.,  herein  consists  love:  not  that  we  home  loved  Qod^  but  that 
He  loved ue'*^  (ver.  10).  Our  mutual  love  is  a  proof  that  God 
dwells  in  us.  God  dwelling  in  us,  Uis  love  is  perfected  in  us 
(ver.  12).  The  latter  clause,  it  would  seem,  must  be  explained 
according  to  ver.  10.  Then  (ver.  16),  "  "We  have  known  and 
believed  the  love  that  God  h(xth  in  us  "  (see  on  John  xvi.  22, 
on  the  phrase  ha/oe  love).  "  God  is  love ; "  that  is  His  nature, 
and  He  imparts  this  nature  to  be  the  sphere  in  which  His  chil- 
dren dwell.  "He  that  dwelleth  in  love  dwelleth  in  God.'* 
Finally,  our  love  is  engendered  by  His  love  to  us.  "  We  love 
Him  because  He  first  loved  us  "  (ver.  19). 

In  harmony  with  this  is  John  xv.  9.  "  As  the  Father  loved 
me,  I  also  loved  you.  Continue  ye  in  my  loveJ^  My  love 
must  be  explained  by  I  loved  you.  This  is  the  same  idea  of 
divine  love  as  the  sphere  or  element  of  renewed  being ;  and 
this  idea  is  placed,  as  in  the  passage  we  are  considering,  in 
direct  connection  with  the  keeping  of  the  divine  command- 
ments. "  If  ye  keep  my  commandments  ye  shall  abide  in  my 
love." 

This  interpretation  does  not  exclude  man's  love  to  God.  On 
the  contrary,  it  includes  it.  The  love  which  God  has,  is  re- 
vealed as  the  love  of  God  in  the  love  of  His  children  towards 
Him,  no  less  than  in  His  manifestations  of  love  to  them.  The 
idea  of  divine  love  is  thus  complex.  Love,  in  its  very  essence, 
is  reciprocal.  Its  perfect  ideal  requires  two  parties.  It  is  not 
enough  to  tell  us,  as  a  bare,  abstract  truth,  that  God  is  love. 
The  truth  must  be  rounded  and  filled  out  for  us  by  the  apprecia- 

*  t.0.,  the  genitiTe  case,  qf  Oody  if  the  FoUh^,  represents  Qod  m  the  nUffeU 
of  the  emotion. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIB8T  EPIBTLB  OF  JOHN.  829 

ble  exertion  of  divine  love  npon  an  object,  and  bj  the  response 
of  the  object.  The  love  of  Ood  is  perfected  or  completed  bj  the 
perfect  establishment  of  the  relation  of  love  between  God  and 
man.  "When  man  loves  perfectly,  his  love  is  the  love  of  God 
shed  abroad  in  his  heart.  His  love  owes  both  its  origin  and 
its  nature  to  the  love  of  God. 

The  word  rnrUy  (0X1^^69)  is  never  used  by  John  as  a  mere 
formula  of  affirmation,  but  has  the  meaning  of  a  qualitative 
adverb,  expressing  not  merely  the  actual  eodeienoe  of  a  thing, 
but  its  existence  in  a  manner  most  absolutely  corresponding  to 
oXif^ca  truth.  Compare  John  i.  48 ;  viii.  31.  Hath  been 
perfected.  John  is  presenting  the  Heal  of  life  in  God.  ^^  This 
is  the  love  of  God  that  we  keep  Uis  commandments."  There- 
fore whosoever  keepeth  God's  v)ord^  His  message  in  its  en- 
tirety, realizes  the  perfect  relation  of  love. 

We  are  in  Hinfi.  Compare  Acts  xvii.  28.  See  note  on  iL 
15. 

6.  He  abideth  in  Hinfi  (^  ain^  fUveiv).  To  abide  in  Ood 
is  a  more  common  expression  with  John  than  to  be  in  Oodj  and 
marks  an  advance  in  thought  The  phrase  is  a  favorite  one 
with  John.  See  John  xv.  4  sqq. ;  vi.  56 ;  1  John  ii.  24,  27,  28 ; 
iii.  6,  24 ;  iv.  12  sq. ;  15  sq.  Bengel  notes  the  gradation  in  the 
three  phrases  "  to  know  Rirn^  to  be  in  Him^  to  abide  in  Sim} 
knowledge,  fellowship,  constancy." 

Ought  (i^tKu).  An  obligation,  put  as  a  dd>t.  See  Luke 
xvii.  10,  and  on  debtSy  Matt.  vi.  12.  The  word  expresses  a 
special,  personal  obligation,  and  not  as  Sel  mfuet^  an  obligation 
in  the  nature  of  things.  See  John  xx.  9,  and  compare  1  John 
iii.  16  ;  iv.  11 ;  8  John  8. 

He  {iKuifo^).  Always  of  Christ  in  the  Epistles  of  John. 
See  ixelpTf^,  referring  to  aftaprta  sin^  1  John  v.  16. 

7.  Brethren  (dSeX^l).  The  correct  reading  is  AryainfTot 
beloved.  The  first  occurrence  of  this  title,  which  is  suggested 
by  the  previous  words  concerning  the  relation  of  love. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


•> 


S30  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

No  new  commandment  {ovic  hnoT^iv  kmp^p).  The  Bev. 
properly,  places  these  words  first  in  the  sentence  as  emphatic, 
the  point  of  the  verse  lying  in  the  antithesis  between  the  new 
and  the  old.    On  new^  see  on  Matt  zxvL  29. 

Old  (iraXaiAy).  Fonr  words  are  used  in  the  New  Testament 
for  old  or  elchr.  Of  these  yipw  and  irpeafivrepo^  refer  merely 
to  the  age  of  men,  or,  the  latter,  to  official  position  based  pri- 
marily upon  age.  Hence  the  official  term  elder.  Between  the 
two  others,  hpxoSo^  and  waXcuo^,  the  distinction  is  not  sharply 
maintained.  *Afy)(aio^  emphasizes  the  reaching  back  to  a  ft^ 
ginning  {apXTf).  Thns  Satan  is  ^^  that  old  (apx^aSo^)  serpent,'* 
whose  evil  work  was  coeval  with  the  beginning  of  time  (Apoc. 
xii.  9 ;  zx.  2).  The  world  before  the  fiood  is  ^^  the  old  (afyxaSo^) 
world  "  (2  Pet.  iL  5).  Mnason  was  "  an  old  {ofyxaSo^)  disciple ; " 
not  agedy  bnt  having  been  a  disciple  from  the  beginning  (Acts 
xxi.  16).  Sophocles,  in  "  TrachinicB,^  555,  gives  both  words. 
"  I  had  an  old  {waXaiop)  gif t,*'  i.e.y  received  long  ago,  '*  from 
the  old  {ofyxaio^)  Centaur.'*  The  Centaur  is  conceived  as  an 
old-world  creature,  belonging  to  a  state  of  things  which  has 
passed  away.  It  carries,  therefore,  the  idea  of  old/ashioned : 
peculiar  to  an  obsolete  state  of  things. 

IlaKcuo^  carries  the  sense  of  toomoiUhj  time,  injury,  sorrow, 
or  other  causes.  Thns  the  old  garment  (Matt.  ix.  16)  is  iraXtuov. 
So  the  old  wine-skins  (Matt  ix.  17).  The  old  men  of  a  living 
generation  compared  with  the  young  of  the  same  generation 
are  waKaioL  In  iraXtuo^  the  simple  conception  of  time  dom- 
inates. In  afy)(am  there  is  often  a  suggestion  of  a  character 
answering  to  the  remote  age. 

The  commandment  is  here  called  old  because  it  belonged  to 
the  first  stage  of  the  Christian  church.  Believers  had  had  it 
from  the  beginning  of  their  Christian  faith. 

Commandment.  The  commandment  of  love.  Compai*e 
John  xiii.  34.  This  commandment  is  fulfilled  in  walking  as 
Christ  walked.    Compare  Eph.  v.  1,  2. 

8.  New  commandment.  The  commandment  of  love  is 
both  old  and  new.     Oldj  because  John's  readers  have  had  it 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  331 

from  the  beginning  of  their  Christian  experience.  New^  be- 
cause, in  the  unfolding  of  Christian  experience,  it  has  developed 
new  power,  meaning,  and  obligation,  and  closer  correspondence 
"  with  the  facts  of  Christ's  life,  with  the  crowning  mystery  of 
His  passion,  and  with  the  facts  of  the  Christian  life." 

Which  thing  is  true  (5  iirrw  oK'tfii^,  The  expression  whioh 
thingj  or  that  which,  refers  either  to  the  commandment  of  love, 
or  to  the  fact  stated,  viz.,  that  the  old  commandment  is  new. 
The  fact  that  the  old  commandment  is  new  is  true  in  Him  and 
in  us.    On  the  whole  I  prefer  this. 

In  Him  and  in  us.  For  ua,  read  you.  The  fact  that  the 
old  commandment  is  new,  is  true  in  Him  (Christ),  since  He 
gave  it  as  a  new  commandment,  and  illustrated  it  by  His  word 
and  example.  It  is  true  in  you,  since  you  did  not  receive  it 
until  Christ  gave  it,  and  since  the  person  and  life  of  Christ  arie 
appealing  to  you  in  new  lights  and  with  fresh  power  as  your 
Christian  life  develops.    In  Him,  points  back  to  as  He  walked. 

Because.    Explaining  the  apparent  paradox. 

The  darkness  {^  a-Koria).  See  on  John  i.  5.  God  is  light; 
and  whatever  is  not  in  fellowship  with  God  is  therefore  dark- 
ness. In  all  cases  where  the  word  is  not  used  of  physical  dark- 
ness, it  means  moral  insensibility  to  the  divine  light;  moral 
blindness  or  obtuseness.  Compare  John  viii.  12 ;  xii.  35,  46 ; 
1  John  ii  9^  11. 

Is  past  (trapdrferai).  Wrong.  The  passing  is  not  represented 
as  aocomjplishedy  but  as  in  progress.  Rev.,  rightly  rendering 
the  present  tense,  is  passing  away. 

The  true  light  (rh  ^£9  rb  oKffStmv).  lit.,  the  light,  the 
true  (light).  See  on  that  eternal  life  (i.  2).  Trvs,  not  as  dis- 
tinguished from  false,  but  as  answering  to  the  true  ideal.  See 
on  John  i.  9.  The  true  light  is  the  revelation  of  God  in  Christ 
See  on  1  John  i.  5. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


882  WORD  STUDIBB  IN  THB  HEW  TESTAMENT. 

Shineth  (^W).  See  on  John  L  6.  Compare  Apoc  i.  16 ; 
viiL  12 ;  xxi.  23 ;  2  Pet  L  19.  See  also  Bom.  xiii.  11  sqq. ; 
Tit.  iu  11 ;  iiL  4. 

9.  Hateth  {juaSnf).  The  sharp  issne  is  maintained  here  as 
in  Ohrist'e  words,  ^^  He  that  is  not  with  me  is  against  me  ^  (Luke 
xL  23).  Men  fall  into  two  classes,  those  who  are  in  fellowship 
with  God,  and  therefore  walk  in  light  and  love,  and  tliose  who 
are  not  in  fellowship  with  GKhI,  and  therefore  walk  in  darkness 
and  hatred.  ^^  A  direct  opposition,''  says  fiengel ;  where  love 
is  not,  there  is  hatred.  ^^  The  heart  is  not  empty."  See  John 
iiL  20 ;  vii.  7 ;  zv.  18  sqq. ;  xviL  14.  The  word  hate  is  opposed 
both  to  the  love  of  tuUural  affection  {j^CKeiv\  and  to  the  more 
discriminating  sentiment — love  founded  on  a  just  estimate  (070- 
vav).  For  the  former  see  John  zii.  25 ;  xv.  18, 19 ;  compare 
Lnke  xiv.  26.  For  the  latter,  1  John  iii.  14, 16 ;  iv.  20 ;  Matt 
v.  43 ;  vi.  24;  Eph.  v.  28,  29.  "In  the  former  case,  hatred^ 
which  may  become  a  moral  duty,  involves  the  subjection  of  an 
instinct.  In  the  latter  case  it  expresses  a  genend  determina- 
tion of  character  ^  (Westcott). 

His  brother  {rhv  aSe\tf>6v).  His  fellow-Christian.  The  sin- 
gular, brother^  is  characteristic  of  this  Epistle.  See  vv.  10, 11 ; 
iiL  10, 15, 17 ;  iv.  20,  21 ;  v.  16.  Christians  are  called  in  the 
New  Testament,  Christians  (Acts  xL  26 ;  xxvi.  28 ;  1  Pet  iv. 
16),  mainly  by  those  ontside  of  the  Christian  circle.  Disomies, 
applied  to  all  followers  of  Christ  (John  ii.  11 ;  vi.  61)  and 
strictly  to  the  twelve  (John  xiii.  5  sqq.).  In  Acts  xix.  1,  to 
those  who  had  received  only  John's  baptism.  Not  fonnd  in 
John's  Epistles  nor  in  the  Apocalypse.  Brethren.  The  first 
title  given  to  the  body  of  believers  after  the  Ascension  (Acts  i. 
15,  where  the  tme  reading  is  ABeT^xfrnv  hrethren^  for  fiaSrfr&v 
disciples).  See  Acts  ix.  30 ;  x.  23 ;  xi.  29 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  10 ;  v. 
26 ;  1  John  iii.  14 ;  3  John  5, 10 ;  John  xxi.  23.  Peter  has  ij 
aSe\^6Ti79  the  brotherhood  (1  Pet  ii  17 ;  v.  9).  The  hdievers. 
Under  three  forms:  Tlie  believers  (oi  in<rrol;  Acts  x.  45 ;  1 
Tim.  iv.  12) ;  they  that  believe  {01  irurrevovre:;  1  Pet.  ii.  7 ;  1 
Thess.  i  7 ;  Eph.  i.  19) ;  they  that  believed  {ol  wurrevtravres ; 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIBST  BPISTLB  OF  JOHN.  338 

Act8  ii.  44 ;  iv.  32 ;  Eeb.  iv.  3).  The  nmnta  {oi  Syioi) ;  charac- 
teristic of  Paul  and  the  Apocalypse.  Four  times  in  the  Acts 
(ix.  13,  32,  41 ;  xxvi.  10),  and  once  in  Jnde  (3).  Also  Heb.  vi 
10 ;  xiii.  24.  In  Panl,  1  Oor.  vi.  1 ;  xiv.  33 ;  Eph.  i.  1, 15,  etc 
In  Apocalypse  v.  8 ;  viii.  3,  4;  xi.  18,  etc 

Until  now  (&»9  ifyrt).  Though  the  light  has  been  increasing, 
and  though  he  may  claim  that  he  has  been  in  the  light  from 
the  first  The  phrase  occurs  in  John  ii.  10 ;  v.  17;  xvi.  24; 
and  is  used  by  Paul,  1  Cor.  iv.  13 ;  viiL  7 ;  xv.  6. 

10.  Abideth  (jiipei).    See  on  ver.  6.    Compare  ver.  9,  is  in. 

Occasion  of  stumbling  (trKdvSaXop).  See  on  afendy  Matt 
T.  29.  For  the  image  in  John,  see  John  vi.  61 ;  xi.  9 ;  xvi.  1 ; 
Apoc.  ii.  14.  The  meaning  is  not  tliat  he  gives  no  occasion  of 
stumbling  to  others,  but  that  there  is  none  in  his  own  way. 
See  John  xi.  9,  10. 

11.  Is— walketh — whither.  The  condition  of  him  who 
hates  is  viewed  as  related  to  heingy  cusUan,  and  tendency. 

He  goeth  {inr^rfet).  Or,  te  going.  See  on  John  vi.  21 ;  viii 
21. 

Hath  blinded  {M^Xi^atif).  For  the  image  see  Is.  vi.  10. 
See  on  dosed.  Matt  xiii  15.  Compare  John  i.  5,  and  see  note 
on  teariKafiev,  overtook;  John  xii.  35,  40.  The  aorist  tense, 
Uindedj  indicates  a  past,  definite,  decisive  act  When  the  dark- 
ness overtook,  it  blinded.  The  blindness  is  no  new  state  into 
which  he  has  come. 

12.  Little  children.  See  on  ver.  1,  and  John  i.  12.  ITot 
children  in  age,  but  addressed  to  the  readers  generally. 

Name.    See  on  John  i.  12 ;  ii.  23. 

13.  Fathers.    Indicating  age  and  authority. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


334  WORD  STUDIBS  IN  THB  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

Have  known  (eyiHOKare).  Rev.,  correctly,  ye  know.  Knowl- 
edge is  the  characteristic  oi  fathers  ;  knowledge  as  the  fruit  of 
experience.     Te  h(voej>eroewed^  therefore  ye  know. 

Have  overcome  {vepudiKare).  Compare  John  xvL  33.  The 
image  is  characteristic  of  the  Apocalypse  and  First  Epistle. 
See  Apoc.  ii.  7, 11, 17,  26 ;  xiL  11 ;  xxL  7 ;  1  John  iu  14 ;  iv. 
4;  V.4,  6. 

The  evil  one  {rip  irovrfpop).  See  on  wickedneasy  Mark  vii. 
22 ;  eoiUy  Luke  iii.  19  ;  evU  spirUsj  Luke  vii.  21.  The  prince 
of  darkness  is  styled  by  John  6  SidfioXoq  thefaUe  accuser  (John 
viii.  44 ;  xiii.  2 ;  1  John  iii.  8,  10.  See  on  Matt.  iv.  1) :  o  Xa- 
TcofWi  Satariy  the  adversary  (John  xiii.  27 ;  compare  o  KarTJye^p 
the  accuser^  properly,  in  courts  Apoc.  xiL  10) :  o  irovripi^  the 
evil  one  (John  xvii.  15 ;  1  John  ii.  13,  14 ;  iii.  12 ;  v.  18, 19) : 
6  apx<ov  Tov  Kocfiov  TovTov  the  ruler  of  this  world  (John  xiL  31 ; 
xiv.  30 ;  xvi.  11).  Note  the  abrupt  introduction  of  the  word 
here,  as  indicating  something  familiar. 

I  have  written  {Sypay^a).  Or,  strictly,  I  wrote.  Compare  / 
W7nte  (vv.  12,  13),  and  note  the  change  of  tense.  The  past 
tense,  Iwrote^  does  not  refer  to  some  previous  writing,  as  the 
Gospel,  but,  like  the  present,  to  this  Epistle.  The  present,  / 
write^  refers  to  the  immediate  act  of  writing :  the  aorist  is  the 
epistolary  aorist,  by  which  the  writer  places  himself  at  the  read- 
er's stand-point,  regarding  the  writing  as  past  See  on  1  Pet. 
V.  12.  /  write^  therefore,  refers  to  the  Apostle's  immediate 
act  of  writing ;  I  home  written^  or  /  wrote^  to  the  reader's  act  of 
reading  the  completed  writing. 

Little  children  (irotS/a).  Compare  r^Kvla  little  children 
(ver.  1),  which  emphasizes  the  idea  of  kinshipy  while  this  word 
emphasizes  the  idea  of  subordination  and  consequent  discipline. 
Hence  it  is  the  more  appropriate  word  when  spoken  from  the 
stand-point  of  authority  rather  than  of  affection. 

Ye  have  known  (JrpfoncaTe).    Rev.,  correctly,  ye  know. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  335 

The  Father.  In  his  rightful  authoritj,  as  a  Father  over 
little  children. 

14.  Him  that  is  from  the  beginning.  The  eternal,  pre- 
exiBtent  Christ,  who  was  from  the  beginning  (John  i.  1).  The 
eternal  Son,  through  whom  men  are  bronght  into  the  relation 
of  children  of  Ood,  and  learn  to  know  the  Father.  The  knowl- 
edge of  God  involves,  on  the  part  of  hoth/athers  and  children^ 
the  knowledge  of  Christ. 

Strong  {urxypot).  See  on  vxia  not  ciblUy  Lnke  xiv.  30 ;  Ica/n^ 
noty  Luke  zvL  3. 

15.  The  world  {rov  /eScfiov).    See  on  John  i.  9. 

The  love  of  the  Father  (ij  aydirtf  rov  warpo^).  The  phrase 
occurs  only  here  in  the  New  Testament  It  means  love  taioards 
the  Father,  yet  as  generated  bj  the  Father's  love  to  man. 
Compare  1  John  iii.  1.    See  on  love  of  Ood^  ver.  5. 

Is  not  in  him.  This  means  more  than  that  he  does  not  love 
God :  .rather  that  the  love  of  Gk)d  does  not  dwell  in  him  as  the 
juling  principle  of  his  life.  Westcott  cites  a  parallel  from 
Philo :  "  It  is  impossible  for  love  to  the  world  to  coexist  with 
love  to  God,  as  it  is  impossible  for  light  and  darkness  to  co- 
exist Compare  Plato.  "Evils,  Theodoras,  can  never  pass 
away;  for  there  must  always  remain  something  which  is  ant- 
agonist to  good.  Having  no  place  among  the  gods  in  heaven, 
of  necessity  they  hover  around  the  earthly  nature,  and  this 
mortal  sphere.  Wherefore  we  ought  to  fly  away  from  earth  to 
heaven  as  quickly  as  we  can ;  and  to  fly  away  is  to  become  like 
God,  as  far  as  this  is  possible ;  and  to  become  like  Him  is  to 
become  holy  and  just  and  wise  '*  (**  Thesetetus,'*  176). 

16.  All  (iroi/).  Not  all  things  severally,  but  all  that  is  in 
the  vH/rld  ooUectiosly,  r^arded  as  a  unit 

The  lust  (i^  hridviUa).    See  on  Mark  iv.  19. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


336  WOBD  8TUDIBS  IK  THE  NEW  TBBTAMENT. 

Of  the  flesh.  Sensual  appetite.  The  desire  which  resides 
in  the  fleshy  not  the  deAxe  for  the  flesh.  For  this  snbjective 
usage  of  the  genitive  with  lusi^  see  John  viii.  44 ;  ^m.  i.  24 ; 
Apoc  xviii.  14.  Compare  1  Pet  ii.  11 ;  Titns  ii.  12.  The  lust 
of  the  flesh  involves  the  appropriation  of  the  desired  object. 
On  the  fleshy  see  on  John  L  14. 

The  lust  of  the  eyes.  This  is  included  in  the  lust  of  the 
flesh,  as  a  specific  manifestation.  All  merely  sensual  desires  be- 
long to  the  economy  which  "  is  not  of  the  Father.^  The  desire 
of  the  eyes  does  not  involve  appropriation.  It  is  satisfied  with 
corUemplating.  It  represents  a  higher  type  of  desire  than  the 
desire  qfthejleshj  in  that  it  seeks  mental  pleasure  where  the 
other  oeeksphysioal  gratification.  There  is  thus  a  significant 
hint  in  this  passage  that  even  high  artistic  gratification  may 
have  no  fellowship  with  Ood. 

The  pride  of  life  (ij  aXa^ovela  roO  filov).  'Rev.,  vainglory. 
The  word  occurs  only  here  and  Jas.  iv.  16,  on  which  see  note. 
It  means,  originally,  empty,  braggart  talk  or  display  /  swagger/ 
and  thence  an  insolent  and  vain  assurance  in  one's  own  re- 
sources, or  in  the  stability  of  earthly  things,  which  issues  in  a 
contempt  of  divine  laws.  The  vainglory  of  life  is  the  vain- 
glory which  belongs  to  the  present  life.  On  filo^  life,  as  dis- 
tinguished from  ^anj  life,  see  on  John  i.  4. 

Of  the  Father  {ite  rov  nrarpo^).  Do  not  spring  forth  from 
the  Father.  On  the  expression  eha*  €k  to  he  of,  see  on  John  i.  46. 
"  He,  therefore,  who  is  always  occupied  with  the  cravings  of 
desire  and  ambition,  and  is  eagerly  striving  after  them,  must 
have  all  his  opinions  mortal,  and,  as  far  as  man  can  be,  must 
be  all  of  him  mortal,  because  he  has  cherished  his  mortal  part. 
But  he  who  has  been  earnest  in  the  love  of  knowledge  and  true 
wisdom,  and  has  been  trained  to  think  that  these  are  the  im- 
mortal and  divine  things  of  a  man,  if  he  attain  truth,  must  of 
necessity,  as  far  as  human  nature  is  capable  of  attaining  immor- 
tality, be  all  immortal,  for  he  is  ever  attending  on  the  divine 
power,  and  having  the  divinity  within  him  in  perfect  order,  he 
has  a  life  perfect  and  divine"  (Plato,  "TimsBus,"  90). 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  BPISTLB  OF  JOHN.  337 

17.  Forever  {ek  rbv  al&va).  The  only  form  in  which  al&p 
age^  life^  oocars  in  the  Gospel  and  Epistles  of  John,  except  iic 
rou  al&vo^  since  the  world  began  (John  ix.  32).  Some  old  ver- 
sions add,  ^^as  God  abideth  foi-ever.^' 

18.  Little  children  {fratZU).    See  on  ver.  13. 

The  last  hour  {ifrxdrq  &pa).  The  phrase  only  here  in  the 
New  Testament.  On  John's  use  of  &pa  AatiTy  as  marking  a 
critical  season,  see  John  ii.  4 ;  iv.  21,  23 ;  v.  25,  28 ;  vii.  30 ; 
viii.  20 ;  xiL  23,  27 ;  xvi.  2,  4,  25,  32.  The  dominant  sense  of 
the  expression  last  daj/Sj  in  the  New  Testament,  is  that  of  a 
period  of  suffering  and  stm^le  preceding  a  divine  victory. 
See  Acts  ii.  17 ;  Jas.  v.  3 ;  1  Pet.  i.  20.  Hence  the  phrase  here 
does  not  refer  to  tiie  end  of  the  world,  but  to  the  period  pre- 
ceding a  crisis  in  the  advance  of  Christ's  kingdom,  a  changef nl 
and  troablons  period,  marked  by  the  appearance  of  ^^  many  an- 
tichrists." 

Antichrist.  Fecnliar  to  John  in  the  New  Testament  The 
absence  of  the  article  shows  its  currency  as  a  proper  name.  It 
may  mean  one  who  stands  against  Christ,  or  one  who  stands 
instead  of  Christ ;  just  as  avnarpdrtiyo^  may  mean  either  one 
who  stands  in  the  place  of  a  arpaTqyi^  prcBtor^  a  prqprcstor 
(see  Introd.  to  Luke,  vol.  i.,  p.  246,  and  note  on  Acts  xvi.  20), 
or  an  opposing  general,  John  never  uses  the  word  '^evi&xpur- 
To^  false  Christ  (Matt.  xxiv.  24 ;  Mark  xiii.  22).  While  the 
false  Christ  is  merely  a  pretender  to  the  Messianic  o£Sce,  the 
Antichrist "  assails  Christ  by  proposing  to  do  or  to  preserve 
what  he  did,  while  denying  Him."  Antichrist,  then,  is  one  who 
opposes  Christ  in  the  guise  of  Christ.  "Westcott's  remark  is 
very  important,  that  John's  sense  of  Antichrist  is  determined 
by  thefuU  Christian  conception  of  Christy  and  not  by  the  Jewish 
conception  of  the  promised  Samour. 

Cometh  (ifyxerai).    The  prophetic  present,  equivalent  to  is 
abovt  to  come.    The  same  term  is  used  of  Christ  (John  xiv.  3 ; 
zxi.  22 ;  Apoc.  xxii.  20). 
Vol.  IL— 22 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


338  WORD  8TUDIBS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Are  there  {yeyowurw).  Kev^  more  correctly,  have  there 
arisen. 

Whereby  (SSep).  Lit,  whence.  Only  here  in  John.  It  is 
foand  in  Matthew  and  Lake,  and  freqaently  in  UebrewB,  and 
not  elsewhere. 

19.  They  went  out  from  us  {i^^f^Av  ^f^XAw).  The  phrase 
went  out  fromj  may  mean  either  rem/oval  (Apoc  xviii.  4 ;  John 
viii.  69)  or  origin  (Apoc.  ix.  3 ;  xiv.  13,  15,  17 ;  xix.  6,  21). 
Here  the  latter,  as  appears  from  the  following  danse.  C!om- 
pare  Acts  xx.  30. 

Were  not  of.    See  on  John  i.  46. 

No  doubt.    A  needless  addition  of  the  A.  V. 

With  us  (amA'  fiijAv).  *Ev  ^fiSv,  among  usj  would  be  more 
according  to  John's  ordinary  usage ;  but  his  thought  rests  here 
rather  on  fellowship  than  on  the  unity  of  believers  as  one 
body. 

They  might  be  made  manifest  {(fMvepwB&iraf).  See  on 
John  xxi.  1. 

They  were  not  all  {ovic  etalv  irdms^).  Kev.,  more  correctly, 
they  all  are  not.* 

20.  An  unction  (xpta-fui).  The  word  means  that  with 
which  the  anointing  is  performed — the  unguent  or  ointment. 
In  the  New  Testament  only  here  and  ver.  27.  Rev.,  an  anovnt- 
ing.  The  root  of  this  word  and  of  Xpiaro^,  Christy  is  the  same. 
See  on  Matt  i.  1.     The  anointing  is  from  the  Anointed. 

The  Holy  One.  Christ  See  John  vi.  69 ;  Acts  iii.  14 ; 
iv.  27,  30 ;  Apoc.  iii  7. 

*  Beeanse  the  rerb  separates  n(4  from  att.  In  saoli  oases,  aoeording  to  Neir 
Testament  nsage,  the  negation  is  uniTersaL  The  A.Y,  not  aU  makes  it  partiaL 
Bee,  for  instanoe,  1  John  iiL  15 ;  Matt  xxiv.  2d. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  SPI8TLB  OF  JOHN.  839 

Ye  know  all  things  {aXSare  irdura).  The  best  texts  read 
vdvT^,  ye  all  know;  in  which  case  the  connection  is  with  the 
following  daose :  ^^  I  have  not  written  nnto  yon  because  ye 
know  not  the  trnth,  bnt  becanse  ye  know  it'' 

21.  I  have  not  written  (oiK  Sypa^).  Or,  /  v)roie  not 
See  on  ver.  13. 

22.  A  liar  (o  ^^e^tmy;).  Rev.,  correctly,  "  tAe  liar.''  For  a 
similar  interrogative  phrase  see  ch.  v.  6.  It  marks  the  lively 
feeling  with  which  the  apostle  writes.  By  the  definite  article, 
the  liar,  the  lie  is  set  forth  in  its  concrete  personality :  the  one 
who  impersonates  all  that  is  false,  as  an^hrist  represents  every 
form  of  hostility  and  opposition  to  Christ  The  denial  that 
Jesns  is  the  Christ  is  the  representative  falsehood.  He  that 
denies  is  the  representative  liar. 

He  that  denieth  (o  appovfievo^).  The  article  with  the  par- 
ticiple denotes  the  haibilual  denial.  Lit,  the  one  denying^  the 
one  who  habitnally  represents  this  attitude  towards  Christ 
The  words  are  aimed  at  the  heresy  of  Cerinthns,  a  man  of 
Jewish  descent  and  edncated  at  Alexandria.  He  denied  the 
miraciilons  conception  of  Jesns,  and  taught  that,  after  His 
baptism,  the  Christ  descended  upon  Him  in  the  form  of  a  dove, 
and  that  He  then  announced  the  unknown  Father  and  wrought 
miracles ;  but  that,  towards  the  end  of  His  ministry,  the  Christ 
departed  again  from  Jesus,  and  Jesus  suffered  and  rose  from 
the  dead,  while  the  Christ  remained  impassible  (incapable  of 
suffering)  as  a  spiritual  being. 

The  Father.  The  title  the  Father  occurs  always  in  its 
simple  form  in  the  Epistle.  Never  hie  or  our  Father,  or  the 
Father  in  heaven. 

23.  Hath  not  the  Father  (ovSi  rhv  waripa  ^4).  Properly, 
"  hath  not  even  the  Father,^  though  he  professes  to  reverence 
the  Father  while  rejecting  die  Son.    Compare  John  viii  42. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


d40  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT* 

24.  As  for  you  (v/ieJ^).  This  is  the  reDdering  of  the  Rev. 
The  force  of  the  emphatic  you  at  the  b^inning  of  the  sentence 
is  utterly  lost  in  tlie  A.  Y.,  which  takes  the  pronoun  simply  as 
nominative  to  ye  have  heard.  You  is  emphatic  by  way  of  con-» 
trast  with  the  false  teachers  (ver.  22). 

From  the  beginning.  See  on  i.  1.  Notice  the  change  in  the 
order  of  the  repeated  sentence,  that  which  ye  heard  Jrom  the 
1>egifming:  h  ^Kova-are  air  ifofi^*  ^^^  which  ye  Jiea/rd;  the 
emphasis  being  on  their  reception  of  the  message :  h  ant  apyrfi 
^tcovaare,  that  which  ye  ho&rd  Jrom  the  beginnmg;  emphasiz- 
ing the  time  of  the  reception  as  coincident  with  the  origin  of 
their  faith. 

In  the  Son  and  in  the  Father.  Compare  the  reverse  order 
in  ver.  22.  ^^  Here  the  thought  is  that  of  rising  through  the 
confession  of  the  Son  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Father ;  there 
the  thought  is  of  the  issue  of  denial  culminating  in  the  denial 
of  the  Father^'  (Westcott). 

25.  The  promise  {ff  hrat/yeKta).    See  on  Acts  L  4. 

Eternal  fife  (r^y  {bJ^  '^  ai&vwp).  lit.,  {he  Kfe^  the  eternal 
(life). 

26.  Seduce  {ifKaafAvrwv).    See  on  i.  8.    Bev.^  lead  astray. 

27.  As  for  you  ipiuU).    Emphatic,  as  in  ver.  24. 

Of  Him  {aw  avTov).    See  on  i.  6. 

The  same  anointing  (r&  airb  xp^r/ia).  The  best  texts 
read  airrovj  Sis  anointing. 

Is  truth,  and  is  no  lie.  The  characteristic  combination  of 
positive  and  negative  statement    See  on  i.  5. 

Ye  shall  abide  (jAevelre).  Wrong.  The  best  texts  read 
fiipere,  which  may  be  taken  either  as  imperative^  abide  ycy  or 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  EPIBTLB  OF  JOHN.  341 

as  indicativey  ye  abide.  The  indicative  is  preferable^  as  answer- 
ing to  fUv€$  abideth^ 

In  Him.    Christ 

28.  When  He  shall  appear  (Srm  ^iaveponSfj.  The  best 
texts  read  ihv  if^  for  when.  So  Rev.,  which  gives  also  the 
proper  passive  force  of  (fMvepoDSp,  if  He  shaU  he  manifested. 
2^ot  expressing  a  doubt  of  the  /act,  but  uncertainty  as  to  the 
circumstances.  On  (fxufepSc^  to  make  manifestj  see  on  John 
XXL  i.  John  never  uses  dm-oicaXvirTto  to  reveal,  of  the  revela- 
tion of  Christ  Indeed,  neither  the  verb  nor  the  kindred  noun, 
iiroKoku^vi,  occurs  in  his  writings  except  in  John  xii.  88,  which 
is  a  citation  from  Isaiah,  and  in  Apoc.  i.  1. 

We  may  have.  Thus  identifying  himself  with  his  children 
in  the  f  aitii.    Teacher  and  pupil  must  alike  abide  in  Him. 

We  may  have  confidence  (<rx&fiev  ira^^trlav).  Bev., 
boldness.  For  the  phrase  ham  boldness,  see  iii.  21 ;  iv.  17 ;  v. 
14 ;  Heb.  iii.  6  ;  x.  19  ;  Philem.  8.  For  the  word  wa^ptjaia 
boldness,  see  on  John  vii.  13 ;  Acts  iL  29.  It  is  opposed,  as 
here,  to  aurxpvofuu  to  be  ashamed,  in  Prov.  xiii.  5,  where  the 
8eptuagint  reads  ^^  a  wicked  man  is  ashamed  (aiaxvverai)  and 
shall  not  have  boldness  {irapfnfalav).  Also  in  Philip,  i.  20. 
Compare  2  Cor.  iii.  12.  The  idea  of  free,  open  speech  lies  at 
the  bottom  of  the  word  :  coming  before  God's  bar  with  noth- 
ing to  conceal.  The  thought  is  embodied  in  the  general  confes- 
sion of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer:  "That  we  should  not 
dissemble  nor  cloke  them  before  the  face  of  Almighty  God 
our  Heavenly  Father,  but  confess  them."  So  John  Wesley's 
Hymn: 

*'  JesQS,  Thy  blood  and  Hghteonsnofls 
My  beauty  are,  my  glorious  dresB: 
'MidBt  flaming  worlds,  in  these  arrayed, 
With  joy  shaU  I  lift  up  my  head. 

Bold  shall  I  stand  in  Thy  great  day, 
For  who  aught  to  my  charge  shall  lay  f 
Fully  absolved  through  these  I  am, — 
From  sin  and  fear,  from  guilt  and  shame." 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


843  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Be  ashamed  before  Him  (aurxyvS&fiev  ant  avroO).  The 
expression  is  peculiar.  Lit,  ^be  ashamed ^rom  Him."  The 
fundamental  thought  is  that  of  separcUion  and  shrinking  from 
God  through  the  shame  of  conscious  guilt.  The  same  con- 
•truction  is  found  in  the  Septuagint  Isa.  i.  29,  ^^  They  shall  be 
Mdmmed/ram  their  idols."  Jer.  ii  36,  ^  Thou  shalt  be  ashamed 
of  {from)  Egypt,  as  thou  wast  ashamed  of  (Jrom)  Assyria." 
Jer.  xii.  13. 

Coming  (irapovaCa).  lit j  presence.  So  2  Cor.  z.  10.  Hence, 
the  presence  of  one  coming^  and  so  cominffy  especiallj  in  the 
New  Testament,  of  the  future,  visible  return  of  our  Lord  to 
raise  the  dead,  judge  the  world,  and  finally  establish  the  king- 
dom of  God.  The  word  does  not  occur  elsewhere  in  John,  nor 
does  he  use  hrt^dveui^  which  is  Paul's  word  for  the  same  event. 

29.  If  ye  know— ye  know  (cAv  efS^c — jafdxrtcere).  I£  ye 
hnow  ahsohUely  that  He  is  righteous,  ye  peroevoe  that  every 
one,  etc.  See  on  John  ii.  24.  Teperoevoe  may  be  taken  as 
imperative :  percevoe  or  know  ye. 

Is  born  of  Him  (^{  amw  ^ftyhnnfrcii).  The  interpreters  dif- 
fer as  to  the  reference  of  Him  /  some  referring  it  to  Oody  and 
others  to  Christ.  Against  the  latter  is  the  fact  that  men  are 
not  said  to  be  horn  of  Christy  but  of  Ood;  and  that  to  he  horn 
of  Ood  is  a  characteristic  phrase  of  John,  while  to  he  horn  of 
Christ  is  a  phrase  which  occurs  nowhere.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  undoubted  reference  to  Christ  in  ver.  28,  would  seem  to 
demand  a  similar  reference  here.  Men  are  said  to  dhide  in 
Christ  as  well  as  in  God,  and  to  be  bom  of  the  Spirit.  West- 
cott's  remark  is  pertinent  ^^  When  John  thinks  of  GkKl  in  re- 
lation to  men,  he  never  thinks  of  Him  apart  from  Christ  (see 
1  John  V.  20) ;  and  again,  he  never  thinks  of  Christ  in  His  hu- 
man nature  without  adding  the  thought  of  His  divine  nature. 
Thus  a  rapid  transition  is  possible  from  the  one  aspect  of  the 
Lord's  divine-human  person  to  the  other." 

Righteous  (BUouk).  Used  by  John  both  of  God  and  of 
Christ    Of  God,  1  John  i.  9;  John  zviL  25 ;  Apoc  zvi.  5 ;  of 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


hbst  epibtlb  of  johh.  343 

Cbnsty  1  John  iL  1 ;  iii  7.    Compare  Acts  iii.  14 ;  vii.  52 ;  xziL 
14. 

Is  born  of  Him  {i^  airov  yeytyvfyrcu).    Bey.,  begotten.    The 
first  oocorrenoe  of  the  phrase  in  the  Epistle. 


CHAPTER  III. 

1.  Behold  (2S€T6).  lit,  hehdldye.  The  plnral  is  peculiar. 
The  usual  form  is  the  singular  JSe  or  iSot;.  See  John  L  29;  xi. 
3,  etc. ;  iv.  35 ;  xix.  26,  27.  Elsewhere  the  plnral  is  used  of 
something  actually  visible  (Gal.  vi  11). 

What  manner  of  {vonrairiiv). '  The  word  is  of  infrequent 
occurrence  in  the  New  Testament,  but  is  found  in  all  the  Sjuop- 
tists  and  in  2  Pet.  iii.  11.  Only  here  in  John's  writings.  Orig- 
inally it  means  from  what  country  or  race  ;  then,  of  what  sort 
or  quality.    It  is  used  of  the  quality  of  both  persons  and  things. 

Hath  bestowed  (S^&o/tey).  Emphasizing  the  endowment  of 
the  receiver.  Compare  x^^'^f''^  from  x^^^  graoe^  fofooTy 
which  emphasizes  the  good-will  of  the  giver.  See  GaL  iii.  18 ; 
Philip.  iL  9;  i.  29. 

That  (&a).     See  on  John  xv.  18. 

We  should  be  called  {xKffS&fMp).  Or,  named.  As  Matt, 
ii.  23 ;  xxi.  13 ;  Luke  i.  13,  31,  etc.  The  verb  is  never  used  by 
John  of  the  divine  call.    In  John  x.  3,  for  tcoKei  oalleth^  read 

The  sons  (riiOHi).  Bev.,  better,  children.  See  on  John  L 
12. 

And  such  we  are  (icol  icfAeti).  JALjOndweare.  Added  by 
Bev.,  according  to  the  best  texts.  A  parenthetical,  reflective 
comment,  characteristic  of  John.     See  on  L  2. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


344  WOBI>  STUDIES  IN  THB  KBW  TESTAMENT. 

2.  Beloved.    SeeiLT. 

Now  are  we  and,  etc.  The  two  thonghts  of  the  present  and 
the  f  utare  condition  of  God's  children  are  placed  side  by  side 
with  the  simple  copala,  a/ndy  as  parts  of  one  thought.  Christian 
condition,  now  and  eternally,  centres  in  the  fact  of  being  child- 
ren of  God.  In  that  fact  lies  the  germ  of  all  the  possibilities 
of  eternal  life. 

It  doth  not  yet  appear  {oiTrm  i^apepJn^).  Bev.,  more  cor- 
rectly, it  is  not  yet  made  manifest  See  on  John  xxi.  1.  The 
force  of  the  aorist  tense  is,  vxxs  never  manifested  on  any  oc- 
casion. 

What  we  shall  be  {rl  i<r6/jLeSa).  ^^This^Ao^  suggests  some- 
thing unspeakable,  contained  in  the  likeness  of  God  "  (Bengel). 

But  we  know.    Omit  hU. 

When  He  shall  appear  {iitv  (t>avepei>9§).  Bev.,  correctly,  if 
He  (or  U)  shaU  he  mKmifested.  We  may  render  either  **  if  it 
shall  be  manifested,*'  that  is  what  we  shaJl  he;  or,  ^^if  Ee^^ 
etc.  The  preceding  ^av€fi&Af\  it  is  (not  yet)  made  man^esty 
must,  I  think,  decide  us  in  favor  of  the  rendering  it.  We  are 
now  children  of  God.  It  has  not  been  revealed  what  we  shall 
be,  and  therefore  we  do  not  know.  In  the  absence  of  such  rev- 
elation, we  know  (through  our  consciousness  of  childship, 
through  His  promise  that  we  shall  behold  His  glory),  that  if 
what  we  shall  he  were  manifested,  the  essential  fact  of  the 
glorified  condition  thus  revealed  will  be  likeness  to  the  Lord. 
This  fact  we  know  now  as  a  promise,  as  a  general  truth  of  our 
future  state.  ThQ  condition  of  realizing  the  fact  is  the  mani- 
festation of  that  glorified  state,  the  revealing  of  the  ri  iaofjLeSa 
what  we  shall  he;  for  that  manifestation  wiU  bring  with  it  the 
Cfpen  vision  of  the  Lord.  When  the  what  we  shaU  he  shall  be 
manifest,  it  will  bring  us  face  to  face  with  Him,  and  we  shall 
be  like  Him  heccmse  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is. 

As  He  is  {Ko^m  i<mv).    Strictly,  jtist  as.    Bev.,  even  as. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIBST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  34$ 

"  As  long  as  the  festlYitT' 
Of  Paradise  shall  be,  so  long  our  love 
Shall  radiate  ronnd  about  ns  such  a  yestore. 
Its  brightnera  is  proportioned  to  the  ardor, 
The  ardor  to  the  vision  ;  and  the  vision 
Equals  what  grace  it  has  above  its  worth. 

Dante,  •*Paradiso,"  xiv.,  37-42. 

3.  Every  man  that  hath  {irw$  6  <lx^v).  A  characteristic 
form  of  expression  with  John,  containing  '^a  reference  to  some 
who  had  questioned  the  application  of  a  general,  principle  in 
particular  cases."  Here  to  some  persons  who  had  denied  the 
practical  obligation  to  moral  purity  involved  in  their  hope. 
See  vv.  4,  6,  9, 10,  15,  23,  29 ;  iv.  7 ;  v.  1,  4, 18 ;  2  John  9. 

Hope.  John's  only  reference  to  Christian  hope.  Tlie  phrase 
used  here,  to  home  the  hope  v/pon  oney  is  unique  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament. Compare  iir  avr^  eSvff  ikirioOaiv  "on  Him  shall  the 
Gentiles  hope  "  (Rom.  xv.  12) :  riKirUaiiaf  hrX  Oe^  {f£rrt  "  we 
have  hoped  on  the  living  God  "  (1  Tim.  iv.  10).  On  the  force 
of  ^o>y>  see  on  John  xvi.  22. 

In  Him  {iir  air&).    Ambignous.    Better,  as  Bev.,  9et  on 

Purifieth  himself  {&yvlfyi,  imrriv).  On  the  verb,  see  on  1 
Pet.  i.  22 ;  Jas.  iv.  8.  In  the  Septuagint  used  only  of  ceremonial 
purification,  and  so  four  out  of  the  seven  instances  in  which  it 
occurs  in  the  New  Testament  (John  xi.  55 ;  Acts  xxi.  24,  26 ; 
xxiv.  18).  In  the  remaining  cases,  of  purifying  tJie  heart  and 
the  soul  (Jas.  iv.  8 ;  1  Pet.  i.  22).  The  kindred  adjective  07^09 
pure^  has  a  moral  signification  in  every  case,  as  has  the  noun 
ar/vorqi;  jnereness  (only  2  Cor.  vL  6).  ^Ayviafii*:  jyur\/ication 
(only  Acts  xxi.  26),  ceremoniaL 

He  (iK€UH^).     Christ,  as  always  in  the  Epistle. 

Pure  {arfvo^).  See  above.  Though  marking  moral  and 
spiritual  purity,  and  that  of  a  very  high  grade,  since  it  is  ap- 
plied to  Christ  here,  yet  it  admits  the  thought  of  possible 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


346  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

temptation  or  pollution,  thus  differing  from  &yio^,  which  means 
absolutely  holy.  Hence  arp^  'cannot  properly  be  applied  to 
God,  who  is  &ywi ;  but  both  may  be  used  of  Christ,  the  latter 
in  virtue  of  His  hvman  perfection. 

4.  Whosoever  committeth  sin  {ira^  6  iroi&v  ri^v  afiofnlap). 
Bev.,  better,  every  one  that  doeth  sin.  See  on  ver.  3,  every  man 
that  hath^  and  note  the  frequent  repetition  of  this  form  of  ex- 
pression in  the  present  chapter.  Compai*e  irSi/;  o  a^mprdiwp 
whosoever  sinneth  (ver.  6).  The  phrase  to  do  sin  regards  sin  as 
sometliing  actually  realized  in  its  completeness.  He  that  doee 
sin  realizes  in  action  the  sin  (note  the  article  r^y),  that  which 
includes  and  represents  the  complete  ideal  of  sin.  Compare  do 
righisousnesSj  ii.  29. 

Transgresseth  also  the  law  {mi  riiv  avofilav  iroiu).  Bev., 
more  accurately,  doeth  also  lawlessness.  Compare  Matt.  xiii.  41, 
and  the  phrase  oi  ipya^^ofjLevoi  rifp  avofkUuf  ye  that  work  iniquity 
(Matt  viL  23). 

For  («cal).  Bev.,  correctly,  o/uf.  This  and  the  preceding 
clause  are  co-ordinated  after  John's  manner. 

Is  the  transgression  of  the  law  {iarlv  ^  ivofjiU).  Bev., 
correctly,  is  lawlessness.  Sin  is  the  violation  of  the  law  of  our 
being,  the  law  which  includes  our  threefold  relation  to  Ood,  to 
the  men  and  things  around  us,  and  to  ourselves.  Compare 
Jas.L14;  iv.17. 

5.  Ye  know.  John's  characteristic  appeal  to  Christian 
knowledge.  Compare  iL  20,  21 ;  iv.  2, 1^  16 ;  v.  15, 18 ;  3 
John  12. 

He  {itc€ivosi).  Christ,  as  always  in  this  Epistle.  See  on 
John  i.  18. 

Was  manifested.  See  on  John  xxi.  1.  Including  Christ's 
whole  life  on  earth  and  its  consequences.  The  idea  of  mani- 
festation here  assumes  the  fact  of  a  pi*evious  being.    John 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  BPISTLB  OF  JOHK.  847 

uses  various  terms  to  describe  the  incarnation.  He  conceives  it 
with  reference  to  the  Father^  as  a  seridinffy  a  mission.  Hence 
d  irifL^a^  fie  He  that  sent  me  (John  iv.  34 ;  vi.  38 ;  ix.  4 ;  xii. 
44,  etc.) :  o  irkfi^tv;  fie  irarrip  the  Faiher  that  sent  me  (John  v. 
37 ;  viiL  18 ;  xii.  49,  etc.) :  with  the  verb  &iro<rreKKoi>  to  send 
as  an  envoy y  with  a  commission f  God  sent  {airecreCKev)  His 
Son  (John  iii.  17 ;  x.  36 ;  1  John  iv.  10 ;  compare  John  vi.  57 ; 
vii.  29 ;  xvii.  18).  With  reference  to  the  Son^  as  a  coming^ 
regarded  as  a  historic  fact  and  as  an  abiding  fact.  As  a  his- 
toric eventy  He  came  {^\1^,  John  i.  11);  this  is  He  that 
caine  (o  ^K^v^  1  John  v.  6).  Came  forth  {i^XBov;  John  viiL 
42 ;  xvL  27,  28 ;  xviL  8).  As  something  aJ>iding  in  its  effects^ 
am  comey  hath  comSy  is  comey  marked  by  the  perfect  tense: 
Light  is  come  {iKJiku^^  John  iii.  19).  Jesus  Christ  is  corns 
(^lyXuSdro,  1  John  iv.  2).  Compare  John  v.  43 ;  xii.  46 ;  xviiL 
37).  In  two  instances  with  ^/icw  lam  comey  John  viiL  42;  1 
John  V.  20.  Or  with  the  present  tense,  as  describing  a  coming 
realized  at  the  moment :  whence  looms  {SpxofKu,  John  viii.  14) ; 
compare  John  xiv.  3,  18,  28 ;  also  Jesiu  Christ  coming  {ifrxo- 
fievop,  2  John  7).  With  reference  to  the  form :  in  ftesh  {<rdp^). 
See  John  L  14 ;  1  John  iv.  2 ;  2  John  7.  With  reference  to 
meny  Christ  y>as  manifested  (1  John  L  2 ;  iii.  5,  8 ;  John  i.  31 ; 
xxi.  1, 14).» 

To  take  away  (&a  aprj).    See  on  John  L  29. 

Our  sins  (r^  dfiafyrlai9  ^fi&v).  Omit  ^fi&v  ov/r.  Compare 
John  i.  29,  t^v  ifiaprlav,  the  sin.  The  plural  here  regards  all 
that  is  contained  in  the  inclusive  term  the  sin :  all  manifesta- 
tions or  realizations  of  sin. 

In  Him  is  no  sin  {aiiaprria  h  avr^ovtc  iariv).  lit,  in  Him 
sin  is  not  He  is  essentially  BJid  forever  without  sin.  Compare 
John  vii.  18. 

6.  Abideth.  Compare  John  xv.  4-10.  To  abide  in  Christ 
is  more  than  to  ^  in  Him,  since  it  represents  a  condition  main- 

*I  am  indebted  for  the  substance  of  this  note  to  Canon  WeetooCt 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


8i8  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

tained  by  commtinion  with  God  and  by  the  habitual  doing  of 
His  will.    See  on  iL  6. 

Sinneth  not.  John  does  not  teach  that  believers  do  not 
sin,  but  is  speaking  of  a  cha/racter^  a  habit.  Throughout  the 
Epistle  he  deals  with  the  ideal  reaUty  of  life  in  God,  in  which 
tlie  love  of  Gk)d  and  sin  exclude  each  other  as  light  and  dark- 
ness. 

Seen — known.  The  vision  of  Christ  and  the  appropriation 
of  what  is  seen.    Bev.,  correctly,  knoweth. 

7.  Little  children.    See  on  ii.  1. 

Deceive  {irKoofdrw).   Bev.,  better,  lead  astray.    See  on  1.  8. 

Doeth  righteousness.  See  on  ver.  4,  and  compare  ii.  29. 
Kote  the  article  r^v,  the  righteousness,  in  its  completeness  and 
unity.  Not  merely  doing  righteous  acts.  ^^  In  his  relation  to 
other  men  he  will  do  what  is  just;  and  in  his  relation  to  the 
gods  he  will  do  what  is  holy ;  and  he  who  does  what  is  just 
and  holy  cannot  be  other  than  just  and  holy  **  (Plato,  **  Gor- 
gias,"  607). 

8.  The  Devil.  See  on  iL  13.  Compare  John  viii.  44.  "The 
devil  made  no  one,  he  begot  no  one,  he  created  no  one ;  but 
whosoever  imitates  the  devil,  is,  as  it  were,  a  child  of  the 
devil,  through  imitating,  not  through  being  bom  of  him" 
(Augustine). 

Sinneth.  The  present  tense  indicates  oontinuousness.  He 
sinned  in  the  beginning,  and  has  never  ceased  to  sin  from  the 
beginning,  and  still  sinneth. 

The  Son  of  God.  For  the  first  time  in  the  Epistle. 
Hitherto  the  title  has  been  t?ie  Sony  or  Sis  Son.    See  on  i.  7. 

Might  destroy  (Xuoi;).  Lit.,  dissolve^  loosen.  Compare 
Acts  xxvii.  41 ;  xiii.  43.     "  The  works  of  the  devil  are  repre- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  BPISTLB  OF  JOHN.  349 

66nted  as  having  a  certain  consistency  and  coherence,  l^hejr 
show  a  kind  of  solid  front  Bat  Christ,  by  His  coming,  has 
revealed  them  in  their  complete  nnsabstantiality.  He  has  '  un- 
done '  the  seeming  bonds  by  which  they  were  held  together  " 
(Westcott). 

9.  Whosoever  is  born  {irS^  o  yeyannffUiH)*:).  On  the  form 
of  expression,  see  on  ver.  4.  Bev.,  hegoUen.  The  perfect 
participle  indicates  a  condition  remaining  from  the  first :  he 
who  hath  been  begotten  and  remains  God's  child. 

His  seed.    The  divine  principle  of  life. 

Cannot.  See  on  ver.  6.  Conceived  as  a  perfect  ideal,  life 
in  Ood  exdudes  the  possibility  of  sin.  Compare  Horn.  vi. 
throughout. 

10.  In  this  {hf  rouTfp).    See  on  ii.  3. 

Children  of  the  devil  {riicva  rov  SiafioKov).  The  only  oc- 
currence of  the  phrase.  Compare  Acts  xiiL  10,  and  see  John 
viii.  44. 

Righteousness.  Here  the  article  is  wanting,  compare  ver. 
7.  Eighteousness  is  regarded,  not  in  its  completeness,  but  as 
bearing  a  particular  character.  It  will  be  interesting  to  follow 
out  the  same  distinction  between  the  following  words  with  and 
without  the  article:  ofLOfyria  sin;  arfwirq  lave;  i^a>i}  life; 
aki]$€ui  truth. 

11.  From  the  beginning.    See  on  i  1. 

That  {iva).  The  pwrport  and  aim  of  the  message.  See  on 
John  XV.  13. 

12.  Cain  who  was  {JUA»  f^v).  Who  is  not  in  the  Greek. 
The  construction  is  irregular.  Lit.,  as  Rev.,  not  as  Cain  was 
of  the  evil  one. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


850  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Slew  (lar^M^ep).  The  verb  occurs  only  in  John,  and  only 
here  outside  of  the  Apocalypse.  Originally,  to  slay  by  cutting 
the  throat ;  so  in  Homer,  of  cattle : 

"  the  suitor  train  who  day  (v^Cftwri) 
His  flocks  and  slow-paced  beeves  with  crooked  horns." 

••Od78se7,"l,  92. 

To  slaughter  victims  for  sacrifice : 

'*  Backward  they  tamed  the  necks  of  the  fat  beoTea, 
And  cut  Uwir  throati  (l^r^or),  and  flayed  the  carcasses." 

"  niad,"  i.,  489. 

Thence,  generally,  to  slay  or  kill. 

Wherefore  {x^^v  riuo^).  Lit,  on  account  of  what.  Xdpw 
for  the  sake  of  on  account  of  is  elsewhere  placed  after  the 
genitive.    See  Eph.  iii.  1,  14 ;  1  Tim.  v.  14 ;  Gal.  iii.  19. 

13.  Brethren  {aSe>jf>ol).  The  only  occurrence  of  this  mode 
of  address  in  the  Epistle. 

Hate  (jua-et).  Indicative  mood,  pointing  to  the  fact  as  exist- 
ing :  if  the  world  hate  you,  as  U  does. 

14.  We  know.  Emphatic;  v)e  as  distinguished  from  the 
world. 

Have  passed  (jurafieffijtcafiep).    Dt,  have  passed  over. 

From  death  {i/c  rov  Bavdrov).  Lit.,  out  of  the  death.  The 
article  marks  it  as  one  of  the  two  spheres  in  which  men  must 
be ;  death  or  life.  The  deaths  the  life^  present  one  of  those 
sharp  oppositions  which  are  characteristic  of  the  Epistle;  as 
lovey  hatred;  darhness^  light;  truths  a  lie.  *0  ^dvaro^  the  deaths 
occurs  in  John's  Epistles  only  here  and  in  the  next  clause.  In 
the  Gospel,  only  v.  24.  Personified  in  Apoc.  i  18 ;  vi.  8 ;  ix. 
6 ;  XX.  13. 

Unto  life  (€fe  T^  K^^\  Kev.,  better,  into.  Compare  enJter 
into  the  lifej  Matt.  xviiL  8 ;  xix.  17. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


hbst  epistle  of  jomr.  S51 

Because.  The  si^  of  having  passed  into  life;  not  the 
ffrotmd. 

We  love  the  brethren  (ofyair&fAev  Toi>^  iB€X4>ov^).  The  only 
occurrence  of  the  phrase.  Elsewhere,  lave  one  anoiker^  or  lorn 
hi%  brother.    See  on  ii.  9. 

His  brother.    Omit 

15.  Murderer  {avBponroKTovo^).  Manslayer.  Only  here  and 
John  viii.  44,  of  the  demL 

Hath  eternal  life,  etc  The  contrast  is  suggestive  between 
the  sentiment  embodied  in  this  statement  and  that  of  Pagan 
antiquity  respecting  murder,  in  the  Homeric  age,  for  instance. 
"  With  regard  to  the  practice  of  homicide,  the  ordinary  Greek 
morality  was  extremely  loose.  .  .  .  Among  the  Greeks,  to 
have  killed  a  man  was  considered  in  the  light  of  misfortune,  or, 
at  most,  a  prudential  error,  when  the  perpetrator  of  the  act  had 
come  among  strangers  as  a  fugitive  for  protection  and  hospi- 
tality. On  the  spot,  therefore,  where  tiie  crime  occurred,  it 
could  stand  only  as  in  the  nature  of  a  private  and  civil  wrong, 
and  the  fine  payable  was  regarded,  not  (which  it  might  have 
been)  as  a  mode,  however  defective,  of  marking  any  guilt  in 
the  culprit,  but  as,  on  the  whole,  an  equitable  satisfaction  to 
the  wounded  feelings  of  the  relatives  and  friends,  or  as  an 
actual  compensation  for  the  lost  services  of  the  dead  man.  The 
religion  of  the  age  takes  no  notice  of  the  act  whatever  "  ( Glad- 
stone "  Homer  and  the  Homeric  Age,"  ii.,  436). 

16.  Hereby  {h  tovt^).     See  on  ii.  3. 

Perceive  {iyvdieafiev),    Bev.,  correctly,  hnoto. 

The  love.  Omit  the  italics  of  A.  Y.,  of  Godj  and  render  as 
Rev.,  hereby  know  toe  love. 

Laid  down  His  life  (r^  '^^^X^  avrov  iSffxev).  See  on  John 

X.11. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


352  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

We  ought  {o^tkofiev).    See  on  il.  6. . 

17.  This  world's  good  (rbv  fiiov  rov  Koafuni).  Rev.,  the 
wotIcPb  goods.  Bm  nieaDS  that  by  which  life  is  sustained,  re- 
sources j  wealth. 

Seeth  (Semp^),  Deliberately  contemplates.  See  on  John  i. 
18.     Rev.,  heholdeth.     The  only  occurrence  of  the  verb  in 

John's  Epistles. 

Have  need  (xp^^  iypma).  Lit,  having  need.  Rev.,  in 
need. 

Bowels  of  compassion  {rk  airXirfxya).  See  on  pUifxd,  1 
Pet.  iii.  8.  Rev.,  mach  better,  his  comjMSsion.  The  word 
only  here  in  John. 

19.  Shall  assure  {ireCavfiep).  Two  renderings  are  possible ; 
the  primitive  meaning  pers^uzde  (Acts  xix.  26  ;  xvii.  4 ;  2  Cor. 
V.  11) ;  or  the  secondary  and  consequent  sense,  assure,  quiet, 
conciliate  (Matt,  xxviii.  14).  Render  as  A.  Y.,  and  Rev.  as 
sure.  See  critical  note  at  the  end  of  the  commentary  on  this 
Epistle. 

Before  Hinfi  (ifLirpoa-Sep  avroO).  Emphatic,  the  order  being, 
before  Him  we  shall  assure  our  heart.  These  words  are  to  be 
kept  in  mind  as  the  key-note  of  what  follows. 

20.  For  if  our  heart  condenfin  us,  God  is  greater,  etc. 
A  very  difficult  passage.  See  critical  note  as  above.  Render, 
as  Rev.,  shall  assure  our  heart  before  Sim  whereinsoever  our 
heart  condemn  us,  because  God  is  greater  than  our  heart. 

For  (oTi).  To  be  rendered  not  as  a  conjunction  {for,  because) 
but  as  a  relative,  in  whatsoever  or  whereinsoever. 

Condemn  {tcaTarfivda-tcjf).  The  word  occurs  only  three 
times  in  the  New  Testament ;  here,  ver.  21,  and  Gal.  ii.  11. 
It  signifies  (1.)  To  note  accurately/,  usually  in  a  bad  sense. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  BPIBTLB  OF  JOHN.  858 

Hence  to  deted  (Prov.  xxviiL  11) ;  compare  AriBtophanes : 
"Having  ohaerved  (/eararypoit^)  the  foibles  of  the  old* man ^ 
("  Klnights,*'  46).  To  form  an  unfamorahle  prejvdict  cyainsL 
So  Herodotus.  Datis  says  to  the  Delians,  "  Why  are  ye  fled, 
O  holy  men,  having  jvdged  me  {/cararfvSvTe^  tear  ifiev)  in  so 
unfriendly  a  way?"(vi.,  97).  (2.)  To  note  judicieUly :  to  ao- 
cuse :  to  accuse  on^e  ad/.  So  Thucydides :  "  No  one,  when 
venturing  on  a  perilous  enterprise,  ever  yet  passed  a  eefitefioe 
qf  failure  on  himself^  {jcararfvoxf^  iairrov  fi^  irepUaeaBa*  ;  iiL 
45).  2^0  give  sentence^  or  condemn.  To  condemn  to  deaUi. 
"Those  who  had  fled  they  condemned  to  death"  {^avarw 
tearayv6vT€^ ;  Thucydides,  vi.,  60).  To  decide  a  suit  against 
one.  So  Aristophanes :  "  You  judges  have  no  maintenance 
if  you  will  not  'decide  against  {jcararfvtaaea^  this  suit" 
("  Knights,"  1360).  In  Gal.  ii.  11,  it  is  said  of  Peter  that,  be- 
cause  of  his  concessions  to  the  Jewish  ritualists,  icar«7Mk>a/i^i«09 
9iv  he  stood  condemned  or  self-condemned  (not  as  A.  Y.,  Ad  VHi$ 
to  he  Named).  His  conduct  was  its  own  condemnati<m.  This 
is  the  sense  in  this  passage,  the  internal  judgment  of  conscience. 

Because  (^0-  '^^^^  second  or*  does  not  appear  in  the  A.  Y, 
It  is  a  conjunction. 

Greater  {fieO^mv).  Is  this  superior  greatness  to  be  regarded 
as  related  to  God's  judgmefnJL,  or  to  'Sis  compassion  f  If  to  His 
fudgment^  the  sense  is :  God  who  is  greater  than  our  heart  and 
knows  all  things,  must  not  only  endorse  but  emphasize  oar  self- 
accusation.  If  our  heart  condemn,  how  much  more  Chdy  wh# 
is  greater  than  our  heart.  If  to  His  compassionj  the  sense  is: 
when  our  heart  condemns  us  we  shall  quiet  it  with  the  assur- 
ance that  we  are  in  the  hands  of  a  God  who  is  greater  than  our 
heart — who  surpasses  man  in  love  and  compassion  no  less  than 
in  knowledge.  This  latter  sense  better  suits  the  whole  drift  of 
the  discussion.  See  critical  note.  There  is  a  play  of  the  words 
yivdaKCi  knoioethy  and  KararfaHoaicg  condemneth^  which  is  un- 
translatable. 

21.  Beloved.    The  affectionate  address  is  suggested  by  the 
preceding  thought  of  tormenting  self -accusation. 
Vol.  n.— 23 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


364  WORD  8TUDIB8  IK  THB  NBW  TBBTAMENT. 

Confidence  {va^jrrialiw).    Bey.,  holdnew.    See  on  iL  28. 

S2.  We  ask  (air&fjw).     See  on  Lnke  zL  9. 

We  receive  of  Him  {XofifidvofAep  M  aimS).  On  the  form 
of  expression,  see  on  i.  5.    For  the  thought,  compare  John  xv.  7. 

We  Iceep  {rtipovfieii).  See  on  1  Pet,  i.  6.  Note  the  combin- 
ation of  I^ep  and  do.  Watchfol  discemment  and  habitaal 
practice.  Compare  Ps.  cxxiiL  2.  The  same  combination  occurs 
V.  2,  3,  where  instead  of  the  first  rnpA/Jiev  keep^  read  wouifAep 
do. 

Pleasing  (iptard).    See  John  viiL  29.    . 

In  His  sight  {hwnrunf  airrov).  Compare  iftm-poaSep  airrov 
'before  Himy  or  in  HU  presence  (ver.  19).  In  Hie  eight  "ac- 
centnates  the  thought  of  the  divine  regaitl.  Compare  tfohn  xii. 
37  and  XX.  30''  (Westcott). 

23.  Believe  on  the  name  {irurre&rwfAep  r^  ovofjLan).  See 
on  John  i.  12 ;  1  John  i.  7. 

24.  Abideth  in  Him  and  He  in  Him.  '' Therefore  let  God 
be  a  home  to  thee,  and  be  thon  the  home  of  GK>d :  abide  in  God, 
and  let  God  abide  in  thee"  (Bede). 

Spirit.  The  first  mention  of  the  Spirit  in  the  Epistle.  Never 
f  oond  with  Soly  in  the  Epistles  or  Apocalypse. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

1.  Beloved.  Again  the  recognition  of  danger  from  false 
spirits  prompts  this  affectionate  address.    Compare  iii.  21. 

Try  {^MyMjsTi).  Better,  as  Rev.,  prove.  See  on  1  Pet  i.  7 ; 
Lnke  xii  55.  Compare  the  phrase  discerning  ofspirits^  1  Cor. 
xiL  10. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  BPI8TLB  OF  JOHN.  355 

Of  Qod  (&).     OiU  of:  proceeding  from. 

False  prophets  ('^rcu&nrpo^^cu).  The  term  is  applied  in 
the  New  Testament  to  rivaJs  of  trne  prophets  nnder  the  old 
dispensation  (Luke  vi.  26 ;  2  Pet  ii.  1),  and  to  rivals  of  the 
apostles  nnder  the  gospel  economy  (Matt  vii.  IS ;  xxiv.  11,  24; 
Mark  xiii.  22).  In  the  Apocalypse  to  "  the  embodied  power 
of  spiritual  falsehood  "  (xvi.  13 ;  xix.  20 ;  xx.  10).  The  false 
prophet  supports  his  claims  by  signs  and  portents  (Matt  xxiv. 
24 ;  Acts  xiii.  6 ;  Apoc  xix.  20)  and  is  thus  distinguished  from 
the  false  teacher.  See  2  Pet  iL  1,  where  the  two  terms  occur 
together. 

Are  gone  out  (^^X^XiASoo-iy).  The  perfect  tense  indicates 
that  the  influence  of  their  going  out  on  their  false  mission  is  in 
operation  at  the  present 

2.  Hereby  (^  roxntf).    See  on  iL  3. 

Know  ye  {jivaKneere).    Perceive.    See  on  John  ii.  24. 

Confesseth  {ofioKoyeZ).    See  on  Matt,  vii  23 ;  x.  32. 

That  Jesus  Christ  is  oome  in  the  flesh  {^IffcovpXpurrop 
hf  aapKl  ikffKuSora).  Lit,  Jesus  Christ  having  comCj  etc  The 
whole  phrase  forms  the  direct  object  of  the  verb  confeseeth. 

Of  God.    Compare  1  Cor.  xiL  3. 

3.  Is  oome  in  the  flesh.  Omit  Bender,  confesseth  not 
Jesus.  So  Rev.  An  ancient  reading  is  Xue*  rbv  'Iffcovp  ^^an- 
nuUeth  or  destroyeth  Jesus."  Tlie  simple  Jesus  emphasizes  the 
humanity  of  our  Lord  considered  in  itself.  See  Bom.  iiL  26 ; 
X.  9 ;  2  Cor.  xi.  4 ;  Eph.  iv.  21 ;  Heb.  ii.  9. 

This  (toOto).  Not  this  spirit^  but  this  non-confeseionf  sum* 
med  up  in  all  its  manifestations. 

Cometh.    See  on  ii.  18. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


356  WORD  STUDIBS  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

4.  Have  overcome.    See  on  iL  13. 
Greater.    Compare  iii.  30. 

In  you.  The  Christian  society.  Compare  John tL  56 ;  xiv. 
80 ;  XV.  4-10 ;  xvii.  23,  26 ;  Gal.  ii.  20  (of  the  individual). 

He  that  is  in  the  world.  In  v.  19,  the  world  is  said  to  be 
in  the  evil  one.    Compare  Epb.  ii.  2. 

5.  Of  the  world  (^ii^rofiicocr/ioi;).  Proceedvng  fromy^Aih^ir 
source  {ix).  Different  from  iK  rry;  yry;from  the  earth  (John  ilL 
.31),  as  marking  the  whole  worldly  economy  morally  considered. 

Speak  they  of  the  world  {iK  rov  §c6afiov  XaXoSo-ii^).  An 
ambiguous  rendering,  which  might  readily  be  interpreted  "they 
speak  conoeminff  the  world."  Literally  it  is :  "  they  speak  aiU 
<^the  world ;  i.e.j  the  character  of  their  utterances  corresponds 
to  their  origin.  Rev.,  "  speak  they  as  of  the  world."  The  po- 
sition of  of  the  world  in  the  sentence  is  emphatic :  "it  is  out  of 
the  world  that  they  speak." 

6.  He  that  knoweth  (o  f^fivwncmv).  Lit.,  the  one  knowing: 
he  who  is  habitually  and  ever  more  clearly  perceiving  and  re- 
cognizing God  as  his  Christian  life  unfolds.  The  knowledge  is 
regarded  as progreseive  and  not  complete.  Compare  Philip,  iii. 
12,  and  He  who  is  calling  (6  KcCKSiv,  1  Thess.  v.  24),  also  o  arfom'&v 
he  that  loves  (ver.  7). 

Hereby  (ifc  rovrov).  Not  the  same  as  the  common  iv  rovrip 
(ver.  2).  It  occurs  only  here  in  the  Epistle.  'JEv  rovrp  is  in 
this:  iK  rovrov,  from  this.  The  former  marks  the  residing  or 
consisting  of  the  essence  or  truth  of  a  thing  in  something  the 
apprehension  of  which  conveys  to  us  the  essential  nature  of  the 
thing  itself.  The  latter  marks  the  inference  or  deduction  of 
the  truth  from  something,  as  contrasted  with  its  immediate 
perception  in  that  something.    Bev.,  by  this. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIBST  HPiarrLB  of  JOHN.  857 

The  spirit  of  error  {t6  'nvev/ia  liy:  wXavty;),  Tlie  phrase  oc- 
curs nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament.  Compare  nvcfifiaai 
vXdvoi^  misleading  spirttSy  1  Tim.  iv.  1. 

7.  Of  God  {itc  Tov  eeav).    Flows  from  God. 

8.  Knoweth  not  (odic  tyiw).  The  aroist  tense:  did  noi 
know,  from  the  beginning.    He  never  knew. 

Is  love  {arydwff  iarlii).  See  on  Ood  is  light  (i  5),  and  the 
truth  (i.  6) ;  also  Ood  ie  spirit  (John  iv.  24).  Spirit  and  light 
are  expressions  of  Gk>d's  essenti<d  nature.  Love  is  the  expres- 
sion of  His  personality  corresponding  to  His  nature.  See  on 
love  of  Ood  (iL  5).  Truth  and  love  stand  related  to  each  other. 
Loving  is  the  condition  of  knowing. 

9.  Was  manifested.    See  on  John  xxL  1 ;  1  John  iii  5. 

Toward  us  {h  fifuv).  Wrong.  Not  ^^  among  ns,"  as  John 
L  liy  nor  ^^in  us ; "  but  as  Bev.,  in  margin,  in  our  oase.^ 

Sent  {AiriffToKscep).  John  describes  the  incarnation  as  a 
sending,  more  frequently  than  in  any  other  way.  ^AtroiniKKtis 
is  to  send  under  commission,  as  an  envoy.  The  perfect  tense, 
hath  sent,  points  to  the  abiding  results  of  the  sending.  See  on 
lu.  6. 

His  only-begotten  Son  (rip  vlbv avrov  rhp  fjunwytinj).  lit, 
Mis  Son,  the  only-begotten  (Son).  A  mode  of  expi*ession  com- 
mon in  John,  enlarging  upon  the  meaning  of  a  noun  by  the 
addition  of  an  adjective  or  a  participle  with  the  article.  See  L  3 ; 
ii.  7,  8,  25 ;  v.  4 ;  John  vi.  41,  44,  50,  61 ;  xv.  1,  etc  On  only- 
begotten,  see  on  John  i.  14. 

•  So  Alfbrd  and  Hnther,  agt  Westoott.  Weitoott  rightly  obserrM  that  ih« 
proposition  ^  m*  1b  oonfltuitl j  used  in  the  oontext  to  ezprefli  the  presenoe  of 
Ood  in  the  Christian  body  ;  bat  it  is  most  commonly  joined  there  with  lUpu 
abidethf  yt.  12, 18, 15, 16,  and  the  objeotive  sUtement,  Ood  ient^  eto.,  defining 
the  manifestation  of  God's  lore,  does  not  adjust  itself  natnraUy  to  the  sul^eol- 
ive  sense  implied  in  in  us. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


858  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NSW  TESTAMENT. 

10.  Propitiation.    See  on  iL  2. 

11.  So  {adrm^).     Emphatic. 
We  ought.    See  on  iL  6. 

13.  God.  Beginning  the  sentence  emphatically,  and  with- 
out the  article :  GUxl  as  GUxl.  <<  God  hath  no  man  ever  yet 
teen.''    Compare  John  i.  18. 

His  love.  Not  oar  love  to  Him,  nor  His  love  to  ns,  but  the 
loYO  which  is  pecoliarlj  His ;  which  answers  to  His  nature. 

14.  We  have  seen  (Te9€4/Ae9a).  Have  deliberately  and 
steadfastly  contemplated.    Compare  i  1,  and  see  on  John  L  14. 

Do  testify  (jiapTvpoOfuv).  Eev^  hear  vntneas.  See  on  John 
L7. 

Sent.    See  on  ver.  9. 

The  Saviour  of  the  world.  See  the  same  phrase,  John  ir. 
42,  and  compare  John  iii.  17.  Swnip  Saviour ,  occurs  in  John 
only  here  and  John  iv.  42.  Elsewhere  it  is  applied  both  to 
God  (1  Tim.  i.  1 ;  ii.  8;  Tit. i.  8;  ii.  10;  iii.  4 ;  Jude 25),  and  to 
Christ  (Luke  ii.  11 ;  Acts  v.  81 ;  xiiL  23 ;  2  Tim.  1 10 ;  Tit.  i. 
4,  etc.).  The  title  is  found  in  Paul's  Epistles  of  the  Captivity 
(Eph.  Y.  23  ;  Philip,  iii.  20),  and  in  the  Pastorals  (see  aboye), 
but  not  in  Corinthians,  Bomans,  Oalatians,  or  Thessalonians.  In 
classical  writings  the  term  is  applied  to  many  deities,  especially 
to  2ieu8  (Jupiter) ;  also  to  Hermes  (Mercury),  Apollo,  Hercules, 
and  even  to  female  deities,  as  Fortune  and  Aphrodite  (Yenus). 
^^  Zeus  Soter  "  (Zeus  Saviour)  was  used  as  a  formula  in  drinking  at 
banquets.  The  third  cup  was  dedicated  to  him.  Compare  Plato : 
^^  Then,  by  way  of  a  third  libation  to  the  saviour  Zeus,  let  us 
sum  up  and  reassert  what  has  been  said''  (^' Philebas,"  66).  The 
drinking  of  this  cup  was  a  symbol  of  good  fortune,  and  the 
third  time  came  to  mean  the  lucky  time.  ^^  Twice  then  has  the 
just  man  overthrown  the  unjust;  and  now  comes  the  third  trial, 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  EPISTLB  OF  JOHN.  359: 

whidiy  after  Olympic  fashion,  is  sacred  to  Zeus  the  saviour, 
.  .  .  and  sarelj  tliis  will  prove  the  greatest  and  most  de- 
cisive of  falls"  (Plato,  "Kepublic,**  683).  Hence  the  proverb, 
T^  rplrov  TfS  awrrrjp^  lit,  the  third  to  the  scmour  ;  i.e.,  the  third 
or  lucky  time.  The  name  was  also  given  later  to  princes  or 
public  benefactors.  The  kindred  noun  a-omfpia  aahation^  does 
not  occur  in  John's  Epistles,  and  appears  only  once  in  the  Gospel 
(iv.  22).  It  is  found  thrice  in  the  Apocalypse  (viL  10 ;  xiL  10 ; 
xix.  1).  Xoi^^€iv  to  s(we  occurs  six  times  in  John's  (Gospel,  and 
once  in  the  Apocalypse  (xxi.  24).  It  does  not  appear  in  the 
Epistles. 

15.  Whosoever  (69  Hoi).    Lit,  who  if  there  he  any. 
Shall  confess.    See  on  L  9. 

Son  of  God.    See  on  1. 7. 

16.  The  love  which  God  hath.  On  this  use  of  ^ly  to 
havey  see  on  John  xvi.  22.    Compare  John  xiiL  35. 

To  us  {ip  fipHv).  Kev.,  in  us.  Compare  Chd  abideth  in 
Him. 

Dwelleth  in  love,  etc    See  John  xv.  9, 10.    Bev.,  dbide(h. 

17.  Herein  {h  rovrfp).  To  what  does  this  refer!  Two  ex- 
planations are  given.  (1.)  To  the  following  that  we  may  have 
hddneea.  So  Huther,  who  argues  thus  on  the  ground  that 
ver.  18  shows  that  the  drift  of  the  writer's  thought  is  toward 
the  Jearleseness  of  love.  According  to  this,  therefore,  love  has 
its  fulfilment  in  freeing  us  from  fear,  and  inspiring  us  with 
boldness  even  in  view  of  the  final  judgment.  (2.).  To  what 
precedes,  viz.,  our  dwelling  in  God  and  He  in  tie.  So  West- 
cott :  ^^  The  fellowship  of  God  with  man  and  of  man  with  God, 
carries  with  it  the  consummation  of  love."  I  prefer  the  latter, 
principally  on  the  ground  that  in  such  phrases  as  hf  rovrfp  in 
thisj  Bi^  toOto  on  this  accotmtj  therefore,  the  pronoun  usually 
refers  to  something  preceding,  though  more  fully  developed  in 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


300  WORD  8TUDIBB  IN  THB  HBW  TESTAMENT. 

wbat  follows.    See  John  v.  16,  18 ;  ▼!  M ;  yiii.  47 ;  x.  17 ; 
zii  18 ;  XTL  15. 

Our  lov#  (i^  wi&ini  i^tSf  ^/mM).  The  A.  Y.  oonstrues  /le^* 
4^M»r  wih  uSf  with  loWy  making  wth  us  equivalent  to  ottr.  In 
that  case  it  might  mean  either  ihe  love  which  is  betweetfi  Christr- 
44snsy  or  the  lave  which  ie  between  Ood  wnd  Chrietians.  The 
Bev.  oonstmes  with  us  with  the  verb :  love  is  made  perfect 
with  us.  The  latter  is  preferable.  I  do  not  think  it  wonld  be 
easy  to  point  out  a  parallel  in  the  New  Testament  to  the  ex- 
pression 070^  fAey  fiii&v  love  that  is  with  us  =  our  love.  The 
tme  idea  is  that  love  is  perfected  in  fellowship.  The  love  of 
Ood  is  perfected  with  us^  in  communion  with  us,  through  our 
abiding  in  Him  and  He  in  us.  ^^  Love  is  not  simply  perfected 
in  man,  but  in  fulfilling  this  issue  God  works  with  man'' 
(Westcott).  Compare  2  John  3,  ^^  grace  shall  be  loith  us  "  (true 
reading) ;  and  Acts  xv.  4,  ^^  what  things  God  had  done  unth 
them.^  See  also  Matt  L  23 ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  24 ;  Gal.  vi  18. 
Merd  with,  is  used  constantly  in  the  New  Testament  of  ethical 
relations.  See  Matt.  xx.  2 ;  iL  3 ;  Luke  xxiii  12 ;  Acts  vii.  9 ; 
Bom.  xiL  15 ;  1  John  i.  6. 

Boldness  {wap^lav).    See  on  iL  28. 

The  day  of  judgment  (rg  ^fiipq^  r^  KpUrem).  Lit.,  the  day 
qf  the  judgment.  The  exact  phrase  occurs  here  only.  ^H^Uptf 
scpla-ec^  day  of  judgment,  without  the  articles,  is  found  Matt 
X.  15;  xL  22,  24;  xii.  86;  2  Pet  iL  9 ;  iiL  7.  The  day  is 
called  the  great  day  of  their  wrath  (Apoc  vi.  17) ;  the  day  of 
wrath  a/nd  of  revelation  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  Ood  (Bom. 
ii.  5) ;  the  day  of  visitation  (1  Pet.  iL  12)  ;  ^  last  day  (John 
vi.  39,  40,  44,  54) ;  that  day  (Matt  vii.  22 ;  Luke  vL  23 ;  x. 
12).  T%e  judgment  is  found  Matt  xii.  41,  42 ;  Luke  x.  14 ; 
xL  31,  82. 

Because.    Likeness  to  Christ  is  the  ground  of  boldness. 

As  (icadck).  Not  absolutely,  but  according  to  our  measure, 
aa  men  in  this  world. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  EPI8TLB  OF  JOHN.  861 

He  is.  The  present  tense  is  very  significant  Compare  iiL 
1j  ^^  is  righteous  even  as  He  i«  righteoas."  The  essence  of  oar 
being  as  He  is  lies  in  perfected  love ;  and  Christ  is  eternally 
love.  ^^  He  that  abideth  in  love  abideth  in  God  and  GU>d  in 
him."    Compare  iii.  2. 

In  this  world.  This  present  economy,  physical  and  moral. 
The  phrase  limits  the  conception  of  likeness. 

18.  There  is  no  fear  in  love  (^i8o9  ovk  Sartv  ip  if  &ff<hrg). 
JAt^Jear  is  not.  It  has  no  existence.  The/ear  is  that  spoken 
of  in  1  Pet  i.  17 ;  Heb.  xii.  28 ;  godly  fear ;  filial  reverence: 
not  slavish  fear,  as  Rom.  viii.  15.  In  love^  lit,  the  love,  that 
perfected  love  of  which  John  has  been  speaking. 

Perfect  (rtXeia).  Not  perfected^  as  ver.  17,  bnt  perfect  as 
the  result  of  having  been  perfected.  Compare  Heb.  v.  14 ; 
Jas.  i.  4 ;  iiL  2. 

Casteth  out  (J{«»  /9<£XXei).  A  strong  expression :  twmeth 
out  of  doors.  Fear  is  cast  out  of  the  sphere  of  the  fellowship 
of  love.  See  the  phrase  in  John  vL  87 ;  ix.  34,  35  ;  xii.  31 ; 
XV.  6. 

Hath  torment  {icoKaaw  ^ei).  Tormefnt  is  a  faulty  transla- 
tion. The  word  means  punishment^  penalty .  It  occurs  in  the 
New  Testament  only  here  and  Matt  xxv.  46.  The  kindred 
verb,  KoXd^ofjuii  to  punish^  is  found  Acts  iv.  21 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  9. 
Note  the  present  tense,  hath.  The  punishment  ib  present.  Fear 
by  anticipating  punishment  has  it  even  now.  The  phrase  hath 
punishment  (see  on  John  xvi.  22)  indicates  that  the  punish- 
ment is  inherent  in  the  fear.  Fear  carries  its  own  punish- 
ment. Augustine,  commenting  on  the  expulsion  of  fear  by 
love,  says :  '^  As  in  sewing,  we  see  the  thread  passed  through 
by  the  needle.  The  needle  is  first  pushed  in,  but  the  thread 
cannot  be  introduced  until  the  needle  is  brought  out.  So  fear 
first  occupies  the  mind,  but  does  not  remain  permanently,  be- 
cause it  entered  for  the  purpose  of  introducing  love."  The 
words  "because  fear  hath  punishment  are  parenthetical. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

He  that  feareth.  The  A.  Y.  omits  and  (S^),  which  is  im- 
portant as  closelj  connecting  this  clause  with  there  is  no/ear  in 
lovey  etc.  That  is  an  abstract  statement ;  this  is  personal ;  two 
modes  of  stating  the  same  tmth.    Bev.  '^  cmd  he  that  feareth." 

Is  not  made  perfect.  ^^  Men's  condition  is  varied ;  without 
fear  and  love ;  with  fear  without  love ;  with  fear  and  love ; 
without  fear  with  love  *'  (Bengel). 

19.  We  love  Him  {iiiiw  a^am-AfAev  airriv).  The  best  texts 
omit  Sim.  Some  render  let  tie  love,  as  ver.  7.  The  statement 
is  general,  relating  to  the  entire  operation  of  the  principle  of 
love.  All  human  love  is  preceded  and  generated  by  the  love 
of  God. 

20.  He  that  loveth  not  his  brother,  etc  Note  the  strik- 
ing inversion  of  the  clauses:  Se  that  loveth  not  hie  hrother 
whom  he  hath  eeen^  God  whom  he  hath  not  seen  cannot  love. 

How.  The  best  texts  omit,  and  give  the  direct  statement 
oamiot  love.    So  Bev. 

21.  That  (Zya).  Not  defining  the  contents  of  the  command- 
ment, but  expressing  its  intent.  Compare  John  xiiL  34,  and  see 
on  John  xv.  13. 

His  brother.  ^^  To  the  persecutor  Saul,  Christ  said, '  Saul, 
Saul,  why  persecutest  thou  Me  t  I  have  ascended  into  heaven, 
yet  still  I  lie  upon  earth.  Here  I  sit  at  the  right  hand  of  the 
Father;  there  I  stiU  hunger,  thirst,  and  am  a  stranger'" 
(Augustine). 


CHAPTER  r. 

1.  Whosoever  believeth  (tto^  o  wurrewmf).  Lit.,  every  one 
that  heUeveth.  For  the  characteristic  form  of  expression  see 
on  iii  3. 

The  Christ.    See  on  Matt  i.  1,  and  1  John  L  7. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  BPISTLB  OF  JOHN.  863 

S.  By  this  (iprovr^).  Not  by  thk  or  from  thii^M  m  tq^ 
encd  (see  on  iv.  6),  bnt  in  the  Teiy  ezerctse  of  the  sentiment 
toward  God,  wej>ercewe. 

When  (*raif).  More  strictly,  whenever.  Our  perception  of 
the  existence  of  love  to  our  brethren  is  developed  on  every  00^ 
casion  when  we  exercise  love  and  obedience  toward  God. 

Keep  (Tffp&fAeif).  Read  iroUifiev  do.  So  Bev.  See  on  John 
iiL  21 ;  1  John  iii  4.  The  exact  phrase  tro^eip  t^9  ivTo\h^  to  do 
the  commandments,  occurs  only  here.    See  on  Apoc.  xxii.  14. 

3.  Grievous  (fiapetai).  Dt,  heavy.  The  word  occurs  six 
times  in  the  Kew  Testament.  Acts  xx.  29,  violent,  rapacious; 
"  grievous  wolves "  :  2  Cor.  x.  10,  weighty ,  impressive^  of 
Paul's  letters :  Matt  xxiii.  23 ;  Acts  xxv.  7,  important,  serious; 
the  weightier  matters  of  the  law ;  serious  charges  against  PauL 

*•  Ovsrcometh  iyucf).    See  on  ii.  13. 

The  victory  (i^  vliai).    Only  here  in  the  Kew  Testament 

That  overcomsth  (i^  vnciia'aa'a).  The  aorist  tense,  overcame. 
On  the  cumulative  form  of  expression,  the  victory,  that  which 
overcame,  see  on  iv.  9.  The  aorist  is  to  be  held  here  to  its 
strict  sense.  The  victory  over  the  world  wm,  potentially, 
won  when  we  believed  in  Jesus  as  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God. 
We  overcome  the  world  by  being  brought  into  union  with 
Christ  On  becoming  as  He  is  (iii.  17)  we  become  partakers 
of  His  victory  (John  xvi.  33).  "  Greater  is  He  that  is  in  you 
than  He  that  is  in  the  world  "  (iv.  4). 

Our  faith  {irUrrv;  fiiA&v).  UUrrv;  faith,  only  here  in  John's 
Epistles  and  not  in  the  Gospel.  Our  faith  is  embraced  in  the 
confession  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God.  On  the 
question  of  the  subjective  and  objective  use  of  ihefaith^  see  on 
Acts  vi  7. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


864  WORD  STUDIES  IH  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

6.  He  that  overcometh  (o  vuc&ii).  The  article  with  the 
participle  denoting  what  is  hdbUual;  one  who  leads  a  life  of 
victory  over  the  world. 

6.  This.    Jesoa. 

He  that  came  (o  tK^inf).  Beferring  to  the  historic  fact 
See  Matt  xL  3  ;  Luke  viL  19 ;  John  L  15,  27.  Compare,  for 
the  form  of  expression,  John  L  83 ;  iiL  18. 

By  water  and  blood  (&*  J$SaT09  koX  aSfAarosi).  Aid  hyy  mnst 
be  taken  with  6  ikSwv  He  thoA  came.  It  has  not  merely  the 
sense  of  aoocmhpanimeniy  bot  also  of  inetrumerUaUtyj  i.e.,  hjfy 
through^  hy  means  of.  Water  and  Uood  are  thos  the  media 
through  which  Jesos  the  Mediator  wronght,  and  which  espe- 
cially characterized  the  coming.  See  especially  Heb.  ix.  12 : 
^^  Christ  being  came  .  .  .  neither  it/  the  blood  {Si  atftaro^) 
of  goats  and  calves,  bat  by  Sis  own  blood  {B$h  Se  rou  ISiov 
atfjLaro^ '').  Compare  "  we  walk  by  faith  not  by  sight  {B$h 
vurrem  ov  i$h  cBow/'  2  Cor.  v.  7) :  we  wait  with  (lit,  through) 
jxUienoe  {Si  inrofAovij^j^^  Bom.  viii.  25). 

Water  refers  to  Christ's  baptism  at  the  beginning  of  His 
Messianic  work,  through  which  Ue  declared  His  purpose  to 
fulfil  all  righteousness  (Matt  iii.  15).  Blood  refers  to  His 
bloody  death  upon  the  cross  for  the  sin  of  the  world. 

Other  explanations  are  substituted  for  this  or  combined  with 
it  Some  refer  the  words  water  and  blood  to  the  incident  in 
John  xix.  34.  To  this  it  is  justly  objected  that  these  words  are 
evidently  chosen  to  describe  something  characteristic  of  Christ's 
Messianic  office,  which  could  not  be  said  of  the  incident  in 
question.  Nevertheless,  as  Alford  justly  remarks,  "  to  deny 
all  such  allusion  seems  against  probability.  The  apostle  could 
hardly,  both  here  and  in  that  place,  lay  such  evident  stress  on 
the  water  and  the  blood  together,  without  having  in  his  mind 
some  link  connecting  this  place  and  that"  The  readers  of  the 
Epistle  must  have  been  familiar  with  the  incident,  from  oral  or 
from  written  teaching. 

Others  refer  the  words  to  the  Christian  sacraments.    ThesOi 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  BPISTLB  OF  JOHN.  86S 

however,  as  Hnther  obserres,  are  onlj  the  means  for  the  a^ppro- 
jfriation  of  ChrisCe  atonemetU  ;  whereas  the  subject  here  is  the 
€U)(X)mpUsh7nentoftJis€U4memen:ti4se{^^  ^t/ui  &2o^,  standing  bj 
itself,  never  signifies  the  Lord's  Sapper  in  the  New  Testament 

The  troe  principle  of  interpretation  appears  to  be  laid  down 
in  the  two  canons  of  Diisterdieck.  (1.)  Water  and  Uood  must 
point  both  to  some  pnrelj  historical  facts  in  the  life  of  our 
Lord  on  earth,  and  to  some  still  present  witnesses  for  Christ 
(2.)  They  mnst  not  be  interpreted  symbolically,  but  understood 
of  something  so  real  and  powerful,  as  that  by  them  God's  testi- 
mony is  given  to  believers,  and  eternal  life  assured  to  them. 
Thus  the  sacramental  reference,  though  secondary,  need  not  be 
excluded.  Canon  Westcott  finds  ^'  an  extension  of  the  mean- 
ing "  of  water  and  Uood  in  the  following  words :  ^^  Kot  in  the 
water  only,  but  in  the  water  and  in  the  blood,"  followed  by  the 
reference  to  iiib  present  witness  of  the  Spirit  He  argues  that 
the  change  of  the  prepositions  {h  in^  for  Bui  hy\  the  use  of 
the  article  (Tf>),  and  the  stress  laid  on  actual  experience  (it  is  the 
Spirit  that  witn^sseih)^  these,  together  with  the  fact  that  that 
which  was  spoken  of  in  its  unity  (Jy  wcOer  and  Uood)  is  now 
spoken  of  in  its  separate  parts  {in  the  water  a/nd  in  the  Uood) — 
^^all  show  that  St  John  is  speaking  of  a  continuation  of  the  first 
coming  under  some  new  but  analogous  form.  The  first  proof 
of  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus  lay  in  His  complete  historical  ful- 
filment of  Messiah's  work  once  for  all,  in  bringing  purification 
and  salvation ;  that  proof  is  continued  in  the  experience  of  the 
Church  in  its  two  separate  parts."  Thus  we  are  led  to  the  ideas 
underlying  the  two  sacraments. 

The  subject  opened  by  the  word  Uood  is  too  large  for  discus- 
sion within  these  limits.  The  student  is  referred  to  Dr.  Patrick 
Fairbaim's  "  Typology  of  Scripture ; "  Andrew  Jukes, "  The  Law 
of  the  Offerings;"  Professor  William  Milligan,  " The  Resur- 
rection of  our  Lord,"  note,  p.  274  sqq. ;  Canon  Westcott's  **  Ad- 
ditional Note  "  on  1  John  i.  7,  in  his  "  Commentary  on  John's 
Epistles ; "  and  Henry  Clay  Trumbull,  "  The  Blood  Covenant 

Not  by  water  only  {ovk  h  t^  USar^  fiovov).  Lit,  not  in  the 
water  only.    Bev.,  wUh.    The  preposition  iv  iny  marks  the 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


366  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NBW  TESTAXSHT. 

9pheTe  or  eUmerU  in  which ;  Sui  ht/y  the  medium  throngh  which. 
For  the  interchange  of  h  and  Sui  see  2  Cor.  vi  7.  The  words 
are  probably  directed  against  the  teaching  of  Cerinthns.  See 
on  iL  22.  John  asserts  that  Jesns  is  the  Christ,  and  that  He 
came  bj  Uood  as  well  as  by  water. 

And  it  is  the  Spirit  that  beareth  witness  {koX  rh  wvevfid 
iimv  rh  fiapTvpovp).  Lit.,  and  the  Spirit  is  that  which  is  bear- 
ing witneM.  Kote  the  present  tense,  beareth  toitneee^  and  com- 
pare yer.  9,  hath  borne  witness.  The  witness  is  present  and 
continnons  in  the  Church,  in  the  sacraments  for  instance,  in 
water  and  in  blood.  Witnessing  is  the  peculiar  office  of  the 
Spirit.  See  John  xir.  26;  xv.  26;  xvL  8  sqq.  See  on  John 
1.7. 

Because  (2ri).  Some  render  ihaty  as  presenting  the  eub- 
stance  of  the  testimony,  which  is  absurd :  the  Spirit  toitnesseth 
that  the  Spirit  is  the  truth.  The  Spirit  is  the  Soly  Ohosty  not 
the  spiritual  l\fe  in  man. 

The  truth  (i^  itXaiSeut).  Just  as  Christ  is  the  truth  (John 
xiv.  6). 

7.  There  are  three  that  bear  record  (rpek  elati^  oi  fAapiv 
povimi).    Lit,  three  are  the  witnessing  ones. 

The  Father,  the  Word,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  these 
three  are  one.  These  words  are  rejected  by  the  general  ver- 
dict of  critical  authorities.  For  the  details  of  the  memorable 
controversy  on  the  passage,  the  student  may  consult  Frederick 
Henry  Scrivener,  "  Introduction  to  the  Criticism  of  the  New 
Testament;^  Samuel  P.  Tregelles,  "  An  Account  of  the  Printed 
Text  of  the  Greek  New  Testament ; "  John  Selby  Watson,  "The 
Life  of  Richard  Porson,  M.  A. ; "  Professor  Ezra  Abbot,  "  Orme's 
Memoir  of  the  Controversy  on  1  John  v.  7;"  Charles  Foster,  "A 
New  Plea  for  the  Authenticity  of  the  Text  of  the  Three  Heav- 
enly  Witnesses,"  or  "Porson's  Letters  to  Travis  Eclectically 
Examined,"  Cambridge,  1867.  On  the  last-named  work. 
Scrivener  remarks,  '^  I  would  fain  call  it  a  success  if  I  could 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  EPI8TLB  OP  JOHN.  867 

with  truth.  To  rebut  much  of  Porson's  insolent  sophistry  was 
easy,  to  maintain  the  genuineness  of  this  passage  is  simply  im- 
possible.*' Tregelles  gives  a  list  of  more  than  fifty  volumes, 
pamphlets,  or  critical  notices  on  this  question.  Forson,  in  the 
conclusion  of  his  letters  to  Travis,  says:  "  In  short,  if  this  verse 
be  really  genuine,  notwithstanding  its  absence  from  all  the 
visible  Greek  manuscripts  except  two  (that  of  Dublin  and  the 
forged  one  found  at  Berlin),  one  of  which  awkwardly  translates 
the  verse  from  the  Latin,  and  the  other  transcribes  it  from  a 
printed  book ;  notwithstanding  its  absence  from  all  the  ver- 
sions except  the  Yulgate,  even  from  many  of  the  best  and 
oldest  manuscripts  of  the  Yulgate ;  notwithstanding  the  deep 
and  dead  silence  of  all  the  Greek  writers  down  to  the  thirteenth, 
and  of  most  of  the  Latins  down  to  the  middle  of  the  eighth 
century ;  if,  in  spite  of  all  these  objections,  it  be  still  genuine, 
no  part  of  Scripture  whatsoever  can  be  proved  either  spurious 
or  genuine ;  and  Satan  has  been  permitted  for  many  centuries 
miraculously  to  banish  the  ^  finest  passage  in  the  Kew  Testa- 
ment,' as  Martin  calls  it,  from  the  eyes  and  memories  of 
almost  all  the  Christian  authors,  translators,  and  transcribers." 

8.  Ag^ree  \n  one  {ek  rh  hf  eunv).  Lit,  are  for  the  one. 
They  converge  upon  the  one  truths  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of 
God,  come  in  the  flesh. 

9.  If  we  receive  {el  Xofifidvofiai).  The  indicative  mood,  as- 
suming such  reception  as  a  fact  If  we  receive,  (m  we  do.  On 
the  verb  reoeivej  see  on  John  iii.  32. 

The  witness  of  God  is  greater.  Supply  mentally,  and 
therefore  we  ehotdd  receive  thai. 

For  {Sri).  Not  explaining  why  it  is  greater^  but  why  the 
principle  of  the  superior  greatness  of  divine  testimony  should 
apply  and  be  appealed  to  in  this  case.  Supply  mentally,  and 
this  applies  in,  the  case  "before  us^foTy  etc. 

This  is  the  witness  of  God  which  ^v).  The  best  texts  read 
2ri  that  or  "because.  Eender  UiaJt.  This  is  the  witness  of  Ood^ 
even  the  fact  thatj  etc. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


868  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NSW  TESTAMENT. 

10.  On  the  Son  of  God.  Faith  in  the  person  of  Clirist,  not 
merely  in  the/ad  that  Jestis  is  the  Son  of  God. 

God.  Also  personal.  To  believe  God,  is  to  believe  the  mes- 
sage which  comes  from  Him.    See  on  John  L  12. 

Hath  made  —  hath  believed  {weTrolffKev — ireirUrreuKey). 
The  perfect  tense  marks  the  two  results  expressed  by  the 
verbs  as  connected  with  a  past  act.  The  act  perpetuates  itself 
in  the  pi^esent  condition  of  the  unbeliever. 

Believed  on  the  witness  {ireir{<rrevK€v  ek  rfip  fiaprvpiav). 
The  phrase  occurs  only  here.  See  on  John  i.  12.  In  one  other 
case  to  believe  on  is  used  with  an  object  not  directly  personal, 
wurrevere  ek  to  <f>w ;  but  the  reference  is  clearly  to  the  per- 
sonal Christ  as  the  Light  of  the  World  (John  viii.  12). 

11.  Hath  given  {e^icof).  The  aorist  tense,  game.  So  Rev. 
The  reference  is  to  the  historic  fact  of  the  gift.  So  1  John  iii. 
23 :  "  We  should  love  one  another  as  He  game  {iSwKev)  us  com- 
mandment'* Ver.  24 :  "  We  know  that  He  abideth  in  us  by 
the  Spirit  which  He  gave  {SBwKep)  us."  On  the  other  hand,  1 
John  iii.  1 :  "  Behold  what  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  be- 
stowed {SiB<oK€v)  upon  us.**  The  gift  of  love  abides  in  the  fact 
that  we  are  now  children  of  God  (ver.  2). 

Eternal  life  (^^ayifv  aliviov).  Compare  the  phrase  riiv  ^ooifp 
ri)v  auov^ov  the  life^  the  eternal  Ufe  (i.  2),  and  ^  aiivtc^  Ijaii  the 
eternal  life  (John  xvii.  3).  For  the  distinction  between  the 
phrases  see  on  i.  2.  The  phrase  here,  without  either  article, 
merely  defines  the  character  of  the  life. 

12.  Hath  life  (?x^*''^^?^'')-  More  strictly,  as  Eev.,^  life; 
t.^.,  the  life  which  God  gave  (ver.  11).  See  on  John  xvL  22. 
Compare  Christ  who  is  our  life  (CoL  iii.  4). 

The  Son  of  God.  Hath  the  Son^  hath  not  the  Son  of  Oody 
pointing  back  to  God  as  the  giver  of  life  in  His  Son.  Bengel 
observes :  ^'  The  verse  has  two  clauses :  in  the  former,  of  God 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  EPISTLB  OF  JOHIT.  369 

is  not  iaddedy  becanse  believers  know  the  Son;  in  the  other  it 
is  added,  that  unbelievers  may  know  at  length  how  serious  it  is 
not  to  have  Him." 

Hath  not  life.  Kote  the  inversion  ^'  He  that  hath  the  Son 
JuOh  the  life.  He  that  hath  not  the  Son  of  God,  the  Ufe  hcUA 
henot.^ 

18.  Have  I  written  (Sypaypu).  Lit,  Itorote.  John  speaks 
as  looking  back  over  his  Epistle  and  recalling  the  aim  with 
which  he  wrote.    See  on  ii  13. 

May  know  {elSviTe).  Kot  perceive  {yivfoa-tc€tv\  but  know 
with  settled  and  absolute  knowledge.    See  on  John  ii  24. 

Ye  have  eternal  life  {'S<^p  ^ere  aUopuni).  The  Greek  order 
is  peculiar,  "ye  may  know  that  life  ye  have  etemoL^  The  ad- 
jective eternal  is  added  as  an  after-thought  So  Westcott :  "  that 
ye  have  life — yes,  eternal  life.*' 

Unto  you  that  believe.  In  the  A.  Y.,  these  words  follow 
have  I  written.  The  Rev.  follows  the  Greek  order.  The  words, 
like  eternal^  above,  are  added  as  an  after-thought,  defining  the 
character  of  the  persons  addressed. 

On  the  name  {eU  rh  Svofia).    See  on  John  ii.  23 ;  L 13. 

14.  Confidence  (ira^prfcia).  Bev.,  boldness.  See  on  ii.  28 ; 
John  vii.  13.    On  ha/oe  holdness^  see  on  John  xvi.  22. 

We  ask  (aMful^a).  With  a  possible  reference  in  the  middle 
voice  to  asking  for  ourselves. 

According  to  His  will  (tearh  rh  SiXflfffia  avrov).  For  the 
phrase  compare  1  Pet  iv.  19 ;  Gal.  L  4;  Eph.  i.  5, 11. 

He  heareth  us  {atcovei  fjfi&v).    Compare  John  ix.  31 ;  zi  41, 
42.    Bear  is  used  in  this  sense  by  John  only. 
Vol.  n.— 24 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


ft70  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

16.  Whatsoever  we  ask.  The  whole  phrase  is  governed  by 
the  verb  hear.    If  we  know  that  He  heareth  onr  every  petition. 

16.  If  any  man  see  {ii»  rv;  %).    A  supposed  case. 

His  brother.    Christian  brother. 

Sin  a  sin  {afMprivovra  ofuifnlav).  Lit,  as  Bev.,  sinning  a 
sin.  There  is  no  exact  parallel  to  the  phrase  in  the  New  Test- 
ament   Compare  thepromiee  which  Reprcmi9^  ii.  25. 

Not  unto  death  {ji^  wp^  B^parov).  Describing  the  nature 
of  the  sin.  The  preposition  uniOy  signifies  tend&iu^  toward^  not 
necessarily  iiwolvinff  death.    See  on  ver.  17. 

He  shall  ask  (ofnfa^).  In  prayer.  The  future  tense  ex- 
presses not  merely  j>&rmis$ion  (it  shall  be  permitted  him  to  ask), 
but  the  certainty  that,  as  a  Christian  broUier,  he  will  ask.  An 
injunction  to  that  effect  is  implied. 

He  shall  give.  He  n^y  refer  either  to  Qod  or  to  the 
petitioner  J  as  being  the  means  of  bestowing  life  through  his 
intercession,  as  in  Jas.  v.  20.  The  former  explanation  is  the 
more  natural.    So  Bev. 

Him  {airr^).    The  brother  for  whom  intercession  is  made. 

For  them  that  sin  {roU  ifiaprivowTw).  In  apposition  wifli 
airr^  to  him,  God  shall  give  life  unto  him  (the  erring  brother), 
eoen  unto  them  that  sin.  The  plural  generalizes  the  particular 
ease  described  by  ofiafyrdpopra  ifiaprlau  sinning  a  sin. 

There  is  a  sin  {i<rr$v  ifiaprta).  Eev.,  margin,  better,  ^n. 
A  sin  would  express  a  specific  act  as  such.  Sin  describes  the 
character  of  a  class  of  acts. 

Ufito  death.  The  difficulty  of  the  passage  lies  in  the  explan- 
ation of  these  words.    It  is  impossible  to  determine  their  exact 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  EPISTLE  OP  JOHN.  371 

meaning  with  certainty.  Some  of  the  many  explanations  are  ar 
follows  :  Sach  sin  as  God  pnnishes  with  deadly  sickness  or  sud- 
den death.  All  those  sins  punished  with  excommanication  (so 
the  older  Catholic  theologians).  An  unrepented  sin.  Envy.  A 
sinf al  state  or  condition.  The  sin  by  which  the  Christian  falls 
back  from  Christian  life  into  death.  The  anti-Christian  denial 
that  Jesus  is  the  Clirist 

The  phrase  Xafieip  ofJMprlav  Savrfro<l>6pov  to  incur  a  deaths 
hearing  sin  (A.  V.,  hear  sin  and  die)j  occurs  Num.  xviii.  22, 
Sept.,  and  the  distinction  between  sins  unto  death  and  sins 
not  unto  death  is  common  in  Babbinic  writings.  However 
John's  expression  may  have  been  suggested  by  these,  it  cannot 
be  assumed  that  they  determine  the  sense  in  which  he  uses  it. 

Life  and  death  in  the  passage  must  cori*espond.  Bodily 
death  and  spiritual  life  cannot  be  meant.  The  passage  must 
be  interpreted  in  the  light  of  John's  utterances  elsewhere  con- 
cerning life  and  death.  In  ver.  12,  he  says :  Re  that  hath  the 
Son  hath  lifey  and  he  that  hath  not  the  Son  of  Ood  hath  not 
life.  In  iii.  14, 15,  he  says  that  he  thai  loveth  not  abideth  in 
dearth :  that  he  that  hateth  his  hrother  is  a  manslayer^  and  that 
no  mamdayer  hath  eternal  life  abiding  in  him.  These  canons 
of  interpretation  point  to  the  explanation,  in  which  some  of  the 
best  authorities  agree,  that  the  sin  unto  death  does  not  refer  to 
a  specific  actj  but  to  a  dass  or  species  of  sins,  the  tendency  of 
which  is  to  cut  the  bond  of  fellowship  with  Christ.  Hence  the 
passage  is  in  the  key-note  of  fellowship  which  pervades  the 
Epistle.  Whatever  breaks  the  fellowship  between  the  soul 
and  Christ,  and,  by  consequence,  between  the  individual  and  the 
body  of  believers,  is  unto  death,  for  there  is  no  life  apart  from 
Christ  It  is  indeed  true  that  this  tendency  inheres  in  all  sin. 
Sin  is  essentially  death.  But  a  distinction  is  to  be  made,  as 
Canon  Westcott  observes,  between  sins  which  flow  from  human 
imperfection  and  infirmity,  and  sins  which  are  open  manifesta- 
tions of  a  character  alien  from  God.  ^^All  unrighteousness  is 
sin,  and  there  is  a  sin  not  unto  death."  It  must  be  carefully 
borne  in  mind  in  the  study  of  the  passage,  that  John  is  speak- 
ing of  sinful  acts  as  revelations  of  character^  and  not  simply  in 
themselves.    So  Huther:  ^^Such  sinning  as  is  characterized. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


S73  WORD  STUDIES  Df  THB  NEW  TB8TAMENT. 

Dot  by  the  object  with  which  it  is  connected,  bnt  bj  the  dispo^ 
Bition  from  which  it  proceeds."  * 

I  do  not  say  that  he  shall  pray  for  It  {ov  wepl  imlinf;  Xi^ 
&a  iporn/iarj).  Lit,  not  concerning  this  do  I  say  that  he  ehotUd 
make  request.  So  Bev.  Prajer  even  for  this  sin  unto  death  is 
uotforbiddeny  bat  John  says  that  he  does  not  enjoin  it.  Note 
the  sharp  distinctness  with  which  that  terrible  sin  is  thrown 
out  by  the  pronoon  of  remote  reference  and  its  emphatic  posi- 
tion in  the  sentence.  Note  also  the  words  make  request  (ipw- 
niajf),  and  compare  aMiaei  he  ehaU  ash  On  the  distinction, 
see  on  Lake  xi.  9.  Airim  to  aak^  is  used  of  the  petition  of  an 
inferior,  and  is  never  used  of  Chrisf s  own  requests  to  God. 
Hence  it  is  properly  used  here  of  the  humble  and  afFectionate 
petition  of  a  Christian  to  God  on  behalf  of  a  sinning  brother. 
^Epcrrdw  is  used  of  the  request  of  an  equal,  or  of  one  who  asks 
on  equal  terms.  Hence  it  may  mark  a  request  based  upon  fel- 
lowship with  Gtod  through  Christ,  or  it  may  hint  at  an  element  of 
presumption  in  a  prayer  for  a  sin  unto  death.  Westcott  cites 
a  very  early  inscription  in  the  Boman  Catacombs  as  an  illustra- 
tion of  the  use  of  ipmrfv  in  the  sense  of  Christian  prayer  for 
Christians :  ipcrra  (nrip  iiy&v  pray  for  vs. 

17.  Unrighteousness  (oSi^i^).  This  is  the  character  of 
every  offence  against  that  which  is  right.  Every  breach  of 
duty  IB  a  manifestation  of  sin.  Compare  iii.  4,  where  sin  is  de- 
fined as  iofoyJa  lawleMnesSy  and  lawlessness  as  sin.  See  Bom. 
vi.  18. 

18.  We  know  {otBofAev).  John  uses  this  appeal  to  knowl- 
edge in  two  forms :  we  know  (iii.  2,  14 ;  v.  18,  19,  20) ;  ye 
know  (ii.  20 ;  iii.  5,  15). 

He  that  is  begotten  of  God  (o  yewrjSeU  iic  rov  Beov). 
Lit.,  was  begotten.    This  exact  phrase  does  not  occur  elsewhere. 

*  An  interesting  paper  on  "The  Sin  nnto  Death,**  bj  the  Bev.  Samuel  Goz, 
D.D.,  maj  be  found  in  **  The  Bzpositor,"  dd  aeries,  toL  L,  p.  416.  He 
holds  to  Bengers  yiew  of  a  tii0U  state  cr  condition. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  BPI8TLB  OF  JOHN.  373 

Some  refer  it  to  the  man  who  is  bom  of  God,  making  it  paral- 
lel with  6  yeyeinnffiivof:  ex  rov  &€ov,  he  that  is  begotten  of  God. 
Others  to  Christy  the  only-begotten  of  GkxL  The  latter  is  pref- 
erable. 

That  wicked  one  (o  Tramipoi).  See  on  iL  13.  Bev.,  the 
evil  one. 

Toucheth  {iirrerai).  See  on  John  xx.  17,  the  only  other 
passage  in  John's  writings  where  the  verb  occnrs.  Both  this 
verb  and  Svffdp<»  (Ool.  ii.  21 ;  Heb.  xi.  28 ;  xii.  20)  express  a 
touch  which  exerts  a  modifying  influence  upon  the  object,  though 
^iTfidifto  indicates  rather  a  superficial  touch.  On  '^Xob^dm 
(Acts  xvii.  27 ;  Heb.  xii.  18 ;  1  John  i.  1),  see  on  Luke  xxiv. 
39.  Compare  Col.  ii  21.  The  idea  here  is  layeth  not  hold  of 
him. 

19.  We  are  of  God  {iic  rev  Oeov  itrfiiv).  For  the  phrase 
ehtu  ix  to  he  from^  see  on  John  i.  46.  For  iayJkv  we  wre^  see 
on  iii.  1.  John  expresses  the  relation  of  believers  to  God  by 
the  following  phrases :  To  be  bom  or  begotten  of  God,  Ten^ 
$rjvai  i$c  rov  Oeov  (v.  1 ;  ii.  29 ;  iv.  7) :  denoting  the  initial 
communication  of  the  new  life.  To  be  of  Oody  ehai  i/c  rov 
&€ov  (John  viii.  47 ;  1  John  iii  10 ;  iv.  6) :  denoting  the  es- 
sential connection  in  virtue  of  the  new  life.  OAild  of  God, 
ritcpov  &€ov  (John  i  12  ;  1  John  iii.  1, 10) :  denoting  the  rela- 
tion established  by  the  new  life. 

World  {icia-fioi).    See  on  John  i.  9. 

Lieth  (icetTcu).  The  word  is  stronger  than  i<m  isj  indicating 
the  passive,  unprogressive  state  in  the  sphere  of  Satan's  influ- 
ence. "  While  we  are  Jrom  God^  implying  a  birth  and  a  pro- 
ceeding forth,  and  a  change  of  state,  the  Kdcfio^  the  worlds  aU 
the  rest  of  mankind,  remains  in  the  hand  of  the  evil  one  ^ 
(Alford). 

in  wickedness  {h  r^  irovfip^).  Bev.,  better,  in  the  evil  one. 
The  expression  to  lie  in  haa  a  parallel  in  Sophocles'  ^^  Anti< 
gone:" 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


874  WORD  STUDIES  Df  THB  NEW  TBBTAMENT. 

'*  Wr«tcked  we  Ue  in  jr<m  •■  in  a  god"  (247). 

20.  An  understanding  (Suivoiay).  Only  here  in  John's 
writings.  The  facnltj  of  understanding.  See  on  Lnke  L  51. 
Westcott  remarks  that  noons  which  express  intellectoal  powers 
are  rare  in  the  writings  of  John* 

We  may  know  {yuticKOfiep).  Apprehend  progreflsirely. 
Compare  John  xvii  S. 

Him  that  is  true  {rhp  &kri^af6v).  Compare  Apoc.  iii.  7, 14; 
vi.  10.  On  true^  see  on  John  i  9.  "  God  very  strangely  con- 
descends indeed  in  making  things  plain  to  me,  actually  assum- 
ing for  the  time  the  form  of  a  man,  that  I  at  my  poor  level  may 
better  see  Him.  This  is  my  opportunity  to  know  Him.  This 
incarnation  is  God  making  Himself  accessible  to  human  thought 
-p— God  opening  to  man  the  possibility  of  correspondence  through 
Jesus  Christ.  And  this  correspondence  and  this  environ- 
ment are  those  I  seek.  He  Himself  assures  me,  ^  This  is  life 
eternal,  that  they  might  know  Thee,  the  only  true  Gk>d,  and 
jjesns  Christ  whom  Thou  hast  sent'  Do  I  not  now  discern 
the  deeper  meaning  in  Jemis  OhritA  whom  Thou  hast  sent  t  Do 
I  not  better  understand  with  what  vision  and  rapture  the  pro- 
foundest  of  the  disciples  exclaims,  ^  The  Son  of  God  is  come, 
and  hath  given  us  an  understanding,  that  we  might  know  Him 
that  is  truef'  (Drummond,  "Natural  Law  in  the  Spiritual 
World"). 

This.  God  the  Father.  Many,  however,  refer  it  to  the 
Son. 

Eternal  life.    See  on  i.  2.* 


*  The  student  wiU  do  weU  tostudj  Canon  Westoott^s  **  Additional  Note  **  on 
this  phrase,  **  Commentary  on  the  Epistles  of  John,''  p.  204  sqq. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHK.  875 

21.  K^ep  yourselves  {<l>v\d^aT€  iavrii).  The  exact  phrase 
is  not  found  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament  See  2  Pet, 
iii.  17.    Eev.,  rightly,  guard.    See  on  1  Pet  i.  4. 

idols  (elBociKMv).  Strictly,  images.  The  command,  however, 
has  apparently  the  wider  Pauline  sense,  to  guard  against  every- 
thing which  occupies  the  place  due  to  Ood. 


CRITICAL  NOTE  ON  1  JOHN  HL  19-22. 

The  second  great  division  of  John's  First  Epistle  treats  of 
the  conflict  of  truth  and  falsehood.  This  section  extends  from 
ch.  iL  18.  to  ch.  iv.  6,  and  is  subdivided  nnder  the  following 
topics : 

1.  The  revelation  of  falsehood  and  truth  (ii.  18-29). 

2.  The  children  if  Ood  a/nd  the  children  of  the  devil  (iii« 
1-12). 

8.  Brotherhood  in  Christ  and  the  haired  of  the  world  (iii« 
13-24). 

4.  l%e  litval  i^rits  of  2hah  and  Bror  {17.1-6). 

This  passage  lies  within  the  third  of  these  subdivisions ;  but 
the  line  of  thought  runs  up  into  the  second  subdivision,  which 
begins  with  this  chapter, — the  children  of  Ood  and  the  children 
^  the  Devil. 

Let  us  first  briefly  review  the  contents  of  this  chapter  down 
to  the  point  of  our  text 

God  shows  His  wonderful  love  in  calling  us  children  of  God 
{riscpa) ;  as  expressing  community  of  nature^  rather  than  viol 
(sons),  which  expresses  the  position  of  privilege. 

The  world,  therefore,  does  not  know  us,  even  as  it  did  not 
know  Him. 

We  are  children  of  God ;  and  in  this  fact  lies  enfolded  our 
future,  the  essence  of  which  will  be  likeness  to  God,  coming 
through  unveiled  and  transfiguring  vision. 

The  result  of  such  a  relation  and  hope  is  persistent  effort 
after  mxyralpwrity.  ''  Every  one  that  hath  this  hope  in  Him, 
purifieth  himself,  even  as  He  is  pure.'' 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


876  WOBD  .STUDIBS  IK  THB  If  BW  TBSTAMBNT. 

This  attempt  to  purify  corresponds  with  the  fulfilment  of 
our  true  destiny  which  Christ  has  made  possible.  Sin  is  irj*e- 
concilable  with  a  right  relation  to  Gk)d,  for  Christianity  em- 
phasizes the  law  of  God,  and  ^'  sin  is  lawlessness."  The  object 
of  Christ's  manifestation  was  to  ^^  take  away  sin ; "  therefore, 
''everyone  that  abideth  in  Him  sinneth  not"  ''He  that  doeth 
righteousness  is  righteous,  even  as  He  is  righteous."  "He  that 
committeth  sin  is  of  the  devil ; "  but  the  Son  of  God  was  mani- 
fested in  order  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  deviL  The  divine 
seed — the  divine  principle  of  growth — the  germ  of  the  new  life 
is  in  the  true  believer ;  and  the  ideas  of  divine  sonship  and  sin 
are  mutually  exclusive. 

The  being  a  child  of  God  will  manifest  itself  not  only  in  do- 
ing righteousness,  but  in  love — the  love  to  God,  taking  shape 
in  love  and  ministry  to  the  brethren.  This  is  the  highest  ex- 
pression of  righteousness.  The  whole  aim  of  the  Gospel  is  the 
creation  and  strengthening  of  love ;  and  the  type  of  life  in  God 
through  Christ  is  therefore  the  direct  opposite  of  Cain,  who 
being  of  the  evil  one,  slew  his  brother. 

Over  against  this  love  is  the  world's  hatred.  This  is  bound 
up,  as  love  is,  with  the  question  of  origin.  God's  children  share 
God's  nature,  which  is  love.  The  children  of  the  world  are  the 
children  of  the  evil  one,  whose  nature  is  lawlessness  and  hatred. 
Love  is  the  outgrowth  of  life ;  hatred,  of  death.  He  that  lo veth 
not,  abideth  in  death.  For  ourselves,  children  of  God,  we  know 
that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto  life  because  we  love  the 
brethren. 

Christ  is  the  perfect  type  and  revelation  of  love,  since  He 
gave  His  life  for  us.  We,  likewise,  ought  to  lay  down  our  lives 
for  the  brethren.  The  practical  test  of  our  brotherly  love  is 
ministry.  The  love  of  God  does  not  dwell  in  us  if  we  refuse 
to  relieve  our  brother's  need. 

The  fruit  of  love  is  conjidenoe.  "  In  ^w," — the  conscious- 
ness of  active  and  sincere  love  to  the  brethren  resting  upon  and 
moulded  by  the  love  of  Christ — in  this,  we  perceive  that  we  are 
of  the  truth ;  and,  perceiving  this,  we  shall  assure  our  hearts 
in  the  presence  of  God,  in  whom  we  live  and  move  and  have 
our  being.    It  is  of  the  very  essence  of  Christian  life  that  it  ib 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIB8T  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  877 

lived  and  tested  before  God.  lHo  assurance  or  confidence  is 
possible  except  from  being  in  right  relation  to  God. 

Through  the  consciousness  of  love,  then,  which  is  of  God, 
and  wliich  marks  the  children  of  God,  we  perceive  that  we  are 
children  of  God — of  the  trnth  ;  and  in  this  knowledge  we  find 
assurance  and  confidence  before  the  very  highest  tribunal.  ^'  We 
shall  assure  our  heart  before  Him." 

This  brings  us  to  the  heart  of  our  passage.  What  is  the 
ttpeoifio  cAaracter  and  direction  of  our  assurance  ?  Of  what  are 
we  confident  ?  Here  we  strike  the  differences  in  the  exposition 
of  the  passage.    The  questions  resolve  themselves  into  three : 

1.  What  is  the  meaning  of  welaofjLep  {toe  shall  assure  or  per- 
suade)% 

2.  How  are  the  two  iris  {that  or  heca/use)  to  be  explained  ? 

3.  What  is  the  meaning  of  ^l^tov  {greater)  ? 

Tliese  questions  are  interlinked  so  that  it  will  not  be  always 
possible  to  separate  their  discussion  sharply. 

JHelaofieif  may  be  taken  either  according  to  its  primitive 
me&niugj  persicade,  rndtuse^  prevail  tipon  (Acts  xix.  26  ;  xviii. 
4 ;  2  Cor.  v.  11),  or  in  its  secondary  and  consequent  sense,  to 
assure,  quiet,  ajcfpease  (Matt,  xxviii.  14). 

1.  If  we  render  perstcade,  two  courses  are  possible. 

(a.)  Either  we  may  use  it  absolutely,  and  mentally  sup- 
ply something  as  the  substance  of  the  persuasion.    '^  Here- 
by know  we  that  we  are  of  the  truth,  and  shall  persuade 
our  hearts  before  Him."    The  mind  might  tlien  supply : 
We  shall  persuade  our  heart  to  be  oon/ideTU  in  ash- 
ing anything  from  God.     Objection.     This  would 
anticipate  ver.  21.     ''  If  our  heart  condemn  us  not, 
then  have  we  boldness  toward  God,  and  whatsoever 
we  ask  of  Him  we  receive,"  etc. ;  or. 

We  shaJZ  jpersvade  our  heart  to  show  love  in  life  and 
act.  Objection.  This  does  not  suit  the  connection ; 
for  we  recognize  ourselves  by  our  love  as  children  of 
faith,  and  do  not  need  first  to  move  our  hearts  to  love 
which  already  dwells  there ;  or. 

We  shall  persuade  ou/r  Keart  thai  we  are  of  the 
truth.     Objection.     This  is  tautological.    We  know 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


378  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THB  NBW  TBSTAMEKT. 

or  perceive  that  we  are  of  the  tmth,  by  the  fact  of 
our  love.    We  therefore  reject  the  absolute  use  of 

(&.)  Still  rendering  jfer9uadej  we  may  attempt  to  find 
the  substance  of  the  perauasion  in  the  following  clauses. 
Here  we  run  into  the  second  of  our  three  questions,  the 
double  oTi,  for  5ta  becomes  the  sign  of  definition  of  ireC' 
aofieif.  The  different  combinations  and  translations  pro- 
posed centre  in  two  possible  renderings  for  iT$:  because  or 
that. 

If  we  render  heoattse^  it  leaves  us  with  the  absolute 
welaofAev  which  we  have  rejected.  We  have  then  to 
render — "Hereby  perceive  we  that  we  are  of  the 
truth,  and  shall  persuade  our  heart  before  Him :  &«- 
caiMe^  if  our  heart  condemn  us,  hecavsey  I  say  (second 
fri),  God  is  greater  than  our  heart,"  etc. 

All  the  other  renderings,  like  this,  involve  what  ia 
called  the  epanal&ptic  use  of  Srt ;  the  second  taking 
up  and  carrying  forward  the  sense  of  the  first.  This 
is  very  objectionable  here,  because 

1.  There  is  no  reason  for  it  This  use  of  ^  <Mr 
similar  words  is  appropriate  only  in  passages  where 
the  course  of  thought  is  broken  by  a  long,  inter- 
jected sentence  or  parenthesis,  and  where  the  con- 
junction takes  up  again  the  thread  of  discourse.  It 
is  entirely  out  of  place  here  after  the  interjection 
of  only  a  few  words. 

2.  There  is  no  parallel  to  it  in  the  writings  of 
John,  nor  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament,  so  far 
as  I  know  (but  see  1  John  v.  9). 

The  case  is  no  better  if  we  translate  St$  that.  Here  indeed 
we  get  rid  of  the  absolute  veUrofiep,  but  we  are  compelled  to 
hold  by  the  resumptive  Jri.    For  instance, 

"We  shall  persuade  ourselves  t^aty  if  our  heart  condemn 

us,  tkaty  I  say,  God  is  greater  than  our  heart." 

Moreover,  some  of  these  explanations  at  least,  commit  the 

apostle  to  misstatement.   Suppose,  for  example,  we  read :  "  We 

shall  persuade  our  heart  that  Gt>d  is  greater  than  our  heart:" 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


mtST  BPISTLB  OF  JOHN.  S79 

we  mako  the  apostle  say  that  the  conscioosuess  of  brotherly  love, 
and  of  oar  consequent  being  ^^of  the  truth,"  is  the  basis  of  our 
conviction  of  the  sovereign  greatness  of  Qod.  Thus :  ^^  Herein 
(in  our  brotherly  love)  do  we  perceive  that  we  are  of  the  truth, 
and  herein  we  shall  persuade  ourselves  that  God  is  greater  than 
our  heart,  and  knoweth  all  things." 

The  case  is  not  improved  if  we  render  the  first  jri  as  pro- 
nominal, and  read  as  follows:  ^^We  shaU  persuade  ourselves 
in  whatever  our  heart  condemn  us,  that  Otod  is  greater  than  our 
heart."  The  object  of  persuasion,  then,  is  the  greatness  of  God. 
The  sense  of  condemnation  is  the  occasion  of  our  persuading 
ourselves :  the  foundation  of  our  persuasion  of  God's  greatness 
is  our  consciousness  of  being  of  the  truth. 

We  conclude  therefore, 

1.  That  we  must  reject  all  renderings  founded  on  the 
absolute  use  of  veitrofiev, 

(a.)  Because  it  leaves  the  mind  to  supply  something 
which  the  text  leads  us  to  expect  that  it  will  supply. 

{b.)  Because  the  conception  of  persuasion  or  assur- 
ance takes  its  character  from  the  idea  of  condemning 
or  accusing  {Kara^oHiaiCff^  and  becomes  vague  if  we 
separate  it  from  that 

2.  We  must  reject  explanations  founded  on  the  epana- 
leptic  use  of  irt  for  the  reasons  already  given. 

We  turn  now  to  the  rendering  adopted  by  the  New  Testa- 
ment Revisers. 

This  rendering  takes  the  first  &r&  with  ^  as  rdatwe  pro- 
noTjnnaly  and  the  second  as  causal;  and  is  as  follows: 

^^  Herein  do  we  know  (or,  more  properly,  perceive)  that  we 
are  of  the  truth ;  and  shall  assure  (or  quiet)  our  heart  before 
Him  vn,  whatsoever  our  heart  may  condemn  (or  accuse)  us ;  be- 
cause God  is  greater  than  our  heart  and  knoweth  all  things." 

The  only  grammatical  objection  to  this  rendering,  which  is 
entitled  to  any  weight,  is  that  the  exact  pronominal  phrase  Sri 
ihv  does  not  occur  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament ;  but  this 
is  little  better  than  a  quibble,  since  we  have  really  the  same 
combination  under  another  form,  viz..  Gal.  v.  10,  icrv:  iitv  (so 
Lach.,  West,  and  H.,  Tisch.,  Lightfoot),  and  possibly  in  Acts 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


880  WORD  BTUDIBS  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

iii.  23,  where  Tisch.  reads  ^w  iitif.  In  Col.  iii.  17,  West  and 
H.,  Lightf oot,  and  Ellicott,  read  &n  ihp  (^^  whatsoever  ye  do  in 
word  or  deed  ").  Moreover,  it  i&  borne  out  by  the  frequent  use 
of  iitif  for  OP  after  relatives  (Matt.  v.  19 ;  viii.  19 ;  x.  42 ;  xi  27 ; 
John  XV.  7).     See  Moulton's  "  Winer,"  2d  ed.,  p.  890. 

This  rendering  introduces  the  third  question :  What  is  the 
meaning  of  ^Qiiov  t  Siiall  we  take  it  as  indicating  judgment 
or  compassion  on  the  part  of  Ghxl  ?  i.e. : 

Ist  Shall  we  allay  the  accusation  of  our  heart  by  saying : 
'^Ood  is  greater  than  our  heart.  His  judgment  is  therefore 
stricter  than  ours ;  and  so,  apai't  from  fellowship  with  JSim  we 
can  have  no  hope ;  '^  or,  as  Meyer  puts  it, 

*^Only  in  conscious  brotherly  love  shall  we  calm  oar 
hearts,  for,  if  we  do  not  love,  our  heart  condemns  us,  and 
God  is  greater  than  our  heart,  and  there  is  no  peace  for 
the  accusing  conscience :  ^  or,  again,  as  it  is  popularly  in- 
terpreted : 

^^  If  our  heart  condemn  us,  then  God,  who  is  greater 
than  our  hearts,  and  knows  all  things,  must  not  only  en- 
dorse, but  emphasize  our  self-accusation.''    If  ow  heart 
condemn,  how  much  more  God  \ 
Or,  2d.  Shall  we  take  yiAttjmf  as  the  expression  of  Chd*s 
compassionate  love,  and  say,  ^^  when  our  heart  condemns  us, 
we  shall  quiet  it  with  the  assurance  that  we  are  the  proved 
children  of  God,  and  therefore,  in  fellowship  with  a  God  who 
is  greater  than  our  heart,  greater  in  love  and  compassion  no 
less  than  in  knowledge  t 

The  choice  between  these  must  be  largely  determined  by  the 
drift  of  the  whole  discussion,  and  here,  therefore,  we  leave  the 
textual  and  grammatical  side  of  the  question,  and  proceed  to 
the  homiletical  aspect  of  the  passage. 

Generally,  we  may  observe  that  the  whole  drift  of  the  chap- 
ter is  consolatory  and  assuring.  The  chapter  is  introduced  with 
a  burst  of  affectionate  enthusiasm.  ^^  Behold  what  manner  of 
love  the  Father  has  bestowed  upon  us  that  we  should  be  called 
the  children  of  GKkI,  and  such  we  are.''  The  darker  shades — the 
origin  and  nature  of  sin  ;  the  truth  that  sinners  are  of  the  evil 
one ;  the  hatred  of  the  world,  springing  out  of  this  radical  op- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIB8T  BPISTLB  OF  JOHN.  881 

position  between  the  origin  and  motive  of  children  of  God  and 
children  of  the  evil  one — are  thrown  in  to  heighten  and  em- 
phasize the  position  and  privilege  of  Gk>d'8  children.  They  are 
to  be  left  in  no  doabt  as  to  their  relation  to  Ood.  Thej  are 
thrown  for  decisive  testimony  upon  the  supreme  fact  of  love. 
If  God  the  Father  is  love,  and  they  are  His  children,  they  must 
share  His  nature ;  and  they  prove  that  they  do  by  loving  Him 
and  His  children.  Hence,  John  elsewhere  says  (iv.  7  sq.), 
*'  Beloved,  let  us  love  one  another ;  for  love  is  of  God,  and 
every  one  that  loveth  hath  been  bom  of  God  (or  begotten) 
and  knoweth  God.  He  that  loveth  not,  knew  not  God,  for  God 
is  love.  ...  If  we  love  one  another,  God  abideth  in  us,  and 
His  love  is  perfected  in  us.  In  this  we  perceive  that  we  abide 
in  Him  and  He  in  us,  because  He  hath  given  us  of  His  Spirit 
.  .  .  We  have  known  and  believed  the  love  that  God  hath 
to  us.  God  is  love,  and  he  that  abideth  in  love,  abideth  in 
God,  and  God  in  him." 

And  again,  in  this  chapter,  ^^  We  know  that  we  have  passed 
from  death  unto  life,  because  we  love  the  brethren." 

This  testimony  of  love  all  tends  to  the  assurance  of  the 
heart  All  comes  to  a  head  in  this  19th  verse.  "  Herein," — in 
the  fact  and  consciousness  of  love, — ^'  herein,  perceive  we  that 
we  are  of  the  truth,  and  shall  assure  our  heart  before  Him,  in 
whatsoever  our  heart  condemn  us."  In  striking  parallelism  with 
this  is  the  foui*th  chapter  of  this  Epistle  just  alluded  to,  espe- 
cially the  way  in  which,  as  in  this  chapter,  the  evidence  of  love 
makes  for  assurance.  Look  at  the  verses  from  the  7th  to  the 
16th — the  burden  of  which  is,  as  we  have  seen,  that  love  is 
the  evidence  of  our  dwelling  in  God ;  and  then  note  how  this 
evidence  runs  into  assurance  in  the  17th  and  18th  verses. 
"  Herein  is  our  love  made  perfect,  that  we  may  have  boldness 
(compare  *  shall  assure  our  heart ')  in  the  day  of  judgment 
(compare  *  before  Him '),  because  as  He  is  so  are  we  in  this 
world  (like  Christ).  There  is  no  fear  in  love,  but  perfect  love 
casteth  out  fear,  because  fear  hath  torment." 

Now  there  was  a  very  good  and  obvious  reason  for  emphasiz- 
ing this  thought  of  assurance.  John  knew  the  misgivings  of 
the  Christian  heart ;  and  he  knew,  moreover,  how  they  would 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


382  WORD  STUDIKB  IN  THB  ITEW  TB0TAMENT. 

be  awakened  by  the  high  standard  of  Christian  character  which 
he  set  up  in  this  chapter.  Look  at  these  statements :  ^^  Every 
one  that  hath  this  hope  in  Him,  pnrifieth  himself,  even  as  He 
is  pore.''  ^^  Every  one  that  abideth  in  Him  sinneth  not. 
Every  one  that  sinneth  hath  not  even  seen  Him  nor  known 
Him."  "  He  that  coramitteth  sin  is  of  the  devil.**  "  He  that 
is  bom  of  God  doth  not  commit  sin.**  It  is  not  difficnlt  to  con- 
ceive the  effect  of  snch  statements  npon  a  sensitive  conscience. 
Let  ns  bring  ourselves  to  these  tests.  Sliall  we  not  need  to  as- 
sure our  hearts  ?  In  the  consciousness  of  infirmity,  with  the 
remembrance  of  error,  under  the  pressure  and  thrust  of  daily 
temptation,  is  it  strange  if  the  heart  accuses  ?  Is  it  strange  if 
the  question  is  raised,  ^^  Am  I  indeed  a  child  of  God  t  Do  not 
these  errors  and  lapses  prove  me  to  be  a  child  of  the  devil  f  ^ 

Now  I  think  we  should  all  be  led  to  anticipate,  in  view  of 
this  fact,  and  as  the  natural  sequence  of  the  former  part  of  the 
chapter,  a  thought,  not  of  severe  criticism  and  judgment,  based 
upon  God's  infinite  knowledge,  but  of  fatherly  compassion  and 
assurance  dealing  with  our  self-accusations,  and  quieting  our 
misgivings. 

The  Christian  consciousness  exercises  a  judicial  office  in  us, 
accusing  or  approving.  Our  heart  passes  judgment.  But  what 
we  especially  need  to  remember,  and  what,  as  it  seems  to  me, 
is  the  very  core  of  the  teaching  of  this  passage,  is  that  the  cU' 
erees  of  the  heart  a/re  not  finals  hut  mttst  beearriedupto  a  higher 
tribunal  for  ratification.  Even  our  renewed  heart  is  ignorant 
and  blind.  God  is  greater  than  our  heart  and  knoweth  all 
things.  Whatever  power  of  discernment  conscience  has,  it  re- 
ceives from  Gt>d.  Hence,  in  the  interpretation  of  the  passage 
more  stress  should  be  laid  than  is  commonly  done  upon  the 
words  "  before  Him."  "  If  we  receive  the  witness  of  men,  the 
witness  of  God  is  greater"  (1  John  v.  14.  Compare  Heb.  iv.  16). 
It  is,  as  already  hinted,  essential  to  the  idea  of  Christian  life 
that  it  is  lived  in  the  very  sight  of  God.  The  true  child  of 
Gk>d  sets  the  Lord  always  before  his  face.  The  prime  regulator 
of  his  life  is  the  sense  of  God's  presence.  God's  manifestation 
in  Christ's  perfect  obedience  is  his  pattern:  God's  law  imparts 
to  his  conscience  its  tone  of  rebuke  or  of  commendation.    This 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  883 

is  a  natural  and  necessary  result  of  the  relation  assumed  in  the 
passage — children  of  God.  As  children  of  God,  in  our  Father's 
house,  life  is  regulated  by  the  perpetual  consciousness  of  our 
Father's  presence  and  scrutiny.  No  assurance  or  confidence  is 
possible  which  does  not  grow  out  of  a  right  relation  to  Him. 

John,  then,  does  not  mean  to  say  that  a  child  of  God  is  sinless 
by  virtue  of  his  relation  as  a  child ;  and  that  his  self-accusation 
is  quieted  by  being  pronounced  groundless. 

He  does  not  mean  to  say  tliat  the  heart  may  not  accuse  him 
justly.    God's  judgment  may  confirm  that  of  the  heart 

He  does  mean  to  say  that  the  heart  is  not  the  supreme  and 
final  arbiter. 

Thp  ordinary  interpretation  presents  a  radical  defect  in 
this; — that  it  assumes  the  infallibility  of  the  heart,  and  brings 
in  God  to  confirm  and  emphasize  its  decision.  If  your  heart 
condemn  you,  then  God,  who  is  greater  than  your  heart,  con- 
demns you  more  severely,  because  He  sees  your  sin  in  the  light 
of  His  omniscience.  Further,  it  makes  our  confidence  toward 
God  depend  primarily  on  the  testimony  of  our  hearts.  If  our 
heart  condemn  us  not,  then  we  may  go  before  God  with  confi- 
dence and  ask  what  we  will,  because  God,  being  greater  than 
our  heart,  confirms  its  testimony.  The  voice  of  the  heart,  in 
short,  on  this  construction,  is  the  voice  of  Grod.  As  I  read  it, 
John's  teaching  is  the  direct  opposite  of  this.  It  is  only  Gk>d 
who  knoweth  all  things.  No  assurance,  no  accusation  is  to  be 
received  as  final  until  it  has  passed  before  Him.  We  must  look 
outside  of  self  for  the  highest  tests  of  self.  It  is  not  before 
ourselves  that  we  are  either  to  assure  or  to  condemn  ourselves. 
Belf-condemnation  will  not  be  allayed  by  self-communion.  We 
need,  not  to  be  Bdf-awared^  but  to  be  assured  hy  Him. 

It  is  almost  needless  to  say,  bnt  it  should  be  kept  in  mind, 
that  these  words  are  addressed  to  Christians ;  and  this  opens 
another  and  interesting  question, — that  of  sin  in  Christians. 
The  heart  sometimes  condemns  unjustly,  or  unduly.  The  con- 
science is  sometimes  diseased  and  morbidly  exacting,  and  the 
heart  is  distressed  with  accusations  which  are  as  fanciful  as 
they  are  painful.  Bnt  the  heart's  condemnation  is,  as  has 
been  already  said^  often  just    This,  however^  as  well  as  the 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


384  WORD  BTX7DIES  IN  THE  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

Other  cases,  is  covered  by  the  apostle's  words :  ^^  We  shall  assure 
our  heart  before  Him,  whereinsoever  our  heart  condemn  us,'* 
It  may  well  be  asked  then,  how,  when  God  endorses  the  con- 
viction of  the  heart,  we  are  to  assure  our  heart  before  Him  ? 
What,  when  the  apostle  himself  has  just  told  us  that  ^^  whoso- 
ever is  born  of  God  doth  not  commit  sin  ? — that  he  cannot  sin, 
because  he  is  bom  of  God  ? — that  whosoever  sinneth  hath  not 
seen  or  known  God  ?  These  utterances,  by  themselves,  are  ter- 
rible. Tiiey  destroy  all  hope  of  assurance.  They  make  sin- 
lessness  the  test  of  being  in  Christ  How  shall  we  assure  our 
heart  ? 

Here  we  must  be  particular  to  note  that  all  through  this 
chapter,  and  it  might  be  said,  throughout  the  Epistle,  John  is 
dealing  with  something  broader  than  specific  errors  or  good 
deeds.  He  is  dealing  with  the  question  of  a  Christian's  rela- 
tion to  God.  Note  the  sharp  and  broad  classifications  of  this 
chapter  to  this  effect,  indicating  the  order  or  economy  to  which 
the  man  belongs  rather  than  his  specific  acts. 

He  that  doeth  rigkteovsness. 

He  that  doeth  sin  /  where  sin  as  a  whole  answers  to  right- 
eousness as  a  whole. 

He  is  righteoits  even  as  He  is  righteous.  He  is  of  the  devil: 
where,  in  each  case,  the  man's  character  is  shown  to  be  a  reflec- 
tion of  his  spiritual  master. 

So,  too,  the  phrases,  "children  of  God;"  "of  the  truth;" 
"passed  from  death  unto  life."  And  in  chapter  i.,  "in  dark- 
ness;" "in  the  light."  Again,  in  chapter  iv.,  "dwelleth  in 
God ;"  "of  the  world ;"  "of  God."  And,  once  more,  the  fact 
that  the  entire  Epistle  turns  on  a  question  of  relation  between 
man  and  God.  Its  key-note  is  fellowship — "  That  which  we 
have  seen  and  heard  declare  we  unto  you  also,  that  ye  also  may 
have  fellowship  with  us ;  yea,  and  our  fellowship  is  with  the 
Father  and  with  His  Son  Jesus  Christ" 

This  being  true,  the  tests  applied  are  directed  at  this  relation. 
"  Hereby  we  perceive  that  we  are  of  the  truth : "  that  is  our 
sphere,  our  genesis,  our  economy.  And  accordingly  specific 
acts  are  treated  in  the  light  of  this  general  relation.  Ko  man 
goes  sinless  before  God.    This  is  treated  in  the  first  chap- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHK.  885 

ter  with  reference  to  certain  actnal  delusions  in  this  matter. 
Those  who  maintain  that  sin  is  an  accident  and  not  a  principle, 
a  transient  phenomenon  which  leaves  no  abiding  issues,  are  met 
with  "  if  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin  {afubprlav  oifx  ^o/^y),  we 
lead  onrselves  astray  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us."  Those  who 
deny  that,  personally,  they  have  sinned,  are  met  with  "  if  we 
say  that  we  have  not  sinned  {ovx  ^fiapTi]/cafjLep)j  we  make  of 
Him  a  liar,  and  His  word  is  not  in  us,"  So  that,  I  repeat,  the 
test  here  contemplated  is  a  test  of  relation  and  not  of  specific 
act  As  Westcott  truthfully  says :  "As  long  as  the  relationship 
with  God  is  real"  (if  a  man  is  truly  born  of  God)  "sinfnl  acts 
are  but  accidents.  They  do  not  touch  the  essence  of  the  man's 
being."  (Compare  also  Westcott  on  1  John  v.  16.)  Conse- 
quently, when  our  heart  condemns  us  of  sin,  and  we  appear 
before  God,  our  assurance  or  quieting  of  heart  comes  through 
God^s  throwing  us  back  upon  this  relation  to  Him,  and  its  ac- 
companying proof,  love  for  the  brethren.  God  teaches  the 
heart  to  meet  its  self-accusation  with  the  fact  and  evidence  of 
sonship.    Hereby  we  shall  assure  our  heart  before  Him. 

It  is  noteworthy  how  John  exalts  and  emphasizes  the  suffic- 
iency and  decisiveness  of  this  test.  "  He  that  abideth  in  love 
abideth  in  God,  and  God  in  him."  "  We  know  that  we  have 
passed  from  death  unto  life  because  we  love  the  brethren." 
And  in  the  fourth  chapter  he  is  even  more  emphatic ;  assert- 
ing (ver.  12)  that  love  to  the  brethren  is  the  only  possible 
proof  of  love  to  God ;  for  "  God  hath  no  man  ever  beheld.  If 
we  love  one  another,  God  abideth  in  us,  and  His  love  is  per- 
fected in  us." 

So,  then,  the  man  takes  his  justly  accusing  heart  before  Him, 
and  GkKi  says,  "  It  is  true,  you  have  sinned.  But  you  are  my 
child,  proven  to  be  such  by  your  love.  Shall  not  I,  your  Father, 
forgive  your  sin  ?  Do  you  fear  to  bring  it  to  me  ?  *  If  any 
man  sin,  he  hath  an  advocate  with  me,  Jesus  Christ  the  right- 
eous, and  He  is  the  propitiation  for  his  sins.'  If  you  confess 
your  sin,  I  am  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  you  your  sin  and  to 
cleanse  you  from  all  unrighteousness." 

If  he  goes  under  the  accusation  of  imperfect  love,  he  is  met 
with  the  assurance  that  his  relation  to  God  is  not  determined 
Vol.  IL— 35 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


886  WORD  BTUDIBS  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Dor  perpetuated  bj  the  scant  measure  of  the  purest  human 
love.  "  Herein  is  love ;  not  that  we  have  loved  {^ainiicafAev) 
God,  but  that  He  loved  us  (^drmjo'ev,  associating  His  love  with  a 
definite  act)  and  sent  His  Son  to  be  the  propitiation  for  our  sins." 

If  the  self -accusation  is  morbid  and  unfounded,  a  freak  of  a 
diseased  religious  fancy,  rather  than  a  truthful  verdict  of  a 
healthy  conscience,  the  complex  and  confused  witness  of  our 
ignorant  heart  is  resolved  into  the  simple  testimony  of  love.  I 
am  God^s  child.  At  my  Father^s  hand  I  shall  meet  with  no 
encouragement  to  continue  in  sin,  but  with  pardon  for  my  sin ; 
with  tonics  for  my  morbid  conditions ;  with  allowance  for  my 
infinnity.  Only  by  that  perfect  wisdom  will  the  error  be 
duly  weighed ;  only  by  that  perfect  love  will  it  be  forgiven ; 
only  by  that  perfect  strength  will  the  soul  be  energized  to 
renew  the  life-long  fight  with  sin.  If  we  are  trembling  lest 
the  things  of  which  our  heart  accuses  us  be  the  warrant  for 
disinheriting  us  of  our  position  and  privilege,  we  are  pointed 
past  our  individual  lapses  and  errors  to  the  great,  dominant 
sentiment  of  our  relation  to  God.  We  love  Him,  we  love  the 
brethren,  therefore  we  are  His  children ;  erring  children  no 
doubt,  but  still  His.    Will  He  disinherit  His  child  ? 

Observe  again,  how  John  finds  comfort  in  the  fact  of  omni- 
science. We  shall  assure  our  heart  because  God  knowetih  aU 
thuigs.  The  natural  instinct  of  imperfection  is  to  evade  the 
contact  and  scrutiny  of  perfection.  But  that  instinct  is  false  and 
misleading.  The  Gospel  creates  a  contrary  instinct,  in  creating 
a  filial  consciousness.  If  God's  holiness  shames  our  sinf  nlness, 
and  God's  perfect  wisdom  dwarfs  our  folly,  nevertheless,  per- 
fection is  the  only  safe  refuge  for  the  imperfect.  No  man 
wants  to  be  tried  before  an  ignorant  or  a  corrupt  judge.  If 
that  omniscient  knowledge  sees  deeper  into  our  sin  than  we  do, 
it  also  sees  deeper  into  our  weakness.  If  it  weighs  the  act  in 
more  nicely-poised  scales,  it  weighs  the  circumstances  in  the 
same  scales.  If  it  knows  our  secret  faults,  it  knows  likewise 
our  frame  and  our  frailty.  If  it  discerns  aggravations,  it 
equally  discerns  palliations.  If  infinite  knowledge  compasses 
the  sin,  so  does  infinite  love.  There  mercy  and  truth  meet  to- 
gether, and  righteousness  and  peace  kiss  each  other. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FIRST  EPISTLE  OP  JOHN.  387 

So  we  shall  assnre  our  heart  before  Him  in  whatsoever  our 
heart  condemn  ns.  Kot  with  the  conceited  assurance  of  self- 
righteousness;  not  with  a  drugged  and  dulled  perception  of  the 
vileness  of  sin ;  not  with  an  elixir  which  shall  relax  our  spirit- 
ual fibre  and  moderate  our  enthusiasm  for  spiritual  victory; 
but  with  the  thought  that  we  are  God^s  children,  loving,  though 
erring,  in  our  Father's  hands ;  with  our  elder  brother  Christ  in- 
terceding for  us;  with  the  knowledge  that  the  judicial  element 
in  our  Christian  experience  is  transferred  from  our  own  heart  to 
Ood ;  with  the  knowledge  that,  being  His,  ^'  neither  death,  nor 
life,  nor  angels,  nor  principalities,  nor  powers,  nor  things  pres- 
ent, nor  things  to  come,  nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any  other 
creature  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God, 
which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord."  As  I  read  this  passage  I 
wonder  if  John,  as  he  penned  it,  had  not  in  mind  that  inter- 
view of  Christ  and  Peter  at  the  lake  after  the  resurrection. 
There  was  Peter  with  a  heart  stung  with  self-accusation,  as 
well  it  might  be:  Peter  who  had  denied  and  forsaken  his  Lord: 
and  yet  Christ  meets  all  this  self- accusation  with  the  words 
"  Lovest  thou  Me  ? "  And  Peter's  reply  is  in  the  very  vein  of 
our  passage.  ^^  God  is  greater  than  our  heart,  and  knoweth  all 
things :  ^  ^^  Lord,  thou  knowest  all  things,  thou  knowest  that  I 
love  Thee." 

On  this  interpretation,  the  remainder  of  the  passage  follows 
simply  and  naturally.  Once  assured  that  we  are  children  of 
Gk)d,  we  have  boldness  toward  God.  That  assurance,  canying 
with  it  the  assurance  of  pardon  and  sympathy,  is  the  only  means 
by  which  the  heart's  condemnation  is  legitimately  allayed.  If, 
under  that  assurance,  our  heart  ceases  to  condemn  us,  ^*  then 
have  we  confidence  toward  God."  It  is  noteworthy  how  the 
line  of  thought  coincides  with  that  in  the  latter  part  of  the 
fourth  of  Hebrews.  There  too  we  see  the  Divine  omniscience 
emphasized — the  discernment  of  the  living  word,  ^^  quick  and 
powerful,  sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword,  a  discemer  of  the 
thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart.  Neither  is  there  any  crea- 
ture that  is  not  manifest  in  His  sight,  but  all  things  are  naked 
and  opened  unto  the  eyes  of  Him  with  whom  we  have  to  do." 
Then  comes  the  priesthood  and  the  sympathy  of  Jesus,  the 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


388  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Great  High-Priest,  "touched  with  the  feeling  of  onr  infirm- 
ities ; "  and  then  the  same  conclusion :  "  Let  ns  therefore  come 
holdly  unto  the  throne  of  grace." 

This  latter  part  of  the  passage  must  therefore  be  interpreted 
by  the  former.  That  the  heart  feels  no  sense  of  condemnation 
is  not,  of  itself,  a  legitimate  nor  a  safe  ground  of  boldness  toward 
God.  There  is  a  boldness  which  is  born  of  presumption,  of 
spiritual  obtuseness,  of  ignorance  of  the  character  and  claims  of 
God,  of  false  and  superficial  conceptions  of  sin.  A  valid  ab- 
sence of  condemnation  must  have  a  definite  and  valid  fact,  a 
substantial  evidence  behind  it ;  and  that  it  has,  according  to 
the  interpretation  we  have  given :  "  We  shall  assure  our  heart 
before  Him  in  whatsoever  our  heart  condemn  us,  by  this ; 
namely,  that  the  all-knowing  Qt)d  is  our  forgiving  Father,  that 
Christ  is  our  Propitiator  and  Saviour,  and  that  the  Spirit  of  love 
in  onr  hearts,  and  the  loving  ministry  of  our  lives  testify  that 
we  are  children  of  God.  Note  at  this  point  how  John  answers 
to  Paul.  Look  first  at  the  fourth  chapter  of  this  Epistle.  "  If 
we  love  one  another,  God  dwelleth  in  us,  and  His  love  is  per- 
fected in  us.  Hereby  know  we  that  we  dwell  in  Him  and  He 
in  us,  because  He  hath  given  us  of  His  Spirit."  Now  turn  to 
the  eighth  chapter  of  Bomans.  "  There  is  therefore  now  no 
condemnation  to  them  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus.  For  the  law 
of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesns  made  me  free  from  the  law 
of  sin  and  death.  Ye  are  not  in  the  flesh,  but  in  the  Spirit,  if 
so  be  that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in  you.  For  as  many  as 
are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  these  are  sons  of  God.  For  ye 
received  not  the  spirit  of  bondage  again  unto  fear,  but  ye  re- 
ceived the  spirit  of  adoption,  whereby  we  cry  Abba,  Father. 
The  Spirit  itself  beareth  witness  unto  our  spirit  that  we  are 
children  of  God;  and  if  children,  then  heirs;  heirs  of  God  and 
joint  heirs  with  Christ."  And,  in  like  manner,  "  the  Spirit 
also  helpeth  our  infirmity ;  the  Spirit  Himself  maketh  interces- 
sion for  us  with  groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered  ;  and  He 
that  searcheth  the  hearts  (being  greater  than  our  heart  and 
knowing  all  things)  laioweth  what  is  the  mind  of  the  Spirit, 
because  He  maketh  intercession  for  the  saints  according  to  the 
will  of  God  " — for  the  saints  that  love  God,  foreordained,  called. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


FmST  BPISTLB    OF  JOHN.  389 

justified,  gloiified.  ''What  then  shall  we  say  to  these  things  i 
If  God  is  for  us,  who  is  against  us  ?  He  that  spared  not  His 
own  Son,  but  delivered  Him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall  He  not  also 
with  Him  freely  give  us  all  things  ?  Who  shall  lay  anything  to 
the  charge  of  God's  elect  i  It  is  God  that  justifieth,  who  is  he 
that  shall  condemn  ?  It  is  Christ  Jesus  that  died,  yea  rather, 
that  was  raised  from  the  dead,  who  is  at  the  right  hand  of  God, 
who  also  maketh  intercession  for  us.  Who  shall  separate  us 
from  the  love  of  Christ  ?  Shall  tribulation,  or  anguish,  or  per- 
secution, or  famine,  or  nakedness,  or  peril,  or  sword  ?  Even  as 
it  is  written, 

*  For  Thy  sake  we  are  killed  all  the  day  long ; 
We  were  accounted  as  sheep  for  the  slaughter.* 

Nay,  in  all  these  things  we  are  more  than  conquerors  through 
Him  that  loved  us.  For  I  am  persuaded  that  neither  death, 
nor  life,  nor  angels,  nor  principalities,  nor  things  present,  nor 
things  to  come,  nor  powers,  nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any  other 
creature,  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God 
which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord." 

Finally,  the  whole  passage  carries  a  protest  and  an  antidote 
against  an  introverted,  morbidly  subjective  and  self-scrutiniz- 
ing type  of  piety,  which  habitually  studies  self  for  the  evidence 
of  right  spiritual  relation  and  condition:  which  tests  growth 
in  grace  by  tension  of  feeling,  and  reckons  spiritual  latitude 
and  longitude  by  spiritual  moods.  Feeling,  religious  sensibility, 
has  its  place,  and  a  high  and  sacred  place  it  is  ;  but  its  place  is 
not  the  judgment-seat ;  and  right  feeling  in  Christian  experi- 
ence is  always  based  upon  right  relation  to  the  facts  of  the  plan 
of  redemption.  The  Christian  consciousness  gives  jxo  valid 
testimony,  save  as  it  reflects  the  great  objective  verities  of  the 
Christian  faith.  If  our  spirit  witnesses  vnth  the  Spirit,  the 
Spirit  must  first  bear  Mdtness  to  our  spirit  that  we  are  children 
of  God. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN. 


1.  The  elder  (6  irpea-fivrepty;).  The  word  is  used  originally 
of  seniority  in  age.  So  Luke  xv.  25.  Afterward  as  a  term  of 
rank  or  office.  Applied  to  members  of  the  Sanhedrim  (Matt, 
xvi.  21 ;  Acts  vi.  12).  Those  who  presided  over  the  Christian 
assemblies  or  churches  (Acts  xi.  30 ;  1  Tim.  v.  17,  19).  The 
twenty-four  members  of  the  heavenly  court  in  John's  vision 
(Apoc.  iv.  4,  10, ;  v.  5,  6,  8, 11,  14).  Here,  with  reference  to 
official  position,  coupled,  presumably,  with  age. 

Unto  the  elect  lady  {iKke/cr^  /evpla).  An  expression  which 
baffles  all  the  commentators.  It  is  supposed  by  some  that  the 
title  describes  apersoriy  by  others,  a  society.  The  views  of  the 
former  class  as  to  thejperaon  designated,  are  (1.)  That  the  letter 
was  addressed  to  a  certain  Babylonian  named  Electa.  (2.)  To 
a  person  named  Kyria.  (3.)  To  Electa  Kyria^  a  compound 
proper  name.  Those  who  regard  the  phrase  as  describing  a 
society,  divide  on  the  question  whether  a  particular  Christian 
society  or  the  whole  Chxirch  is  intended.  It  is  impossible  to 
settle  the  question  satisfactorily. 

Children  {riicvoi,^).  May  be  taken  either  in  a  literal  or  in  a 
spiritual  sense.  For  the  latter,  see  1  Tim.  1,  2 ;  Gal.  iv.  25 ;  3 
John  4.  Compare  also  vv.  4,  13.  The  explanation  turns  on 
the  meaning  of  iKke/cr^  tcvple^  If  it  mean  ^  Church,  children 
will  have  the  spiritual  sense.    If  it  be  a  proper  name,  the  literal. 

Whom  (o{^).  Comprehensive,  embracing  the  mother  and 
the  children  of  both  sexes. 

I  love  {ar^air&).    See  on  John  v.  20. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


392  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

In  the  truth  (eV  oXi^Sc^.  Omit  tJie.  The  expression  in 
truth  marks  the  atmosphere  or  element  of  truth  in  which  some- 
thing is  said,  or  felt,  or  done.  See  John  xvii.  17.  In  truth,  is 
equivalent  to  truly ^  reaUy.    Compare  Col.  i.  6 ;  John  xvii.  19. 

That  have  known  {pi  ^yvtotcoresi).  Either  Jux/ve  come  to 
knaWj  or  as  Rev.,  know.  The  perfect  tense  of  ^ivwnuo^  to 
l^earn  to  knoWy  is  rendered  as  a  present :  /  ham  learned  to 
knowj  therefore  /  know.    See  on  1  John  iL  3. 

2.  Which  dwelleth  {riiv  fihovaav).  Bev.,  ahideth.  En- 
larging on  the  idea  of  the  truth :  that  which  ahideth.  See  on 
1  John  iv.  9,  on  the  phrase  to  abide  m,  see  on  1  John  ii.  6. 

Shall  be  with  us  {jieSf  fi^i&v  i<rrai).  With  vs  has  the  em- 
phatic position  in  the  sentence :  and  with  us  it  shall  he.  Note 
the  change  from  ahideth  in  to  shall  he  wUh,  and  see  on  John 
xiv.  16,  17. 

3.  Grace  be  with  you,  mercy  and  peace  {iarai  lu^  fifi&p 
X^p^^  ^09  eipTjvri).  The  verb  is  in  the  future  tense :  shaU  he. 
In  the  Pauline  Epistles  the  salutations  contain  no  verb.  Li  1 
and  2  Peter  and  Jude,  irkrfSin^Seirf  he  Tnultvplied,  is  used.  Oraoe 
iX^P^)  ^  ^f  ^^^  occurrence  in  John's  writings  (John  i  14,  16, 
17 ;  Apoc.  i.  4 ;  xxii.  21) ;  and  the  kindred  x^^^^P'^  ^  famor^ 
he  kind^  forgive^  and  x^pf'^P^  9\fly  ^^^  ^^^  found  at  all.  See  on 
Luke  i.  30.  Mercy  (IXeo^),  only  hei'e  in  John.  See  on  Luke  i. 
60.  The  pre-Christian  definitions  of  the  word  include  the  ele- 
ment of  grief  experienced  on  account  of  the  unworthy  suffer- 
ing of  another.  So  Aristotle.  The  Latin  misericordia  (miser 
*'  wretched,"  cor  "  the  heart ")  carries  the  same  idea.  So  Cicero 
defines  it,  the  sorrow  arising  from  the  vrretohedness  of  another 
suffering  wrongfully.  Strictly  speaking,  the  word  as  applied 
to  God,  cannot  include  either  of  these  elements,  since  jrt^ can- 
not be  ascribed  to  Him,  and  suffering  is  the  legitimate  result  of 
sin.  The  sentiment  in  God  assumes  the  character  of  pitying 
love.  Mercy  is  kindness  and  good-will  toward  the  miserable 
and  afflicted,  joined  with  a  desire  to  relieve  them.  Trench  ob- 
serves :  '^  Li  the  Divine  mind,  and  in  the  order  of  our  salvation 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


SECOND  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  393 

as  conceived  therein,  the  mercy  precedes  the  grace.  God  so 
loved  tlie  world  with  a  pitying  love  (herein  was  the  mercy)^ 
that  He  g(we  His  only-begotten  Son  (herein  the  grace\  that 
the  world  through  Him  might  be  saved.  But  in  the  order 
of  the  manifestation  of  God's  purposes  of  salvation,  the 
grace  must  go  before  the  mercy  and  make  way  for  it.  It 
is  true  that  the  same  persons  are  the  subjects  of  both,  being 
at  once  the  guilty  and  the  miserable;  yet  the  righteousness 
of  God,  which  it  is  quite  as  necessary  should  be  maintained 
as  His  love,  demands  that  the  guilt  should  be  done  away 
before  the  misery  can  be  assuaged ;  only  the  forgiven  may 
be  blessed.  He  must  pardon  before  He  can  heal.  .  .  . 
From  this  it  follows  that  in  each  of  the  apostolic  salutations 
where  these  words  occur,  grace  precedes  mercy  "  ("  Synonyms 
of  the  New  Testament "). 

With  you.    The  best  texts  read  wUh  vs. 

From  God— from  Jesus  Christ  {iraph  Geov — iraph  ^Irjaov 
Xp^crrov).  Note  the  repeated  preposition,  bringing  out  the 
twofold  relation  to  the  Father  and  Son.  In  the  Pauline  salu- 
tations airo  from^  is  invariably  used  with  God,  and  never  re- 
peated with  Je9u%  Christ.  On  the  use  of  irap6»  from^  see  on 
John  vi.  46 ;  1  John  i.  5. 

God  the  Father.  The  more  common  expression  is  ^^  God 
<mr  Father.'' 

The  Son  of  the  Father.  The  phrase  occurs  nowhere  else. 
Compare  John  i.  18  ;  1  John  ii.  22,  23  ;  1  John  i.  3. 

In  truth  and  in  love.  The  combination  is  not  found  else- 
where.   The  words  indicate  the  contents  of  the  whole  Epistle. 

4.  I  rejoiced.  Expressions  of  thankful  joy  are  common  in 
the  Pauline  salutations.  See  Bom.,  1  Cor.,  Eph.,  Philip.,  Col., 
1  Thess.,  2  Thess.,  Philem. 

Greatly  (X/ai^).  The  word  is  found  in  John's  writings  only 
here  and  3  John  3. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


894  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

I  found  {djfyqica).    See  on  John  i.  41.    Rev.,  /  ham  found. 

Of  thy  children  {iic  t&v  riioHov).  The  rendering  is  obscore. 
Rev.,  rightly,  sapplies  certain.    Compare  John  xvi.  17. 

In  truth  {h  aKrjSe^a).  Compare  3  John  3.  See  on  1  John 
i.  8. 

5.  New  {xatpiiv).    See  on  Matt  xxvi.  29. 

We  had  {etxa^uv).  The  apostle  identifies  himself  with  his 
readers. 

6.  Love  (17  arfaini).  The  love  just  mentioned  in  the  verb 
we  love. 

That  ijva).    See  on  John  xv.  13. 

After  His  commandments  {tcarh  rh^  ivroXM  airrov).  For 
toalky  with  fcard  after^  according  to^  see  Mark  viL  5 ;  Rom. 
viii.  4 ;  xiv.  15  ;  1  Cor.  iii.  3  ;  2  Cor.  x.  2.  Very  often  with  iv 
in.  See  John  viii.  12  ;  xi  9, 10  ;  2  Cor.  iv.  2 ;  1  John  L  7, 11. 
Both  constructions  are  found  2  Cor.  x.  2,  3. 

From  the  beginning  {aif  apyrisi).    See  on  John  i  1. 
In  it  (^  axn^).    In  love:  not  the  commandment. 

7.  Deceivers  (TrX^oi).  See  on  we  deceive  ot^sehesy  1  John 
i  8. 

Are  entered  into  (i^XSav  ek).  Rev.,  are  gone  forth  into. 
The  A.  V.  follows  the  reading  €iar(K^v  entered  into.  The 
tense  is  the  aorist,  strictly  rendered,  went  forth.  It  may  indi- 
cate a  particular  crisis,  at  which  they  went  forth  from  the 
Christian  society. 

Who  confess  not  {oi  ^)f  ofjuiKoyovpres).  The  article  with  the 
participle  describes  the  character  of  this  class  of  deceivers,  and 
does  not  merely  assert  a  definite  fact  concerning  them.  Com- 
pare Mark  xv.  41,  "  other  women  which  came  up  with  Him  '* 
\al  awavafiaaai).     Confess.    See  on  Matt.  vii.  23  ;  x.  32. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BBCOND  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  895 

Is  come  (ipxoH^ov).  Wrong.  The  verb  is  in  the  present 
participle,  coming,  which  describes  the  manhood  of  Christ  as 
stiU  being  manifested.  See  on  1  John  iii.  5.  In  1  John  iv.  2 
we  have  the  manifestation  treated  as  a  past  fact  by  the  perfect 
tense,  iKrjXvSora  has  come.  Bev.,  thai  Jesus  Christ  cameth. 
So  in  1  Thess.  i.  10,  liy;  opyry:  t^  ipx^fJ^hnf^;  is  the  vyrath  which 
is  coming;  which  has  already  begun  its  movement  and  is  ad- 
vancing :  not  merely,  as  A.  Y.,  the  wrath  to  com^Cj  which  makes 
it  wholly  a  future  event.     See  on  Kngerethy  2  Pet.  ii.  3. 

An  antichrist  (o  can'lxpiOTo<;).  Rev.,  rendering  the  definite 
article,  the  antichrist.    See  on  1  John  ii.  18. 

8.  Look  to  yourselves  that  (fiXeirere  latn-ov9  ha).  "Iva  in 
order  that,  marks  the  intent  of  the  caution.  See  on  John  xv. 
13. 

We  lose  {hiroKio'fDfiev).  The  best  texts  read  a'rroXe<nrr€,  ye 
lose.  So  Rev.,  with  destroy  in  margin.  For  the  meanings  of 
the  verb  see  on  Luke  ix.  25. 

We  receive  (a7ro\a/8(»/i€i/).  The  best  texts  read  wfroXafirp-e, 
ye  receive.  The  compounded  preposition  a'n'6,  has  the  force  of 
hack:  receive  hack  from  God* 

Reward  (jiiaSov).  See  on  2  Pet.  ii.  13,  and  compare  Matt 
V.  12  ;  John  iv.  36  ;  1  Cor.  iii.  8  ;  Apoc.  xi.  18  ;  xxii.  12. 

9.  Whosoever  transgresseth  (ttSv  o  irapafialimv).  The 
best  texts  read  irpodrf^v  goeth  onward.  So  Rev.,  with  taketh 
the  lead  in  margin.  The  meaning  is,  whosoever  advances  heyond 
the  limits  of  Christian  doctrine.  Others  explain  of  those  who 
would  set  themselves  up  as  teachers,  or  take  the  lead.  Such 
false  progress  is  contrasted  with  abiding  in  the  teaching.  On 
the  construction,  ira^  every  one^  with  the  article  and  participle, 
see  on  1  John  iii.  3. 

Abideth — in  {jAivwv  hi).    See  on  1  John  ii.  6. 

Doctrine  {SiBa^).    Better,  as  Rev.,  teaching. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


396  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Of  Christ-  Not  the  teaching  concerning  Christ,  but  the 
teaching  of  Christ  Himself  and  of  His  apostles.  See  Heb.  IL 
3.  So  according  to  New  Testament  usage.  See  John  xviiL 
19  ;  Acts  ii.  42  ;  Apoc.  ii.  14,  16. 

In  the  doctrine  of  Christ.  Omit  of  Girist.  AiZa^i  teach- 
ing, is  used  thus  absolutely,  Rom.  xvi.  17 ;  Tit.  i.  9. 

10.  If  there  come  any  (e?  Tt9  epxercu).  Better,  Rev.,  if 
anyone  comeih.  The  indicative  mood  assumes  the  fact :  if  any 
one  comes,  as  there  are  those  that  come.  Cometh  is  used  in  an 
official  sense  as  of  a  teacher.     See  on  1  John  iii.  5. 

Bring  (^/>€t).  For  the  use  of  the  verb  see  John  xviiL  29  ; 
Acts  XX7.  18  ;  2  Pet.  iL  11 ;  L  17,  18 ;  1  Pet.  i.  13. 

Neither  bid  him  God  speed  {icaX  x^P^^^  ^^V  M  ^-^Tere). 
Lit.,  aTid  say  not  unto  him  "  greeting .'"  XcUpew  rejoice^  hail, 
was  the  customary  form  of  salutation.  It  was  ako  used  in 
bidding  farewell ;  but  in  the  New  Testament  always  of  greet- 
ing (Acts  XV.  23 ;  xxiii.  26 ;  Jas.  i.  1).*  "  Now  whoever 
coineth  and  tcacheth  you  all  these  things,  before  spoken,  receive 
him  ;  but  if  the  teacher  himself  turn  aside  and  teach  another 
teaching,  so  as  to  overthrow  this,  do  not  hear  him  ^  ("  Teach- 
ing of  the  Twelve  Apostles,"  ch.  xi.     See  on  Matt.  x.  10). 

11.  Is  partaker  {tcoivfovet).  The  verb  occurs  nowhere  else  in 
John's  writings.  The  kindred  noun  Koanovla  fellowship^  is 
peculiar  to  the  First  Epistle.  See  on  1  John  i.  3 ;  also  on 
partners  (Luke  v.  10) ;  fellowship  (Acts  ii.  42) ;  partaker  (1 
Pet.  V.  1). 

12.  I  would  not  {ovic  ifiovXiiSffv).    See  on  Matt.  i.  19. 

Paper  (x^ov).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  The 
Egyptian  papyrus  or  byblus,  Oyperus  papyruSj  anciently  very 

*  Lightfoot  rendera  xaipw^  fareiM  in  Philip,  iii.  1 ;  and  describes  it  as  a 
parting  benediction  in  ir.  4  ;  but,  in  both  cases,  sajs  that  it  inolades  an  ex- 
hortation to  r^oicd.    The  farewell  is  needless  in  both  instances. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BBCOND  BPISTLB  OP  JOHN.  397 

common,  but  not  now  found  within  the  limits  of  the  country. 
It  is  a  tall,  smooth  flag  or  reed,  with  a  large  triangular  stalk, 
containing  the  pith  which  furnished  the  paper.  The  paper 
was  manufactured  by  cutting  the  pith  into  strips,  arranging 
them  horizontally,  and  then  placing  across  them  another  layer 
of  strips,  uniting  the  two  layers  by  a  paste,  and  subjecting  the 
whole  to  a  heavy  pressure.  The  upper  and  middle  portions  of 
the  reed  were  used  for  this  purpose.  The  fact  that  the  plant 
is  no  longer  found  is  significant  in  connection  with  Isaiah's 
prophecy  that  "  the  fla^B  (Heb.  «2pA,  papyi'ui)  shall  waste 
away  "  (Isa.  xix.  6).  The  plant  grew  in  shallow  water  or  in 
marshes,  and  is  accordingly  represented  on  the  monuments  as  at 
the  side  of  a  stream  or  in  irrigated  lands.*  The  Jews  wrote  on 
various  materials,  such  as  the  leaves  of  the  olive  and  palm,  the 
rind  of  the  pomegranate,  and  the  skins  of  animals.  The  tablet 
{^ivoK&ioVi  Luke  i.  63)  was  in  very  common  use.  It  consisted 
of  thin  pieces  of  wood,  strung  together,  and  either  plain,  or 
covered  with  papyrus  or  with  wax. 

Ink  (/LiiXai/09).  Lit.,  that  which  is  black.  The  word  occurs 
only  once  outside  of  John's  Epistles  (2  Cor.  iii.  3),  and  only 
three  times  in  all  (2  John  12 ;  3  John  13).  Ink  was  prepared 
of  soot  or  of  vegetable  or  mineral  substances.  Gum  and  vitriol 
were  also  used.  Colored  inks,  red  and  gold,  were  also  em- 
ployed.f 

To  come  unto  you  {y€v4aStu  irpb^  vfih^).  Or,  to  be  present 
with  you.    For  the  phrase,  see  1  Cor.  ii.  3 ;  xvi.  10. 

Face  to  face  (arSfia  irpo9  orSfia).  Lit,  rrumth  to  mouth. 
Compare  irp6<royirov  irpo^  irpoatairovyface  toface,  1  Cor,  xiii.  12. 

Full  {ireTrXrjpd^fihnji).     Kev.,  rightly, /t^^/KZ^. 

*  For  faller  details,  see  article  Papffftu  in  **  Enoyolopsedia  Britaxmioa,'' 
9th  edition,  vol.  zviii. 

t  See  Edersheim,  «  Life  and  Times  of  Jesus  the  Messiah,''  a ,  270. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


THE  THIRD  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN. 


1.  The  elder.    See  on  2  John  1. 

Gaius.  The  name  occurs  several  times  in  the  New  Testa* 
ment,  as  Acts  xix.  29 ;  xx.  4 ;  Rom.  xvi.  23 ;  1  Cor.  i.  14.  The 
person  addressed  here  cannot  be  identified. 

The  well-beloved.  Rev.,  the  beloved.  In  the  Greek  order 
the  name  comes  first.     Gaius  the  beloved. 

In  the  truth  {iv  aXril^lf).  Rev.,  properly,  omitting  the  art- 
icle, in  truth.    See  on  2  John  4. 

2.  Beloved.  Compare  the  plural,  1  John  iii.  2,  21 ;  iv.  1, 
7,11. 

I  wish  above  all  things  {'rrepl  irivrmv  eixofiai).  Wrong. 
This  sense  of  wepl  is  contrary  to  New  Testament  usage.  The 
preposition  means  concerning.  So  Rev.  "  I  pray  that  in  all 
things  thou  mayst  prosper.''  Evxofiai  I  pray  or  loishj  occurs 
only  here  in  John's  writings,  and  not  often  elsewhere.  See 
Acts  xxvi  29 ;  Rom.  ix.  3 ;  Jas.  v.  16. 

Mayst  prosper  (evoSova-Sa*).  Lit,  ha/ve  a  prosperous  jour- 
ney. From  €v  welly  and  oBo^;  a  way.  In  this  original  sense, 
Rom.  i.  10.  The  word  occurs  only  three  times  in  the  New 
Testament    See  1  Cor.  xvi.  2. 

Be  in  health  (vyuUpeiv).  Used  in  the  New  Testament  both 
in  a  physical  and  moral  sense.  The  former  is  found  only  here 
and  in  Luke's  Gospel.  See  Luke  v.  31 ;  vii.  10 ;  xv.  27.  Paul 
uses  it  of  soundness  in  faith  or  doctHne.    See  1  Tim.  i.  10 ;  vL 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


400  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

3 ;  2  Tim.  i.  13 ;  Titus  ii.  2.     Here  of  Gaius'  hodUy  health,  as 
is  shown  by  acml  in  the  next  clause. 

Soul  {ifvxfi)'  See  on  Mark  xii.  30;  Luke  i.  46.  The  sovl 
i'^X^)  IS  the  principle  of  individuality,  the  seat  of  personal 
impressions.  It  has  a  side  in  contact  with  both  the  material 
and  the  spiritual  element  of  humanity,  and  is  thus  the  medi- 
ating organ  between  body  and  spirit.  Its  meaning,  therefore, 
constantly  rises  above  life  or  the  living  individualy  and  takes 
color  from  its  relation  to  either  the  emotional  or  the  spiritual 
side  of  life,  from  the  fact  of  its  being  the  seat  of  the  feelings, 
desires,  affections,  aversions,  and  the  bearer  and  manifester  of 
the  divine  life-principle  {irvevfia).  Consequently  y^^X'i  ^®  often 
used  in  our  sense  of  heart  (Luke  i.  46 ;  ii.  35 ;  John  x.  24 ; 
Acts  xiv.  2) ;  and  the  meanings  of  '^irx^n  sotd^  and  irvevfia 
spirit^  occasionally  approach  each  other  very  closely.  Compare 
John  xii.  27,  and  xi.  33 ;  Matt.  xi.  29,  and  1  Cor.  xvi.  18.  Also 
both  words  in  Luke  i.  47.  In  this  passage  ^^vyri  soul^  expresses 
the  soul  regarded  as  a  moral  being  designed  for  everlasting  life. 
See  Heb.  vi.  19;  x.  39;  xiii.  17;  1  Pet  ii.  11 ;  iv.  19.  John 
commonly  uses  the  word  to  denote  the  principle  of  the  natural 
life.  See  John  x.  11, 15;  xiii.  37;  xv.  13;  1  John  iiL  16; 
Apoc.  viii.  9 ;  xii.  11 ;  xvi.  3. 

3.  Rejoiced  greatly*    See  on  2  John  4. 

Brethren  came  {ifyxpfihmv  aZeK^v),  Lit.,  coming.  The 
present  participle  denotes  coming  from  ti/m^  to  time^  and  not 
coming  on  a  single  occasion,  which  would  require  the  aorist. 
On  brethren^  see  on  1  John  ii.  9. 

Thou  walkest  in  truth.  See  on  1  John  i.  8.  For  the  phrase 
walk  in,  see  on  2  John  6.  Thou  is  emphatic,  suggesting  a  con- 
trast with  less  faithful  ones,  as  Diotrephes,  ver.  9. 

4.  Joy  {x^^^)'  '^^^^  ^^^^-^  ^^^y  5  some  reading  x^^y  grace 
or  favor  from  God,  on  which  see  2  John  3.  Note  the  Greek 
order:  greater  Joy  than  this  have  J  not. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


THIBD  BPISTLB  OF  JOHN.  401 

My  children  (r^  ifj^  rhcva).    lit.,  mine  ovon  children. 

Walk  {irepim-arouvra).  Rev.,  rightly,  vxdking.  The  partici- 
ple expresses  something  habitual. 

6.  Thou  doest  faithfully  {irtarov  iroiek).  Bev.,  thou  doeei 
a  faithful  work.  A  third  interpretation  is  thou  giveet  a  pledge 
or  guwrwaty^  and  a  fourth,  akin  to  this,  ihou  makeet  eure. 
The  Rev.  is  best.  There  is  no  parallel  to  justify  the  third  and 
fourth.* 

Thou  doest  (ipydajf).  Or  lit.,  according  to  the  etymology, 
wor&eet  {Spyov  work).  See  on  Jas.  ii.  9.  The  distinction  be- 
tween this  verb  and  others  signifying  to  doy  such  as  iroieuf, 
irpdaaeufy  Spav,  which  last  does  not  occur  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, is  not  sharply  maintained  in  Attic  Greek.  In  certain 
connections  the  difference  between  them  is  great,  in  others,  it  is 
hardly  perceptible.  On  woieiv  and  irpdcaeiv,  see  on  John  iii.  21. 
*Epyd^fuut  like  Trpdaaeiv,  contemplates  iiie  process  rather  than 
tlie  end  of  action,  carrying  the  ideas  of  continuity  and  repetition. 
It  means  to  labors  to  he  active^  toperformj  with  the  idea  of  con- 
tinued exertion,  and  therefore  is  used  of  servants,  or  of  those 
who  have  an  assigned  business  or  office.  See  Matt.  xxi.  28 ; 
XXV.  26;  Luke  xiii.  14;  John  v.  17;  vi.  27;  ix.  4;  1  Thess.  ii 
9.  For  the  phrase  ifyyday  ek  thou  doest  toward  (Rev.),  see 
Matt  xxvi  10. 

And  to  strangers  (/col  ek  rt^  ^hov^).  The  best  texts  read, 
instead  of  ek  roi^  to  the  (strangers),  tovto,  that;  so  that  the 
sentence  is,  literally,  **to  them  that  are  brethren,  and  that 
strangers."  For  the  phrase  (md  thatj  compare  1  Cor.  vi.  6 ; 
Philip.  L  28;  Eph.  ii.  8. 

6.  The  Church  {isctcXrialaii).    See  on  Matt.  xvL  18. 


^Oftnon  Westoott  says  **no  parallel  it  quoted  for*^  the*BeT.  rendering,  bnl 
Apoo.  xxi  5,  can  hardly  be  esteemed  a  paraUel  to  Aw  rendering  "  thou  i 
•ore." 

Vol.  n.— 26 


Digitized  by  (^OOQIC 


402  WORD  STUDIBS  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

If  thou  bring  forward  on  their  journey  (irpoirifi/^fw;).  Lit., 
hamng  sent  forward.  The  aorist  tense  represents  the  act  as 
accomplished.  Compare  Acts  zv.  3 ;  Tit  iiL  13.  Bev.^  sei 
forward^ 

After  a  godly  sort  (of/o*?  toS  dcov).  Lit,  wyrfJvSby  ofOod. 
So  Kev.    Compare  1  Thess.  iL  13 ;  CoL  i  10. 

Thou  shalt  do  well  (jcaKm  Tronjo-et^).  For  the  phrase,  see 
Acts  X.  33 ;  Philip,  iv.  14 ;  Jas.  ii.  8,  19 ;  2  Pet.  i.  19.  Kev,, 
renders  the  whole :  whom  thou  wiU  do  wdl  to  set  forward  on 
their  jov/mey  worthily  of  God. 

7.  For  His  Name's  sake  {inrip  rav  ovifuiros).  Hie  is  sup- 
plied by  the  A.  V.  It  is  not  in  the  text  Rev.,  correctly,  for 
the  sake  of  the  Name.  The  Name  (Jesns  Christ)  is  used  thus 
absolutely  in  Acts  y.  41 ;  compare  Jas.  iL  7.  For  a  similar 
absolute  use  of  the  t/oay,  see  on  Acts  iz.  2.    See  on  1  John  i.  7. 

Taking  nothing  of  QM/fih  Tu^ifidvoprei  chro).  For  the 
phrase  taking  of,  or  fromj  see  on  1  John  i  5. 

The  Gentiles  {iSvue&v).  This  word  occurs  elsewhere  only 
in  the  Gospel  of  Matthew.  The  more  common  word  is  eSptf^ 
which  is  Uie  reading  of  the  Tex.  Bee  here :  Hiv&v*  See  on 
Luke  iL  82. 

8.  Ought  {6if>etKofiev).    See  on  1  John  ii.  6. 

To  receive  {amXafifidveiv).  The  best  texts  read  vrnXafAfid^- 
€iv  to  support;  i.e.,  to  welcome  with  the  provision  of  hospitality. 
Rev.,  welcome.  The  verb  means,  originally,  to  take  underneath 
in  order  to  raise.  Hence,  to  support.  Figuratively,  to  take 
upon  the  mvnd^  to  suppose^  as  Luke  vii.  43 ;  Acts  ii.  15 :  to  take 
up  or  follow  in  speech;  hence  to  ansioery  as  Luke  x.  30. 

Fellow-helpers  to  the  truth  {<ruvepyol  r^  aXi^^cia).  Lit, 
fellow-workers.  The  expression  is  explained  in  two  ways: 
either  fellow-workera  wUh  the  teachers  (toaovtow  smh)  in  sup- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


THIRD  BPISTLB  OF  JOHV.  408 

port  of  the  truth ;  or  feUauy-worherB  loith  the  truth*    Adopt  the 
latter,  as  Kev.*  * 

9.  I  wrote  unto  the  Church.  The  best  texts  insert  rt 
somewhaty  which  indicates  that  the  apostle  did  not  regard  the 
communication  as  specially  important. 

Diotrephes  {AioTp€^).  Tlie  name  is  from  Alof;  qf  Z&ua 
(Jove),  and  Tpi<f>09  to  runmsh,  and  means  Jave^ursed, 

Who  loyeth  to  have  the  pre-eminence  (o  ^iXo9r/K»T«iW). 
From  the  adjective  ^CKoirpfaro^  f(md  ofbemg fir^t.  The  word 
occurs  here  only. 

10.  Prating  {<l>\vap&v).  From  ^Xuq»  to  biMle  up  or  hoU 
over.  Hence  of  talk  which  is  both  fluent  and  emjpty.  Com- 
pare the  kindred  adjective  ^Xvapoi,  tattlerSj  1  Tim.  v.  13. 

Them  that  would.  Those  who  were  disposed  to  receive 
the  strangers. 

Casteth  them  out.  By  excommunication,  which,  -through 
his  influence,  he  had  power  to  bring  about 

11.  Follow  (jufjbov).  More  correctly,  as  Eev.,  imitate.  Else- 
where only  2  Thess.  iii.  7,  9 ;  Heb.  xiiL  7.  The  kindred  word 
fiifprin^  imitator,  uniformly  rendered /bS^n/^dr  in  A.  V.,  occurs 
1  Cor.  iv.  16 ;  xi.  1 ;  Eph.  v.  1.  Hence  our  word  mimio;  also 
pantomime.    Mi/A09  means  both  an  actor  and  a  kind  of  prose 


*  The  ordinary  usage  of  inn^py6s  with  the  genitive  of  the  i>er8on  co-operated 
with  (Rom.  zvi  21 ;  1  Cor.  iii.  9)  Beems  against  the  second  explanation ;  but 
against  the  former  is  the  fact  that  the  thing  for  tuhich,  or  <m  behalf  €f  toMeh^ 
one  is  a  fellow- worker,  is  also  used  in  the  genitire  (2  Cor.  L  24)  or  with  di 
unto  (Col.  iv.  11 ;  2  Cor.  viii.  28).  There  is  no  Instance  of  the  daUtfUi  eom- 
modi  (so  Alf ord,  Hather),  dative  qf  rtferenee.  On  the  other  hand,  the  kindred 
verb  cw9py4m  oocnrs  with  the  dative  of  the  thing  co-operated  with  in  Jas.  iL 
22:  4  ^<rns  ffvrltpyti  rots  Hpyots,  faith  wrought  with  hie  worke  (see  Hather*8 
note).  I  agree  with  Canon  Westcott  thai  this  oonstmotion  is  sai&oient  to  snp- 
I>ort  the  Rev.  rendering.  Hather,  Alford,  and  Ebrard  aU  adopt  the  other 
explanation. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


404  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

drama,  intended  as  a  familiar  representation  of  life  and  char- 
acter, and  without  any  distinct  plot. 

That  which  ia  evil — that  which  ia  good  (rb  iuu^v—rb 
iffoSop).    Compare  r^  ayoBd  goody  rh  <l>av\a  evil,  John  v.  29. 

12.  Demetrius  hath  good  report  {Arffj/rp-pi^  fiefiafyrvpffrai). 
Lit.,  unto  Demetrius  witness  hoik  been  borne.    See  John  iii.  26. 

13.  I  had  {slxpv).  The  imperfect  tense:  Itoashavingy  when 
I  began  to  write. 

Pen  (icdKdfwv).  Lit.,  reed.  See  Matt.  xi.  7.  I%e  staff  or 
sceptre  placed  in  mockery  in  Jesus'  hand,  Matt  xzvii  29.  A 
fneastmng-reedy  Apoc.  zi.  1. 

14.  Face  to  face.    See  on  2  John  12. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


THE  REVELATION  OF  JOHN, 


CHAPTER  L 


1.  The  Revelation. {airoic£ku^v;).  The  Greek  word  is  trans- 
cribed in  Apocalypse.  The  word  occurs  only  once  in  the  Gos- 
pels, Lnke  ii.  32,  where  to  lighten  should  be  rendered  for  ref- 
lation. It  is  used  there  of  oar  Lord,  as  a  light  to  dispel  the 
darkness  under  which  the  heathen  were  veiled.  It  occurs 
thirteen  times  in  Paul's  writings,  and  three  times  in  first  Peter. 

It  is  used  in  the  following  senses  : 

(a.)  The  nnveilvng  of  something  hidden^  which  gives  light 
and  knowledge  to  those  who  behold  it.  See  Luke  iL  32  (above). 
Christianity  itself  is  the  revelation  of  a  mystery  (Rom.  xvL  25). 
The  participation  of  the  Gentiles  in  the  privileges  of  the  new 
covenant  was  made  known  by  revelation  (Eph.  iii.  3).  Paul 
received  the  Gospel  which  he  preached  by  revelation  (Gkd.  i. 
12),  and  went  up  to  Jerusalem  by  revelation  (GaL  ii.  2). 

(}.)  Christian  insight  into  spirittud  truth.  Paul  asks  for 
Christians  the  spirit  of  revelation  (Eph.  i.  17).  Peculiar  mani- 
festations of  the  general  gift  of  revelation  are  given  in  Christ- 
ian assemblies  (1  Cor.  xiv.  6,  26).  Special  revelations  are 
granted  to  Paul  (2  Cor.  xii.  1,  7). 

{c.)  The  second  coming  of  the  Zord{l  Pet  L  7, 13;  2  Thess. 
i.  7 ;  1  Cor.  i.  7)  in  which  His  glory  shall  be  revealed  (1  Pet 
iv.  13),  His  righteous  judgment  made  known  (Bom.  iL  5),  and 
His  children  revealed  in  full  majesty  (Bom.  viii.  19). 

The  kindred  verb  iiro/caXvirrci}  is  used  in  similar  connectiona. 
Following  the  categories  given  above, 

(a.)  Gal.  L  16 ;  iii.  23 ;  Eph.  iii.  6 ;  1  Pet  i.  12. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


406  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

(J.)  Matt  xi.  25,  27 ;  xvi.  17 ;  Luke  x.  21, 22  ;  1  Cor.  ii.  10 ; 
xiv.  80 ;  Philip,  iii.  15. 

{c.)  Matt  X.  26  ;  Luke  ii.  35  ;  xii.  2 ;  xvii.  30 ;  Rom.  i.  17, 
18  ;  viiL  18  ;  1  Cor.  iii  13  ;  2  These.  iL  3,  6,  8  ;  1  Pet  L  5 ; 
V.  L 

The  word  is  compounded  with  mro  from^  and  /caXv7rrc»  to 
cover.  Hence,  to  remove  the  cover  frora  anything ;  to  unvezL 
So  of  Balaam,  "  the  Lord  opened  or  unveiled  his  eyes  {aireKA- 
\uy^  TO^  6(l)^\fjboi><; :  Num.  xxii.  31,  Sept.).  So  Boaz  to 
Naomi's  kinsman:  "I  thought  to  advertise  thee :  "  Rev.,  "(iw- 
doee  ii  unto  thee  "  (airoKcCKin^  ro  089  aov :  Ruth  iv.  4,  Sept.). 
Lit.,  /  will  uncover  thine  ear. 

The  noun  airoK^KiP^i,^  revelation^  occurs  only  once  in  the 
Septuagint  (1  Sam.  xx.  30),  in  the  physical  sense  of  uncovering. 
The  verb  is  found  in  the  Septuagint  in  Dan.  ii.  19,  22,  28. 

In  classical  Greek,  the  verb  is  used  by  Herodotus  (i.,  119)  of 
uncovering  the  head ;  and  by  Plato :  thus,  "  reveal  {airoicoKr 
if^ro^)  to  me  the  power  of  Rhetoric  "  ("  Gorgias,"  460) :  "  Un^ 
cover  your  chest  and  back"  ("Protagoras,"  352).  Both  the  verb 
and  the  noun  occur  in  Plutarch ;  the  latter  of  uncovering  the 
body,  of  waters,  and  of  an  error.  The  religious  sense,  how- 
ever, is  unknown  to  heathenism. 

The  following  words  should  be  compared  with  this :  ^Owraa-- 
ta  a  vision  (Luke  i.  22 ;  Acts  xxvi.  19 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  1).  ^Opafia 
a  vision  (Matt.  xvii.  9  ;  Acts  ix.  10  ;  xvi.  9).  *'Ofaai,^  a  vision 
(Acts  ii.  17 ;  Apoc.  ix.  17.  Of  visible  form,  Apoc.  iv.  3). 
These  three  cannot  be  accurately  distinguished.  They  all  de- 
note the  thing  seen  or  shown,  without  anything  to  show  whether 
it  is  understood  or  not. 

As  distinguished  from  these,  curro/cdXtr^i^  includes,  along 
with  the  thing  shown  or  seen,  its  interpretation  or  unveiling. 

^EiTKfkiveia  appearing  (hence  our  epiphany\  is  used  in  pro- 
fane Greek  of  the  appearance  of  a  higher  power  in  order  to 
aid  men.  In  the  New  Testament  by  Paul  only,  and  always  of 
the  second  appearing  of  Christ  in  glory,  except  in  2  Tim.  i.  10, 
whene  it  signifies  His  first  appearing  in  the  flesh.  See  2  Thess. 
ii.  8 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  14 ;  Tit  ii.  13.  As  distinguished  from  this, 
hiroKoKu^i,^  ia  the  more  comprehensive  word.    An  apocalyjpse 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BBVSLATIOK  OF  JOHlf.  407 

maj  include  several  iinffuipeuu  appearinga.  The  appearinga 
are  the  media  of  the  revealings. 

^avipoxrif:  manifestation;  only  twice  in  the  New  Testament; 
1  Cor.  zii.  7 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  2.  The  kindred  verb  ^av€p6w  to  make 
manifest^  is  of  freqaent  occorrence.  See  on  John  zxi.  1.  It  is 
not  easy,  if  possible,  to  show  that  this  word  has  a  less  dignified 
sense  than  am-o/edXuy^if;.  The  verb  ^av€p6fo  is  used  of  both  the 
first  and  the  second  appearing  of  our  Lord  (1  Tim.  iii.  16 ;  1 
John  i.  2  ;  1  Pet  L  20 ;  Col.  iii  4 ;  1  Pet.  v.  4).  See  also  John 
IL  11 ;  xxi.  1. 

Some  distinguish  between  ^opipfoci^  as  an  external  manif esta* 
tion,  to  the  senses,  but  eingle  and  isolated;  while  anroK^LKAryi^ 
is  an  inward  and  abiding  disclosure.  According  to  these,  the 
Apocalypse  or  unveiling^  precedes  and  produces  the  <l>ai4pwTi^ 
or  manifestation.  The  Apocalypse  contemplates  the  thing  re- 
vealed ;  the  manifestation,  ihe persons  to  whom  it  is  r&oealed. 

The  Revelation  here  is  ihe  tmveiling  of  the  divine  mysteries. 

Of  Jeaua  Christ.  Kot  the  manifestation  or  disclosure  of 
Jesus  Christy  but  the  revelation  given  hy  Him. 

To  shew  (Set^oi).  Frequent  in  the  Apocalypse  (iv.  1 ;  xvii. 
1 ;  xxi.  9 ;  xxii.  1).  Construe  with  fScoseep  gave :  ga/oe  him  to 
shew.  Compare  "  I  will  give  him  to  sit "  (ch.  iii.  21) :  **  It  was 
given  to  hurt "  (ch.  vii  2) :  "  It  was  given  him  to  do  ^  (A.  V. 
"  had  power  to  do ; "  ch.  xiii.  14). 

Servants  (^vKoi^).  Properly,  hond-^erva/nls.  See  on  Matt 
zx.  26 ;  Mark  ix.  35. 

Must  (Se!).  As  the  decree  of  the  absolute  and  infallible 
God. 

Shortly  come  to  pass  {ya4aBM  h  rdxst).  For  the  phrase 
iv  rdxei'  shortly^  see  Luke  xviii.  8,  where  yet  long  delay  is  im- 
plied. Expressions  like  this  must  be  understood,  not  according 
to  human  measurement  of  time,  but  rather  as  in  2  Pet  iii  8. 
The  idea  is,  before  long,  as  time  is  computed  by  Gk>d.    Thm 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


408  WORD  STCJDIBS  IN  THB  NHW  TESTAMENT. 

aorist  infinitive  yepia-BM  ifi  not  hsffin  to  come  to  pasB,  bat  de- 
notes a  (xmpleteJulfUment :  most  shortly  come  to  pass  in  their 
entirety. 

He  sent  {amvcretKiv;).    See  on  Matt  z.  2, 16, 

Signified  {ioT^fmvev).  From  (riifAa  a  eign.  Hence,  literally, 
gvoe  a  sign  or  token.  The  verb  occurs  ontside  of  John's  writings 
only  in  Acts  xL  28 ;  xxv.  27.  See  John  xii.  33 ;  xviii.  32;  xxi. 
19.  This  is  its  only  occurrence  in  the  Apocalypse.  The  word 
is  appropriate  to  the  symbolic  character  of  the  revelation,  and 
so  in  John  xii.  33,  where  Christ  predicts  the  mode  of  His  death 
in  a  figare.    Compare  eign^  Apoc.  xiL  1. 

Angel  {irffiKjov),  Strictly,  a  messenger.  See  Matt  xi.  10 ; 
Lnke  vii.  24;  ix.  52.  Compare  the  mediating  angel  in  the  vis- 
ions of  Daniel  and  Zechariah  (Dan.  viii.  15,  16 ;  ix.  21 ;  x.  10 ; 
Zech.  i.  19).     See  on  John  i.  51. 

Servant.  Designating  the  prophetic  office.  See  Isa.  xlix. 
5 ;  Amos  iii.  7 ;  compare  Apoc.  xix.  10 ;  xxiL  9. 

John.  John  does  not  name  himself  in  the  Gospel  or  in  the 
Epistles.  Here  "  we  are  dealing  with  prophecy,  and  prophecy 
requires  the  goarantee  of  the  individual  who  is  inspired  to  utter 
it"  (Milligan).    Compare  Dan.  viii  1 ;  ix.  2. 

2.  Bare  record  {iiiapTupfiaev).  See  on  John  i.  7.  Bev.,  hear 
vntness.  The  reference  is  to  the  present  book  and  not  to  the 
Gospel.  The  aorist  tense  is  the  epistolary  aorist.  See  on  1 
John  ii.  13,  and  compare  the  introduction  to Thucydides'  "His- 
tory : "  "  Thucydides,  an  Athenian,  wrote  {^upeypw^)  the  his- 
tory of  the  war,"  etc ;  placing  himself  at  the  reader's  stand- 
point, who  will  regard  the  writing  as  occurring  in  the  past. 

Word  of  God.  Not  the  j^sonal  Word,  but  the  prophetic 
contents  of  this  book.    See  xxii  6. 

Testimony  (jutprvplaif).  For  the  phrase  to  witness  a  witness 
see  John  v.  32.    For  the  peculiar  emphasis  on  the  idea  of  wit- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BBYELATION  OF  JOHN.  409 

nes8  in  John,  see  on  John  L  7.    The  words  and  the  idea  are 
characteristic  of  the  Apocalypse  as  of  the  Gospel  and  Epistles. 

And  (re).  Omit  The  clause  aU  things  thai  he  $aw  is  in 
apposition  with  the  Ward  of  God  and  the  testimony  of  Jesus 
Christy  marking  these  as  seen  hj  him.    Bev.  adds  even. 

All  things  that  he  saw  (&ra.€ZSep).  Lit,  as  many  things 
as  he  saw.  In  the  Gospel  John  uses  the  word  elbev  saw,  oulj 
twice  of  his  own  eye-witness  (i.  40 ;  xx.  8).  In  the  Apocalypse 
it  is  constantly  used  of  the  seeing  of  visions.  Compare  i.  19. 
For  the  verb  as  denoting  the  immediate  intuition  of  the  seer, 
see  on  John  ii.  24. 

3.  B leased  (juucdpiosi).    See  on  Matt  v.  3. 

He  that  readeth  (o  ovarfivdxrKtDv).  See  on  Luke  iv.  16.  The 
Header  in  the  Church.  See  2  Cor.  iii.  14.  Ihey  that  hear,  the 
congregation.  The  words  imply  a  public,  official  reading,  in 
full  religious  assembly  for  worship.  The  passage  is  of  some 
weight  in  determining  the  date  of  this  book.  The  stated  read- 
ing of  the  Apostolical  writings  did  not  exist  as  a  received  form 
before  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  a.d.  70. 

And  keep  {koX  rrfpoupres).  The  absence  of  the  article  from 
TTipovine^  keeping  (compare  oi  a/eovovre^  they  that  hear),  shows 
that  the  hearers  and  the  keepers  form  one  class.  Trjpeiv  to 
keep,  is  a  peculiarly  Johannine  word,  and  is  characteristic  of  the 
Apocalypse  as  of  the  other  writings  in  its  own  peculiar  sense  of 
"keeping"  in  the  exercise  of  active  and  strenuous  care,  rather 
than  of  watching  over  to  preserve.    See  on  reserved,  1  Pet  L  4. 

Prophecy.    See  on  prophet,  Luke  vii.  26. 

Which  are  written  {rh  yeypafifUva).  Perfect  participle^ 
have  been  written,  and  therefore  stand  written. 

The  time  (o  tcMp^).    See  on  Matt  xii.  1. 

At  hand  {iyytk).    Lit,  near.    See  on  shortly,  ver.  1. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


410  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

4.  John.  Note  the  absence  of  all  official  titles,  such  as  are 
found  in  Panl;  showing  that  John  writes  as  one  whose  position 
is  recognized. 

Seven.  Among  every  ancient  people,  especially  in  the  East, 
a  religions  significance  attaches  ^  numbers.  This  grows  out  of 
the  instinctive  appreciation  that  number  and  proportion  are 
necessary  attributes  of  the  created  universe.  This  sentiment 
passes  over  from  heathenism  into  the  Old  Testament.  The 
number  seven  was  regarded  by  the  Hebrews  as  a  sacred  num- 
ber, and  it  is  throughout  Scripture  the  covenant  number,  the 
sign  of  God^s  covenant  relation  to  mankind,  and  especially  to 
the  Church.  The  evidences  of  this  are  met  in  the  hallowing  of 
the  seventh  day  ;  in  the  accomplishment  of  circumcision,  which 
is  the  sign  of  a  covenant,  after  seven  days ;  in  the  part  played 
by  the  number  in  marriage  covenants  and  treaties  of  peace.  It 
is  the  number  of  purification  and  consecration  (Lev.  iv.  6,  17 ; 
viii.  11,  83 ;  Num.  xix.  12).  "  Seven  is  the  number  of  everj 
grace  and  benefit  bestowed  upon  Israel ;  which  is  thus  marked 
as  flowing  out  of  the  covenant,  and  a  consequence  of  it  The 
priests  compass  Jericho  seven  days,  and  on  the  seventh  day 
seven  times,  that  all  Israel  may  know  that  the  city  is  given 
into  their  hands  by  Grod,  and  that  its  conquest  is  a  direct  and 
immediate  result  of  their  covenant  relation  to  Him.  Naaman 
is  to  dip  in  Jordan  seven  times,  that  he  may  acknowledge  the 
Qod  of  Israel  as  the  author  of  his  cure.  It  is  the  number  of  re- 
ward to  those  who  are  faithful  in  the  covenant  (Deut.  xxviii.  7 ; 
1  Sam.  ii.  5) ;  of  punishment  to  those  who  are  f reward  in  the 
covenant  (Lev.  xxvi.  21,  24,  28  ;  Deut  xxviii.  25),  or  to  those 
who  injure  the  people  in  it  (Gren.  iv.  15,  24 ;  Exod.  vii.  25 ;  Ps. 
Ixxix.  12).  All  the  feasts  are  ordered  by  seven,  or  else  by 
seven  multiplied  into  seven,  and  thus  made  intenser  still.  Thus 
it  is  with  the  Sabbath,  the  Passover,  the  Feast  of  Weeks,  of 
Tabernacles,  the  Sabbath-year,  and  the  Jubilee." 

Similarly  the  number  appears  in  God's  dealing  with  nations 
outside  the  covenant,  showing  that  He  is  working  for  Israel's 
sake  and  with  respect  to  His  covenant.  It  is  the  number  of  the 
years  of  plenty  and  of  famine,  in  sign  that  these  are  for  Israel's 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


RBYELATION  OF  JOHN.  411 

iake  rather  than  for  Egypt's.  Seven  times  pass  over  Nebn- 
chadnezzar,  that  he  maj  learn  that  the  God  of  his  Jewish  cap- 
tives is  king  over  all  the  earth  (partly  quoted  and  partly  con- 
densed from  Trench's  "  Epistles  to  the  Seven  Churches  "). 

Seven  also  occurs  as  a  sacred  number  in  the  New  Testament 
There  are  seven  beatitudes,  seven  petitions  in  the  Lord's 
Prayer ;  seven  parables  in  Matt.  xiii. ;  seven  loaves,  seven 
words  from  the  cross,  seven  deacons,  seven  graces  (Rom.  xii. 
6-8),  seven  characteristics  of  wisdom  (Jas.  iii  17).  In  the 
Apocalypse  the  prominence  of  the  number  is  marked.  To  a 
remarkable  extent  the  structure  of  that  book  is  moulded  by 
the  use  of  numbers,  especially  of  the  numbers  seven,  four, 
and  three.  There  are  seven  spirits  before  the  throne ;  seven 
churches ;  seven  golden  candlesticks ;  seven  stars  in  the  right 
hand  of  Him  who  is  like  unto  a  son  of  man ;  seven  lamps  of 
fire  burning  before  the  throne  ;  seven  horns  and  seven  eyes  of 
the  Lamb;  seven  seals  of  the  book;  and  the  thunders,  the 
heads  of  the  great  dragon  and  of  the  beast  from  the  sea,  the 
angels  with  the  trumpets,  the  plagues,  and  the  mountains  which 
are  the  seat  of  the  mystic  Babylon, — ^are  all  seven  in  num- 
ber. 

So  there  are  four  living  creatures  round  about  the  throne, 
four  angels  at  the  four  comers  of  the  earth,  holding  the  four 
winds ;  the  New  Jerusalem  is  foursquare.  Authority  is  given 
to  Death  to  kill  over  the  fourth  part  of  the  earth,  and  he  em- 
ploys four  agents. 

Again  the  use  of  the  number  three  is,  as  Professor  Milligan 
remarks,  ^^  so  remarkable  and  continuous  that  it  would  require 
an  analysis  of  the  whole  book  for  its  perfect  illustration." 
There  are  three  woes,  three  unclean  spirits  like  frogs,  three  di- 
visions of  Babylon,  and  three  gates  on  each  side  of  the  heav- 
enly city.  The  THsagion^  or  "  thrice  holy,"  is  sung  to  God  the 
Almighty,  to  whom  are  ascribed  three  attributes  of  glory. 

Seven  Churches.  Not  all  the  churches  in  Asia  are  meant, 
since  the  list  of  those  addressed  in  the  Apocalypse  does  not  in- 
clude C!oloss8e,  Miletus,  Hierapolis,  or  Magnesia.  The  seven 
named  are  chosen  to  symbolize  the  whole  Church.    Compare 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


412  WORD  STX7DIBS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

ch.  ii.  7.    Seven  being  the  number  of  the  covenant,  we  have  in 
these  seven  a  representation  of  the  Church  universal. 

In  Asia.    See  on  Acts  ii.  9. 

Grace — peace.  For  grace  {x^^\  ^^  o^  Luke  i.  30.  Both 
words  are  used  by  Paul  in  the  salutations  of  all  his  Epistles,  ex- 
cept tlie  three  Pastorals. 

From  Him  which  is,  and  which  was,  and  which  is  to 
come  {airo  rov  o  &v  teal  6  ijv  teal  6  ify)(6/iepo^).  The  whole 
salutation  is  given  in  the  name  of  the  Hoi j  Trinity :  the  Father 
(Him  which  is,  and  was,  and  is  to  come),  the  Spirit  (the  seven 
spirits),  the  Son  (Jesus  Christ).  See  further  below.  This  por- 
tion of  the  salutation  has  no  parallel  in  Paul,  and  is  distinct- 
ively characteristic  of  the  author  of  the  Apocalypse.  It  is  one 
of  the  solecisms  in  grammatical  construction  which  distinguishes 
this  book  from  the  other  writings  of  John.  The  Greek  student 
will  note  that  the  pronoun  which  (o)  is  not  construed  with  the 
preposition  from  {air6)y  which  would  require  the  genitive  case, 
but  stands  in  the  nominative  case. 

Each  of  these  three  appellations  is  treated  as  a  proper  name. 
The  Father  is  Him  which  isy  wad  which  was^  wad  which  is  to 
come.  This  is  a  paraphrase  of  the  unspeakable  name  of  Ood 
(Exod.  iii.  14),  the  absolute  and  unchangeable.  *0  &v,  the  One 
who  isy  is  the  Septuagint  translation  of  Exod.  iii.  14,  '^  I  am 
the  o  &v  {lam):^^  "o  iiv  {I am\  hath  sent  me  unto  you.''  The 
One  who  was  (o  ^y).  The  Greek  has  no  imperfect  participle, 
so  that  the  finite  verb  is  used.  Which  is  and  which  was  form 
one  clause,  to  be  balanced  against  which  is  to  com^e.  Com- 
pare xi.  17;  xvi.  6 ;  and  ^^was  (^)  in  the  beginning  with  God  " 
(John  i.  2).  Which  is  to  com^e  (o  ip^ofMeiHy:).  Lit.,  the  One  who 
is  coining.  This  is  not  equivalent  to  who  shaU  he ;  Le.,  the 
author  is  not  intending  to  describe  the  abstract  existence  of 
God  as  covering  the  future  no  less  than  the  past  and  the  pres- 
ent. If  this  had  been  his  meaning,  he  would  have  written 
o  iaofiepo^j  which  shall  he.  The  phrase  which  is  to  com^  would 
not  express  the  future  eternity  of  the  Divine  Being.  The 
dominant  conception  in  the  title  is  rather  that  of  immutability. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  413 

Farther,  the  name  does  not  emphasize  bo  much  God's  abstract 
existence,  as  it  does  His  permanent  covenant  relation  to  His 
people.  Hence  the  phrase  which  is  to  come^  is  to  be  explained 
in  accordance  with  the  key-note  of  the  book,  which  is  the  sec- 
ond coming  of  the  Son  (ch.  i.  7 ;  xxii.  20). 

The  phrase  which  is  to  comcj  is  often  applied  to  the  Son  (see 
on  1  John  iii.  5),  and  so  thronghont  this  book.  Here  it  is  pre- 
dicated of  the  Father,  apart  from  whom  the  Son  does  nothing. 
"The  Son  is  never  alone,  even  as  Redeemer"  (MilHgan).  Com- 
pare "  We  will  come  unto  him,"  John  xiv.  23.  Origen  qnotes 
our  passage  with  the  words :  "  But  that  you  may  perceive  that 
the  omnipotence  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son  is  one  and  the 
same,  hear  John  speaking  after  this  manner  in  the  Apocalypse, 
*  Who  isy  etc.' "  Dean  Plumptre  compares  the  inscription  over 
the  temple  of  Isis  at  Sais  in  Egypt :  ^'  I  am  all  that  has  come 
into  being,  and  that  which  is,  and  that  which  shall  be,  and 
no  man  hath  lifted  my  veil." 

The  Spirit  is  designated  by 

The  seven  Spirits  {r&v  hrrii  wveu/idTCDv).  Paul  nowhere 
joins  the  Spirit  with  the  Father  and  the  Son  in  his  opening 
salutations.  The  nearest  approach  is  2  Oor.  xiii.  13.  The  ref- 
erence is  not  to  the  seven  principal  angels  (ch.  viii.  2).  These 
could  not  be  properly  spoken  of  as  the  source  of  grace  and 
peace;  nor  be  associated  with  the  Father  and  the  Son;  nor 
take  precedence  of  the  Son,  as  is  the  case  here.  Besides,  angels 
are  never  called  spirits  in  this  book.  With  the  expression  com- 
pare ch.  iv.  5,  the  seven  lamps  of  fire,  "  which  are  the  seven 
Spirits  of  God : "  ch.  iii.  1,  where  Jesus  is  said  to  have  "  the 
seven  Spirits  of  Gk)d."  Thus  the  seven  Spirits  belong  to  the 
Son  as  well  as  to  the  Father  (see  John  xv.  26).  The  prototype 
of  John's  expression  is  found  in  the  vision  of  Zechariah,  where 
the  Messiah  is  prefigured  as  a  stone  with  seven  eyes,  "  the  eyes 
of  the  Lord,  which  run  to  and  fro  through  the  whole  earth  " 
(Zech.  iii.  9 ;  iv.  10).  Compare  also  the  same  prophet's  vision 
of  the  seven-branched  candlestick  (iv.  2). 

Hence  the  Holy  Spirit  is  called  the  Seven  Spirits;  the  per- 
fect, mystical  number  seven  indicating  unity  through  diversity 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


414  WORD  STUDIBS  Df  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

(1  Cor.  xii.  4).  Not  the  sevenfold  gifts  of  the  Spirit  are  meant, 
bat  the  divine  Personality  who  imparts  them ;  the  one  Spiiit 
mider  the  diverse  manifestations.  Bichard  of  St.  Victor  (cited 
by  Trench,  "  Seven  Churches  ")  says :  "  And  from  the  seven 
Spirits,  that  is,  from  the  sevenfold  Spirit,  which  indeed  is 
simple  in  nature,  sevenfold  in  grace." 

5.  Jeaua  Christ.  The  Son.  Placed  after  the  Spirit  be- 
cause what  is  to  follow  in  vv.  &~8  relates  to  Him.  This  is  ac- 
cording to  John's  manner  of  arranging  his  thoughts  so  that  a 
new  sentence  shall  spring  out  of  the  final  thought  of  the  pre- 
ceding sentence.  Compare  the  Prologue  of  the  Oospel,  and 
vv.  1,  2,  of  this  chapter. 

The  feithful  witneaa  (o  itApmn  o  tnarhi).  For  the  phrase- 
ology see  on  1  John  iv.  9.  For  toitneM^  see  on  John  i.  7 ;  1 
Pet.  V.  1.  As  applied  to  the  Messiah,  see  Ps.  Ixxxix.  37 ;  Isa. 
Iv.  4.  The  construction  again  departs  from  the  grammatical 
rule.  The  words  witneasy  Jhat-hom^  ruler y  are  in  the  nomina- 
tive case,  instead  of  being  in  the  genitive,  in  apposition  with 
Jesvs  Christ,  This  construction,  though  irregular,  nevertheless 
gives  dignity  and  emphasis  to  these  titles  of  the  Lord.  See  on 
ver.  4.  The  word  wioro?,  faithful  is  used  (1),  of  one  who 
shows  Himself  faithfvl  in  the  discha/rge  of  a  duly  or  the  ad- 
ministration of  a  trust  (Matt  xxiv.  45 ;  Luke  xii.  42).  Hence, 
trustworthy  (1  Cor.  vii.  25  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  2).  Of  things  that  can 
be  relied  upon  (1  Tim.  iii.  1 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  11).  (2),  Confidmg ; 
trusting ;  a  believer  (Gal.  iii.  9 ;  Acts  xvi.  1 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  15  ;  1 
Tim.  V.  16).  See  on  1  John  L  9.  The  word  is  combined  with 
oKoi^wo^y  truey  genuine  in  ch.  iii.  14 ;  xix.  11 ;  xxi  5 ;  xxiL 
6.  Kichard  of  St.  Victor  (cit  by  Trench)  says :  "  A  faithful 
witness,  because  He  gave  faithful  testimony  concerning  all 
things  which  were  to  be  testified  to  by  Him  in  the  world.  A 
faithful  witness,  because  whatever  He  heard  from  the  Father, 
He  faithfully  made  known  to  His  disciples.  A  faithful  wit* 
ness,  because  He  taught  the  way  of  God  in  trath,  neither  did 
He  care  for  any  one  nor  regard  the  person  of  men.  A  faithful 
witness,  because  He  announced  condemnation  to  the  reprobate 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  415 

and  salvation  to  the  elect.  A  faithful  witness,  because  He  oon- 
firmed  by  miracles  the  truth  which  He  taught  in  words.  A 
faithful  witness,  because  He  denied  not,  even  in  deatli,  the  Fa- 
ther's testimony  to  Himself.  A  faithful  witness,  because  He 
will  give  testimony  in  the  day  of  judgment  concerning  the 
works  of  the  good  and  of  the  evil." 

The  first'begotten  of  the  dead  (o  irpwr&roKOf;  ix  r&v  v&c- 
p&v).  Rev.,  ^  f/rstrhcm.  The  best  texts  omit  in  from. 
Compare  Col.  i.  18.  The  risen  Christ  regarded  in  His  relation 
to  the  dead  in  Christ.  He  was  not  the  first  who  rose  from  the 
dead,  but  the  first  who  so  rose  that  death  was  thenceforth  im- 
possible for  Him  (Rom.  vi.  9) ;  rose  with  that  resurrection-life 
in  which  He  will  finally  bring  with  Him  those  who  sleep  in 
Him  (1  Thess.  iv.  14).  Some  interpreters,  rendering^^^Jo^Ti, 
find  in  the  phrase  the  metaphor  of  death  as  the  womb  which 
bare  Him  (see  on  Acts  ii.  24).  Others,  holding  by  the  render- 
ing jvrstrhegoUen^  connect  the  passage  with  Ps.  ii.  7,  which  by 
Paul  is  connected  with  the  resurrection  of  Christ  (Acts  xiii.  33, 
33).  Paul  also  says  that  Jesus  "  was  declared  to  be  the  Son  of 
Gk)d  with  power  by  the  resurrection  from  the  dead  "  (Rom.  i. 
4).  The  verb  tmctw  which  is  one  of  the  components  of  irpayrS- 
roKo^  f/rsi^hegotten  or  honij  is  everywhere  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment used  in  the  sense  of  to  hear  or  to  hringforthy  and  has  no- 
where the  meaning  hegetj  unless  Jas.  i.  15  be  an  exception,  on 
which  see  note.  In  classical  Greek  the  meaning  beg^  is  com- 
mon. 

The  Ruler  of  the  kings  of  the  earth  (o  ipxtov  t&p  fiaaiXr 
imv  7%  7^).  Through  resurrection  He  passes  to  glory  and 
dominion  (Philip,  ii.  9).  The  comparison  with  the  kings  of 
the  earth  is  suggested  by  Ps.  ii.  2.  Compare  Ps.  Ixxxix.  27  ; 
Isa.  lii.  15  ;  1  Tim.  vi  15  ;  and  see  Apoc  vi.  15  ;  xvii  4 ;  xix. 
16. 

Unto  Him  that  loved  (r^  arfonnfiacarri).  The  true  reading  is 
a^anr&ini  thcU  loveth.  So  Rev,  Christ's  love  is  ever  present. 
See  John  xiii.  1. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


416  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  HBW  TESTAMENT. 

Washed  (Kovcavn).  Eead  XOa-opn  loosed.  Trench  remarks 
on  the  variation  of  readings  as  having  grown  oat  of  a  plaj  on 
the  words  Xourpovt  ^  hathing^  and  Xirpov  a  ransom^  both  of 
which  express  the  central  benefits  which  redonnd  to  us  through 
the  sacrifice  and  death  of  Christ  He  refers  to  this  plaj  upon 
words  as  involved  in  the  etymology  of  the  name  ApoUo  as 
given  by  Plato  ;  viz.,  the  washer  (o  anroXovfov)  and  the  dbsoher 
(o  inroXiKov)  from  all  imparities.  Either  reading  falls  in  with 
a  beaatifol  circle  of  imagery.  If  washed,  compare  Ps.  li.  2 ; 
Isa.  L  16,  18 ;  Ezek.  xxxvL  25 ;  Acts  xxii.  16 ;  Eph.  v.  26 ; 
Tit  iii.  5.  If  loosed,  compare  Matt  xx.  28 ;  1  TioL  ii.  6 ;  1 
Pet  L  18 ;  Heb.  ix.  12 ;  GaL  iii.  13 ;  iv.  5 ;  Apoc  v.  9 ;  xiv. 
8,4. 

6.  Kings  (JScunXek).  The  correct  reading  is  fiaaCKelap  a 
hingdom.  The  term  King  is  never  applied  in  the  New  Test- 
ament to  individual  Christians.  The  reigning  of  the  saints 
is  emphasized  in  this  book.  See  ch.  v.  10 ;  xx.  4,  6 ;  xxii  5. 
Compare  Dan.  vii.  18^  22. 

Priests  {UpeU)»  Kingdom  describes  the  body  of  the  re- 
deemed ooUectvvdy,  Priests  indicates  their  indi/vidtud  position. 
Peter  observes  the  same  distinction  (1  Pet  ii.  5)  in  the  phrases 
living  stones  (individuals)  and  a  y[>iritual  house  (the  body  col- 
lectively), and  combines  both  kings  and  priests  in  another  collect- 
ive term,  roycd  priesthood  (ver  9).  The  priesthood  of  believers 
grows  out  of  the  priesthood  of  Christ  (Ps.  ex.  4 ;  Zech.  vi.  13 ; 
Heb.  vii.-x.).  This  dignity  was  promised  to  Israel  on  the  condit- 
ion of  obedience  and  fidelity  to  God.  ^^  Ye  shall  be  a  kingdom 
of  •priests  and  a  holy  nation  "  (Exod.  xix.  6).  In  the  kingdom  of 
Christ  each  individual  is  a  priest.  The  priest's  work  is  not 
limited  to  any  order  of  the  ministry.  All  may  offer  the  sacri- 
fice of  praise  and  thanksgiving :  all  have  direct  access  to  the 
holiest  through  the  blood  of  Jesus :  all  Christians,  as  priests, 
are  to  minister  to  one  another  and  to  plead  for  one  another. 
The  consummation  of  this  ideal  appears  in  Apoc.  xxi.  22,  where 
the  heavenly  Jerusalem  is  represented  as  without  temple.  It 
is  aU  temple.    ^^  It  is  the  abolition  of  the  distinction  between 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BEVBLATIOK  OP  JOHK.  417 

holy  and  profane  (Zech.  xiv.  20,  21)— nearer  and  more  remote 
from  God  — through  all  being  henceforth  holy,  all  being 
brought  to  the  nearest  whereof  it  is  capable,  to  Him  "  (Trench). 

Unto  God  and  His  Father  (tjS  0e^  scaX  irarpX  ovrot)). 
Lit.,  to  the  Ood  and  Father  of  Him.  Hence  Kev.,  correctly, 
His  Ood  and  Father.  For  the  phrase  compare  Som.  xv.  6  ;  2 
Cor.  i.  3 ;  Eph.  L  8. 

Glory  and  dominion  (ij  So^a  scai  rb  tcpdro^).  Kev.,  correct- 
ly, rendering  the  two  articles,  ^'  the  glory  and  the  dominion." 
The  articles  express  uni/versality  :  all  glory ;  that  which  every- 
where and  under  every  form  represents  glory  and  dominion. 
The  verb  he  (the  glory)  is  not  in  the  text  We  may  render 
either  as  an  ascription,  5d,  or  as  a  confession,  is.  The  glory  is 
His.  J<(^  ^2or^  means  originally  <>^ni(m  or /uc^Tm^n^  In  this 
sense  it  is  not  used  in  Scripture.  In  the  sacured  writers  always 
of  a  good  or  fa/oordble  opinion,  and  hence  praise^  hanpTy  glory 
(Luke  xiv.  10  ;  Heb.  iii.  3  ;  1  Pet.  v.  4).  Applied  to  physical 
objects,  as  ligJUy  the  heaverdy  bodies  (Acts  xxiL  11 ;  1  C!or.  xv. 
40).  The  visible  brightness  in  manifestations  of  God  (Luke  iL 
9 ;  Acts  viL  55 ;  Luke  ix.  32 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  7).  Magn\/ioenoej 
dignity  (Matt.  iv.  8  ;  Luke  iv.  6).  Divine  majeety  or  perfect 
exceUenoSy  especially  in  doxologies,  either  of  God  or  Christ 
(1  Pet.  iv.  11 ;  Jude  25 ;  Apoc.  iv.  9,  11 ;  Matt.  xvL  27 ; 
Mark  x.  37 ;  viii.  38  ;  Luke  ix.  26 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  18 ;  iv.  4).  The 
glory  or  majesty  ofdm/ne  grace  (Eph.  i.  6, 12, 14, 18 ;  1  Tim. 
i.  11).  The  majesty  of  angels  (Luke  ix.  26  ;  Jude  8 ;  2  Pet.  ii. 
10).  The  gloriotis  condition  of  Christ  after  acoompLishvng  His 
earthly  work,  and  of  the  redeemed  who  share  His  eternal  glory 
(Luke  xxiv.  26  ;  John  xviL  5  ;  Philip,  iii.  21 ;  1  Tim.  iii  16 ; 
Rom.  viii.  18,  21 ;  ix.  23 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  17 ;  Col.  i.  27). 

Trench  remarks  upon  the  prominence  of  the  doxological  ele- 
ment in  the  highest  worship  of  the  Church  as  contrasted  with 
the  very  subordinate  place  which  it  often  occupies  in  ours. 
^^  We  can  perhaps  make  our  requests  known  unto  God,  and 
this  is  well,  for  it  is  prayer ;  but  to  give  glory  to  Gk>d,  quit^ 
apart  from  anything  to  be  directly  gotten  by  ourselves  in  r^ 
Vol.  IL-87 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


418  WORD  8TUDIBS  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

tarn,  this  is  better,  for  it  is  adoration."  Dr.  John  Brown  in 
his  Memoir  of  his  father,  one  of  the  very  finest  biographical 
sketches  in  English  literature,  records  a  formula  used  by  him 
in  closing  his  prayers  on  specially  solemn  occasions:  ^'And 
now  nnto  Thee,  O  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  the  one 
Jehovah  and  our  God,  we  would — as  is  most  meet — with  the 
Church  on  earth  and  the  Church  in  heaven,  ascribe  all  honor 
and  glory,  dominion  and  majesty,  as  it  was  in  the  beginning, 
is  now,  and  ever  shall  be,  world  without  end.  Amen  "  ("  Horse 
Subsedvce  ").  Compare  the  doxologies  in  1  Pet  iv.  11 ;  Gal. 
i.  5  ;  Apoc.  iv.  9, 11 ;  v.  13  ;  vii.  12 ;  Jude  25  ;  1  Chron,  xxix. 
11. 

Forever  and  ever  {ek  roi^  cu&v<vi  r&v  ai&wav).  Lit.,  ttnto 
the  ages  of  the  ages.  For  the  phrase  compare  Gal.  i.  5 ;  Heb.  xiii. 
21 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  11.  It  occurs  twelve  times  in  the  Apocalypse, 
but  not  in  John's  Gospel  or  Epistles.  It  is  the  formula  of 
eternity. 

Amen  (o^^i^)-  The  English  word  is  a  transcription  of  the 
Greek  and  of  the  Hebrew.  A  verbal  adjective,  meaning  Jvrmy 
faithful.  Hence  o  a/i^i^,  the  Amerij  applied  to  Christ  (Apoc.  iii. 
14).  It  passes  into  an  adverbial  sense  by  which  something  is 
asserted  or  confirmed.  Thus  often  used  by  Christ,  verily. 
John  alone  uses  the  double  affirmation,  verily ^  verily.  See  on 
John  i.  51 ;  x.  1. 

7.  He  Cometh  with  clouds  {Spxerai  i^erk  r&v  vejteX&v). 
The  clouds  are  frequently  used  in  the  descriptions  of  the  Lord's 
second  coming.  8ee  Dan.  viL  13 ;  Matt.  xxiv.  30 ;  xxvi.  64 ; 
Mark  xiv.  62.  Compare  the  manifestation  of  God  in  the 
clouds  at  Sinai,  in  the  cloudy  pillar,  the  Shekinah,  at  the  trans- 
figuration, and  see  Ps.  xcvii.  2 ;  xviiL  11 ;  Kahum  i.  3 ;  Isa. 
xix.  1. 

Shall  see  (J^renu).  The  verb  denotes  the  physical  act,  but 
emphasizes  the  mental  discernment  accompanying  it,  and  points 
to  the  result  rather  than  to  the  act  of  vision.   See  on  John  L  18. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BEVELATION  OF  JOHN.  419 

Appropriate  here  as  indicating  the  quickened  spiritnal  discern- 
ment engendered  by  the  Lord's  appearing,  in  those  who  have 
rejected  Hiin,  and  who  now  mourn  for  their  folly  and  sin. 

They  which  {otnpe^).  The  compound  relative  describes  a 
class.    See  on  Matt.  xiii.  52 ;  xxi.  41 ;  Mark  xii.  18. 

Pierced  {i^idimiaav).  See  on  John  six.  34,  and  compare 
Zech.  xii  10 ;  John  xix.  36.  The  expression  here  refers  not  to 
the  Jews  only,  but  to  all  who  reject  the  Son  of  Man ;  those  who 
^^  in  any  age  have  identified  themselves  with  the  Spirit  of  the 
Saviour's  murderers"  (Milligan).  The  passage  is  justly  cited 
as  a  strong  evidence  that  the  author  of  Uie  Gk>spel  is  also  the 
author  of  the  Apocalypse. 

Kindreds  (^i/Xol).  More  correctly,  trihea.  The  word  used 
of  the  true  Israel  in  ch.  v.  5 ;  vii.  4-8 ;  xxi.  12.  As  the  tribes 
of  Israel  are  the  figure  by  which  the  people  of  God,  Jew  or 
Gentile,  are  represented,  so  unbelievers  are  here  represented  as 
iribesy  ^^  the  mocking  counterpart  of  the  true  Israel  of  God." 
Compare  Matt.  xxiv.  30,  31. 

Shall  wail  because  of  Him  {k&^^cvtm  hr  avrbv).  Bev., 
better,  shall  mourn  over  Him.  Lit,  ahaU  heat  thevr  hreaste. 
See  on  Matt  xi.  17. 

8.  Alpha  and  Omega  (rh  A  tadrb  fl).  Bev.,  rightly,  gives 
the  article,  ^Hhe  Alpha,''  etc.  The  words  are  explained  by  the 
gloss,  properly  omitted  from  the  text,  the  begitming  and  the 
ending.  The  Rabbinical  writers  used  the  phrase  /ram  Aleph 
to  Tavy  to  signify  completely y  from  beginning  to  end.  Thus  one 
says,  "  Adam  transgressed  the  whole  law  from  Aleph  even  to 
Tav."    Compare  Isa.  xii.  4 ;  xliii  10 ;  xliv.  6. 

The  Lord  (o  Kvpio<:).  See  on  Matt  xxi  3.  The  best  texts 
read  KvpuK  6  Oei^,  the  Lord  the  Ood.    Bev.,  the  Lord  Ood. 

Which  iSy  etc.  See  on  ver.  4.  "Gk)d,  as  the  old  tradition 
declares,  holding  in  His  hand  the  beginning,  middle,  and  end  of 
all  that  is''  (Pkto,  "Laws,"  715). 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


420  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

The  Almighty  (o  iravrotcpdrmp).  Used  only  once  outside  of 
the  Apocalypse,  in  2  Cor.  vi.  18,  where  it  is  a  qaotation.  Con- 
stantly in  the  Septoagint. 

9.  I  John.    Compare  Dan.  viL  28 ;  ix.  2;  x.  2. 

Who  am  also  your  brother  {h  ical  iSeK^  ifA&v).  Omit 
iuu,  alaOf  and  render  as  Bev.,  John  yov/t  hrother. 

Companion  (cruy/cotvcoi^).  Bev.,  better,  jxvrto^  with  you. 
See  Philip,  i.  7,  and  note  oil partflMTB^  Luke  v.  10.  Koivwvo^y  is 
a  partner  J  assooiate.  Siiv  strengthens  the  term :  partner  alang 
toUh.  Compare  John's  favorite  word  in  the  First  Epistle, 
Koufmvla  fMov3%hvpy  1  John  i.  3. 

In  the  tribulation,  etc.  Denoting  the  sphere  or  element  in 
which  the  fellowship  subsisted. 

Tribulation  {^Id-^i).  See  on  Matt,  xiii  21.  Persecution 
for  Christ's  sake,  and  illustrated  by  John's  own  banishment. 

Kingdom  (ficurCK^Uf).  The  present  kingdom.  Trench  is 
wrong  in  saying  that  ^^  while  the  tribulation  is  present  the 
kingdom  is  only  in  hope."  On  the  contrary,  it  is  the  assur- 
ance of  being  now  within  the  kingdom  of  Christ — under 
Christ's  sovereignty,  fighting  the  good  fight  under  His  leader- 
ship— which  gives  hope  and  courage  and  patience.  The  king- 
dom of  Ood  is  2k  present  energy,  and  it  is  a  peculiarity  of  John 
to  treat  the  eternal  life  as  already  present.  See  John  iii.  36 ; 
y.  24;  vi.  47,  54;  1  John  v.  11.  ^*'In  all  these  things  we  are 
abundantly  the  conquerors  (Bom.  viii.  37  sqq.).  This  may  go  to 
explain  the  peculiar  order  of  the  three  words ;  trilnUation  and 
kingdom^  two  apparently  antithetic  ideas,  being  joined,  with  a 
true  insight  into  their  relation,  and  patience  being  added  as  the 
element  through  which  the  tribulation  is  translated  into  sover- 
eignty. The  reference  to  tixe/^U^tre  glorious  consummation  of 
the  kingdom  need  not  be  rejected.  It  is  rather  involved  in  the 
present  kingdom.    Patience,  which  links  the  life  of  tribulation 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BBVBLATION  OF  JOHN.  421 

with  the  soyereignty  of  Christ  here  npon  earth,  likewise  links 
it  with  the  oonsummation  of  Christ's  kingdom  in  heaven. 
Tliroogh  faith  and  patience  the  subjects  of  that  kingdom  in- 
herit the  promises.  ^'Rightly  he  says  first  ^in  the  tribula- 
tion' and  adds  afterwards  4n  the  kingdom,'  because,  if  we 
suffer  together  we  shall  also  reign  together"  (Richard  of  St 
Victor,  cit  by  Trench).    Compare  Acts  xiv.  22. 

Patience.    See  on  2  Pet  i  6 ;  Jas,  y.  7. 

Of  Jesus  Christ  dlrfo-od  Xpurrav).  The  best  texts  omit 
Christ  and  insert  iv  in;  rendering,  as  Bey.,  ^^ kingdom  and 
patience  which  are  in  JesvsP 

Was  {ifimfoiiAipf).  Lit,  I  came  to  pass,  ie.,  I  found  rnysdf. 
The  past  tense  seems  to  imply  that  John  was  no  longer  in  Pat- 
mos  when  he  wrote. 

Patmos.  Now  called  Patmo  and  Pahnosa.  In  the  iEgean, 
one  of  the  group  of  the  Sporades,  about  twenty-eight  miles 
S.  S.W.  of  Samos.  It  is  about  ten  miles  long  by  six  in  breadth. 
The  island  is  yolcanic,  and  is  bare  and  rocky  throughout ;  the 
hills,  of  which  the  highest  rises  to  nearly  a  thousand  feet,  oom- 
pianding  a  magnificent  yiew  of  the  neighboring  sea  and  islands. 
The  bay  of  La  Scala,  running  into  the  land  on  the  east,  diyides 
the  island  into  two  nearly  equal  parts,  a  northern  and  a  south- 
em.  The  ancient  town,  remains  of  which  are  still  to  be  seen, 
occupied  the  isthmus  which  separates  La  Scala  from  the  bay 
of  Merika  on  the  western  coast.  The  modem  town  is  on  a 
hill  in  the  southem  half  of  the  island,  clustered  at  the  foot  of 
the  monastery  of  St  John.  A  grotto  is  shown  called  '^  the 
grotto  of  the  Apocalypse,"  in  which  the  apostle  is  said  to  haye 
receiyed  the  yision.  ^^  The  stem,  ragged  barrenness  of  its  broken 
promontories  well  *suits  the  historical  fact  of  the  relegation  of 
the  condemned  Christian  to  its  shores,  as  of  a  conyict  to  his 
prison.  The  yiew  from  the  topmost  peak,  or,  indeed,  from  any 
lofty  eleyation  in  the  islands,  unfolds  an  unusual  sweep,  such  as 
well  became  the  Apocalypse,  the  unyeiling  of  the  future  to  the 
eyes  of  the  solitary  seer.    Aboye,  there  was  always  the  broad 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


422  WORD  8TUDIB3  IN  THB  NBW  TBBTAMENT. 

heaven  of  a  Grecian  skj ;  sometimes  bright  with  its  ^  white 
cload '  (Apoc.  xiv.  14),  sometimes  torn  with  ^  lightnings  and 
thunderings,'  and  darkened  bj  ^  great  hail/  or  cheered  with  ^  a 
rainbow  like  unto  an  emerald'  (Apoc.  iv.  3;  viii.  7;.xL  19; 
xvL  21).  Over  the  high  tops  of  Icaria,  Samos,  and  Kaxos  rise 
the  mountains  of  Asia  Minor ;  amongst  which  would  lie,  to  the 
north,  the  circle  of  the  Seven  Chorches  to  which  his  addresses 
were  to  be  sent.  Around  him  stood  the  mountains  and  islands 
of  the  Archipelago  (Apoc.  vi.  14 ;  xvL  20).  When  he  looked 
round,  above  or  below,  *  the  sea'  would  always  occupy  the  fore- 
most place  .  .  .  the  voices  of  heaven  were  like  the  sound 
of  the  waves  beating  on  the  shore,  as  ^  the  sound  of  many  wa- 
ters'  (Apoc.  xiv.  2 ;  xix.  6) ;  the  millstone  was  ^cast  into  the 
sea '  (Apoc.  xviii.  21) ;  the  sea  was  to  ^  give  up  the  dead  which 
were  in  it'  (Apoc  xx.  13)  "  (Stanley,  "  Sermons  in  the  East "). 

For  the  word  of  God  (Si^  rhv  Xiyov  rou  Oeov).  Far  is  he- 
cause  of:  on  account  of.  The  expression  is  commonly  explained 
with  reference  to  John's  banishment  as  a  martyr  for  Christian 
truth.  Some,  however,  especially  those  who  desire  to  over- 
throw John's  authorship  of  the  book,  explain  that  he  was  in 
Patmos  for  the  sake  ofji>reachmff  the  tvord  therCy  or  in  order  to 
receive  a  communication  of  the  word  of  God.  Apart,  however, 
from  the  general  tone  of  John's  address,  which  implies  a  season 
of  persecution,  the  phrase  for  the  toord  of  God  occurs  in  two 
passages  where  the  meaning  cannot  be  doubtful ;  ch.  vL  9,  and 
XX.  4. 

Testimony  (jiaprvplap).    See  on  John  i.  7. 

Of  Jesus  Christ.    Omit  Christ. 

10.  I  was  {iy€p6fMiv).    See  on  ver.  9. 

In  the  Spirit  {hf  irvevfiarC).  The  phrase  I  was  in  the  Spirit 
occurs  only  here  and  ch.  iv.  2 :  in  the  Spirity  in  ch.  xvii.  8 ; 
xxi.  10.  The  phrase  denotes  a  state  of  trance  or  spiritual 
ecstasy.  Compare  Acts  x.  10;  2  Cor.  xii.  2,  4.  "Connection 
with  surrounding  objects  through  the  senses  is  suspended,  and 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BEVELiLTION  OF  JOHN. 

a  conneotion  with  the  invisible  world  takes  place  "  (Ebrard). 
*^  A  divine  release  from  the  ordinary  ways  of  men "  (Plato, 
"Ph»dru8,"265). 

^'  Yon  ask,  ^  How  can  we  know  the  infinite  ? '  I  answer,  not 
by  reason.  It  is  the  office  of  reason  to  distinguish  and  define, 
llie  infinite,  therefore,  cannot  be  ranked  among  itd  objects. 
Yon  can  only  apprehend  tlie  infinite  by  a  facalty  superior  to 
reason;  by  entering  into  a  state  in  which  yon  are  your  finite 
self  no  longer;  in  which  the  divine  essence  is  communicated  to 
you.  This  is  ecstacy.  It  is  the  liberation  of  your  mind  from 
its  finite  consciousness.  .  •  •  But  this  sublime  condition  is 
not  of  permanent  duration.  It  is  only  now  and  then  that  we 
can  enjoy  this  elevation  (mercifully  made  possible  for  us)  above 
the  limits  of  the  body  and  the  world.  .  .  •  All  that  tends 
to  purify  and  elevate  the  mind  will  assist  you  in  this  attainment, 
and  facilitate  the  approach  and  the  recurrence  of  these  happy 
intervals.  There  are  then  different  roads  by  which  this  end 
may  be  reached.  The  love  of  beauty  which  exalts  the  poet ; 
that  devotion  to  the  One,  and  that  ascent  of  science  which 
makes  the  ambition  of  the  philosopher ;  and  that  love  and  those 
prayers  by  which  some  devout  and  ardent  soul  tends  in  its 
moral  purity  towards  perfection.  These  are  the  great  highways 
conducting  to  heights  above  the  actual  and  the  particular,  where 
we  stand  in  the  immediate  presence  of  the  Infinite  who  shines 
out  as  from  the  deeps  of  the  souP  (Letter  of  Plotinus,  about 
A.D.  260). 

Richard  of  St  Victor  (died  1173)  lays  down  six  stages  of 
contemplation :  two  in  the  province  of  the  imagination,  two  in 
the  province  of  reason,  and  two  in  the  province  of  intelligence. 
The  third  heaven  is  open  only  to  the  eye  of  intelligence — that 
eye  whose  vision  is  clarified  by  divine  grace  and  a  holy  life.  In 
the  highest  degrees  of  contemplation  penitence  avails  more  than 
science ;  sighs  obtain  what  is  impossible  to  reason.  Some  good 
men  have  been  ever  unable  to  attain  the  highest  stage ;  few  are 
fully  winged  with  all  the  six  pinions  of  contemplation.  In  the 
ecstasy  he  describes,  there  is  supposed  to  be  a  dividing  asunder 
of  the  soul  and  the  spirit  as  by  the  sword  of  the  Spirit  of  Ood. 
The  body  sleeps,  and  the  soul  and  all  the  visible  world  is  shut 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


494  WORD  STUDIBB  IN  THB  NBW  TBSTAMEZIT. 

ftwaj.    The  spirit  is  joined  to  the  Lord^and,  one  with  Him, 
transcends  itself  and  all  the  limitations  of  hnman  thought 

Snfism  is  the  mystical  asceticism  of  Mohammedanism.    The 
ecstasy  of  a  Sufi  saint  is  thus  described : 

*'  Mj  tongue  oUre  ferer-drj,  mj  blood  ran  Am, 
Mj  nights  were  ileepleM  with  ooosaming  lore. 
Till  night  «nd  dmj  iped  peet—ae  flies  a  lanoe 
Graiing  a  backler^  rim ;  a  hundred  faiths 
Seemed  there  as  one ;  a  hundred  thousand  jean 
Ko  longer  than  a  moment    In  that  hour 
AU  past  etemitj  and  all  to  come 
Was  gathered  up  in  one  stupendous  JVbw,— 
Let  understanding  marrel  as  it  maj. 
Where  men  see  clouds,  on  the  ninth  hearen  I  gtm^ 
And  see  the  throne  of  Qod.    All  hearen  and  hell 
Are  bare  to  me  and  all  men's  destinies, 
The  hearens  and  earth,  thej  ranish  at  mj  glance : 
The  dead  rise  at  mj  look.    I  tear  the  reil 
Vrom  aU  the  world,  and  in  the  haU  of  hearen 
I  set  me  oentral,  radiant  as  the  sun.** 

Vanghan,  «<  Hours  with  the  Mjstioi,''  IL,  19. 

Beatrice  says  to  Dante: 

«*  We  from  the  giealest  body 
Hare  issued  to  the  hearen  that  is  pure  light ; 
Light  intellectual  replete  with  lore, 
Lore  of  true  good  replete  with  ecstasj* 
Bcstssy  thai  transoendeih  erery  sweetnen.** 

Dante  says: 

<*  I  pereeired  m  jself 
To  be  uplifted  orer  m j  own  power, 
And  I  iHth  rision  new  rekindled  me, 
Such  that  no  light  whatorer  is  so  pure 
But  that  mine  ejes  were  fortifled  against  ii" 

«« ParadiM,^  xzx.,  88-(MX 

Again,  just  before  the  consummate  beatific  vision,  Dante 
•ays: 

<«  And  I,  who  to  the  end  of  all  desires 
Was  now  H^proaching,  eren  as  I  ought 
The  ardor  of  desire  within  me  ended. 
Bernard  was  beckoning  unto  me,  and  smiling, 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


RBVEliATION  OF  JOHV.  425 

That  I  shoald  upward  look ;  but  I  alroAdy 
Wm  of  my  own  accord  sach  at  he  wished ; 
Because  m  j  sight,  becoming  purified^ 
Was  entering  more  and  more  into  the  ray 
Of  the  High  Light  which  of  itself  is  true. 
From  that  time  forward  what  I  saw  was  greater 
Than  our  discourse,  that  to  such  rision  yields, 
And  yields  the  memory  unto  such  excess.** 

''  Paradiio,"  zzzUL,  4^-57. 

On  th«  Lord's  day  {h  tevpuue^  ^Mn\  The  phrase  occurs 
only  here  in  the  New  Testament  The  first  day  of  the  week, 
the  f^tiyal  of  the  Lord's  resurrection.  Not,  as  some,  the  day 
of  judgment,  which  in  the  New  Testament  is  expressed  by  1} 
^fUpa  Tov  Kvpiov  the  day  of  the  Lard  (2  Thess.  ii.  2) ;  or  ^fUpa 
Kvplovtheday  of  the  Lordy  the  article  being  omitted  (2  Pet.  iii. 
10) ;  or  iiiUpa  Xpurrov  the  day  of  Christ  (Philip,  ii  16).  The 
usual  New  Testament  expression  for  the  first  day  of  the  week 
is  1}  fUa  T&v  trafifidrmv  (Luke  xxiy.  1 ;  see  on  Acts  xx.  7). 

Behind  me.  The  unexpected,  overpowering  entrance  of  the 
divine  voice.    Compare  Ezek.  iii  12. 

Of  a  trumpet  {^dKm'Vffaq).    Properly,  a  iffor  trumpet. 

11.  I  am  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  first  and  the  laat. 

Omit 

Thou  teett  {fiKiwei/i).    See  on  John  i.  29. 

Write  (ypdy^v).  The  aorist  imperative,  denoting  instantan- 
eous action.    Write  at  onoe^jmrnykly. 

In  a  boolc  (ek  fiipKtop).  Lit.,  into.  Commit  in  writing  to 
a  book.  For  book  see  on  Matt.  xix.  7 ;  Mark  x.  4;  Luke  iv.  17. 
The  command  to  write  is  given  twelve  times  in  the  Apocalypse. 

Seven  churches.    See  on  ver.  4. 
Which  are  in  Asia.    Omit 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


426  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NBW^  TESTAMENT. 

EphesuSy  etc.  Five  oat  of  the  seven  cities  here  named 
appear  in  a  passage  in  Tacitus'  "  Annals  "  (iv.,  55),  in  which  is 
described  a  contention  among  eleven  of  the  cities  of  proconsu- 
lar Asia  for  the  privilege  of  erecting  a  statue  and  a  temple  to 
Tiberius.  Laodicea  is  passed  over  as  unequal  in  wealth  and 
dignity  to  the  task.  Philadelphia  and  Thjatira  do  not  appear. 
Pergamum  is  rejected  as  having  already  a  temple  to  Augustus. 
Ephesus  (with  Miletus)  has  sufficient  employment  for  its  state 
in  the  ceremonies  of  its  own  deity,  Diana.  Thus  the  dispute 
was  confined  to  Sardis  and  Smyrna;  and  Smyrna  was  preferred 
on  the  ground  of  its  friendly  offices  to  the  Boman  people. 

12.  To  866  the  voice.    The  voice  is  put  for  the  speaker. 

That  spake  (^^).  The  compound  relative  has  a  qualitative 
force:  of  what  sort. 

With  me  O^er'  iyjA).  The  preposition  implies  ocmversaU^on 
and  not  mere  addreaa. 

Candiesticlcs  (Xv^^).  See  on  Matt  y.  15.  We  are  at  once 
reminded  of  the  seven-branched  candlestick  of  the  tabernacle 
(Exod.  XXV.  31 ;  Heb.  ix.  2 ;  compare  2jech.  iv.  2).  Here  there 
is  not  one  candlestick  with  seven  branches,  but  seven  candle- 
sticks, representing  the  Christian  Church.  The  Jewish  Church 
was  one,  as  being  the  Church  of  a  single  people.  The  Christian 
Church,  though  essentially  one,  is  a  Church  composed  of  many 
peoples.  It  is  no  longer  outwardly  one  or  in  one  place.  Accord- 
ing to  the  literal  meaning  of  the  word,  latwpstcmd,  the  several 
lampstands  are  bearers  of  the  light  (Matt.  v.  14, 16),  ^^  holding 
forth  the  word  of  life''  (Philip,  ii.  15, 16). 

The  epithet  golden^  so  common  in  the  Apocalypse,  indicates 
the  preciousness  of  all  that  pertains  to  the  Church  of  God. 
Trench  observes  that  throughout  the  ancient  East  there  was  a 
sense  of  sacredness  attached  to  this  metal,  which  still,  to  a  great 
extent,  survives.  Thus,  golden  in  the  Zend  Avesta  is  through- 
out synonymous  with  heavenly  or  divine.  Even  so  late  as  the 
time  of  David  gold  was  not  used  as  a  standard  of  value,  but 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


RBVELATION  OF  JOHN.  427 

merely  as  a  very  precious  article  of  commerce^  and  was  weighed. 
In  the  Scriptures  it  is  the  symbol  of  great  valae,  duration,  in- 
cormptibility,  strength  (Isa.  xiiL  12 ;  Lam.  iv.  2 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  20 ; 
Job  xxxtL  19).  It  is  used  metaphorically  of  Christian  character 
(Apoc.  iiL  18).  In  the  Earthly  Paradise,  Dante  describes  trees 
like  gold. 

'*  A  little  farther  on,  Beren  trees  of  gold 
In  semblance  the  long  space  still  intenrening 
Between  oorselres  and  them  did  counterfeit  *' 

"  Porgatorio,"  zxix.,  4a-45. 

13.  Seven.    Omit 

The  Son  of  Man.  The  article  is  wanting  in  the  Greek. 
Hev.,  ^^  a  son  of  man."  But  the  reference  is  none  the  less  to 
the  Lord)  and  is  not  equivalent  to  a  man.  Compare  John  v.  27 ; 
Apoc.  xiv.  14. 

A  garment  down  to  the  foot  {iroSi^pff).  Compare  Dan. 
X.  5.  From  iroi^,  thefooty  and  a/M0«  to  fasten  :  hence  that  which 
connects  head  and  foot  The  word  is  properly  an  adjective, 
reaching  to  the  foot^  with  ;^/tq»i/  garment^  understood.  Xeno- 
phon  speaks  of  the  heavy-armed  soldiers  of  the  Persians  as 
bearing  wooden  shields  reaching  to  their  feet  {wo^peat  ^vKivcuf: 
iunriaw  )  "  Anabasis,"  i.,  8,  9).  The  word  occurs  only  here  in 
the  New  Testament,  but  several  times  in  the  Septuagint ;  as 
Ezek.  ix.  2,  3,  11,  where  the  A.  V.  gives  merely  linen;  Exod. 
xxviii.  4,  A.  V.,  robe;  of  the  High-Priest's  garment,  Levit  xvL 
4 ;  of  Aaron's  holy  linen  coat 

The  long  robe  is  the  garment  of  dignity  and  honor.  It  may 
be  either  royal,  or  priestly,  or  both.    Compare  Isa.  vi  1. 

Girt  about  the  paps  (irepteia^cfUpav  wpb^  roh  fuurrok). 
Eev.,  more  correctly,  "girt  about  at  (w/w)  the  breasts."  Com- 
pare ch.  XV.  6.  The  ordinary  girding  was  at  the  loins.  Ac- 
cording to  Josephus,  the  Levitical  priests  were  girded  about  the 
breast 

A  golden  girdle.  The  girdle  is  an  Old  Testament  symbol 
of  power,  righteousness,  truth  (Isa.  xxii.  21 ;  Job  xiL  18 ;  Isa. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


428  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NBW  THBTAMENT. 

zL  6).  Compare  Eph.  yL  14,  where  the  girdle  of  the  Christian 
panoply  is  trtUhj  which  binds  together  the  whole  array  of  graces 
as  the  girdle  does  the  npper  and  lower  parts  of  the  armor.  The 
girdle  suits  equally  Christ's  kingly  and  priestly  office.  The  gir- 
dle of  the  High-Priest  was  not  godden,  bat  only  inwrought  with 
gold.  See Exod.  xxviiL 8:  "curious  girdle:'*  Eev.,  "cunningly 
woven  band."    So  Exod.  xxix.  6. 

14.  White  (KeuKai).  See  on  Luke  ix.  29.  Compare  Dan. 
▼ii.9. 

Wool — snow.  This  combination  to  represent  whiteness  oc- 
curs in  Dan.  viL  9,  and  Isa.  L  18.    SnoWj  in  Ps.  li.  7. 

Flame  of  fire.  Compare  Dan  x.  6.  Fire,  in  Scripture,  is 
the  expression  of  divine  anger.  The  figure  may  include  the 
thought  of  the  clear  and  penetrating  insight  of  the  Son  of  Man ; 
but  it  also  expresses  His  indignation  at  the  sin  which  His  divine 
insight  detects.  Compare  xix.  11, 12.  So  Homer,  of  Agamem- 
non in  a  rage:  "His  eyes  were  like  shining  fire'*  ("Hiad,''  L, 
104);  also  of  Athene,  when  she  appears  to  Achilles:  '^Her 
eyes  appeared  dreadful  to  him"  ("Hiad,''  i,  200). 

15.  Fine  brass  (x^XteoTufidtnp).  Bev.,  burnish^  hrass. 
Only  here  and  ch.  ii.  18.  Compare  Dan.  x.  6 ;  Ezek.  i.  7. 
The  meaning  of  the  word  is  uncertain.  Some  explain  elecfyntm^ 
an  alloy  of  gold  and  silver :  others,  hras9  of  Lebanon  {A(/3am) ; 
others,  brcus  of  the  odor  of  fra/nkmoen^e  {\l0aifQ^) :  others 
again,  that  it  is  an  hybrid  compound  of  the  Greek  x^'^^^^ 
ftroM,  and  the  Hebrew  labdn  to  make  white.  Dean  Plumptre 
observes :  "  Such  technical  words  were  likely  enough  to  be  cur- 
rent in  a  population  like  that  of  Ephesus,  consisting  largely  of 
workers  in  metal,  some  of  whom  were  no  doubt  Jews  "  ("  Epis- 
tles to  the  Seven  Churches  of  Asia ''). 

Many  waters.  Compare  Ezek.  i  24;  xliii  2 ;  Isa.  xvii.  12, 
See  also  Apoc.  xiv.  2 ;  xix.  6. 

16.  A  sharp,  two-edged  sword  (fiofA^ala  SlaropLo^  o^na). 
The  Greek  order  is  a  ewordy  two-edged^  eharp.    For  the  peculiar 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BEVHLATION  OF  JOHN.  430 

word  for  wxyrd  see  on  Luke  iL  86.  Tvxhedged  is,  literally,  two- 
fnaiUAed,  See  on  edffSy  Lake  xxi  24.  Homer  speaks  of  poles 
for  sea-flghting,  "  clad  on  the  tip  (arofAo,  maiUh)  with  brass.** 

Countenance  (*^w).  Used  by  John  only,  and  only  three 
times :  here,  John  vii.  24  ;  xi.  44.    Not  general  afppearanoe. 

Shineth  (^a/yct).     See  on  John  L  5. 

In  his  strength.  With  the  fall  power  of  the  eastern  sun  at 
noonday. 

This  picture  of  the  Son  of  Man  suggests  some  remarks  on 
the  general  character  of  such  symbols  in  the  Apocalypse.  It 
may  be  at  once  said  that  they  are  not  of  a  character  which  tol- 
erates the  sharper  definitions  of  pictorial  art  They  must  be 
held  in  the  mind,  not  as  dearly-cut  symbols  which  translate 
themselves  into  appeals  to  the  eye  and  which  have  their  exact 
correspondences  in  visible  facts,  but  rather  in  their  totality,  and 
with  a  dominant  sense  of  their  inner  correspondences  with 
moral  and  spiritual  ideas.  To  translate  them  into  picture  is 
inevitably  to  run  at  some  point  into  a  grotesqueness  which  im- 
pairs and  degrades  their  solemnity.  This  is  shown  in  Albrecht 
Diirer's  sixteen  wood-cuts  illustrative  of  the  Apocalypse.*  Pro- 
fessor Milligan  goes  too  far  in  saying  that  these  are  only 
grotesque.  One  must  be  always  impressed  with  Diirer's  strong 
individuality,  "  lurking "  as  Lord  Lindsay  remarks,  below  a 
mind  "  like  a  lake,  stirred  by  every  breath  of  wind  which  de- 
scends on  it  through  the  circumjacent  valleys ;  ^  with  the  fer- 
tility of  his  invention,  the  plenitude  of  his  thought,  his  sim- 
plicity and  fearlessness.  But  his  very  truthfulness  to  nature  is 
his  enemy  in  his  dealing  with  such  themes  as  the  Apocalyptic 
visions ;  investing  them  as  it  does  with  a  realism  which  is 
foreign  to  their  spirit  and  intent.  Take,  for  example,  ^^  the 
four  riders  "  (Apoc.  vi.).  The  power  is  at  once  felt  of  the  on- 
ward movement  of  the  three  horsemen  with  bow,  sword,  and 

« •'Die  HeimUoh  Offenbaning  Jolunis :  "*  pabUahed  in  1498. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


430  WORD  STUDIBS  IN  THE  NBW  TBSTAMKNT. 

balances;  the  intense,  inexorable  purpose  with  which  thej 
drive  on  over  the  prostrate  forms  at  their  feet ;  but  the  fourth 
rider.  Death  on  the  pale  horse,  followed  by  Hell,  portrayed  as 
the  wide-opened  jaws  of  a  monster  into  which  a  crowned  head 
is  sinking,  degenerates  into  a  ghastly  caricature  of  the  most  of- 
fensive German  type — a  harlequin,  far  surpassing  in  hideous- 
ness  the  traditional  skeleton  with  scythe  and  hour-glass. 

Similarly,  the  angel  with  his  feet  like  pillars  of  fire,  the  one 
upon  the  sea  and  the  other  upon  the  earth.  If  we  are  solenmly 
impressed  by  the  awful  face  of  the  angel  breaking  forth  from 
the  sun,  the  solemnity  degenerates  into  something  akin  to 
amusement,  at  the  feet  like  solid  columns,  ending  in  flame  at 
the  knees,  and  at  the  Evangelist  ^^  who  kneels  on  a  pi*omontory 
with  the  comer  of  the  great  book  presented  by  the  angel  in 
his  mouth,  apparently  in  danger  of  choking." 

In  short,  such  symbols  as  the  Lamb  with  seven  horns  and 
seven  eyes ;  the  four  living  creatures,  eaeh  with  six  wings,  and 
full  of  eyes  before  and  behind  ;  the  beast  rising  out  of  the  sea, 
having  ten  horns  and  seven  heads,  and  on  the  horns  ten  dia- 
dems,— do  not  lend  themselves  to  the  pencil.  An  illustration 
of  the  sadly  grotesque  effect  of  such  an  attempt  may  be  seen  in 
Mr.  Elliott's  "  HorsB  Apocalypticse,''  where  is  a  picture  of  the 
locust  of  ch.  ix.,  with  a  gold  crown  on  the  head,  hair  like 
women's,  a  breastplate  of  iron,  and  a  tail  like  a  scorpion's. 

Archbishop  Trench  very  aptly  draws  the  comparison  between 
the  modes  in  which  the  Greek  and  the  Hebrew  mind  respect- 
ively dealt  with  symbolism.  With  the  Greek,  the  esthetic 
element  is  dominant,  so  that  the  first  necessity  of  the  symbol  is 
that  it  shall  satisfy  the  sense  of  beauty,  form,  and  proportion. 
With  the  Hebrew,  the  first  necessity  is  '^  that  the  symbol  should 
set  forth  truly  and  fully  the  religious  idea  of  which  it  is  in- 
tended to  be  the  vehicle.  How  it  would  appear  when  it  clothed 
itself  in  an  outward  form  and  shape ;  whether  it  would  find 
favor  and  allowance  at  the  bar  of  taste,  was  quite  a  secondary 
consideration  ;  may  be  confidently  affirmed  not  to  have  been  a 
consideration  at  all." 

The  imagery  of  the  Apocalypse  is  Hebrew  and  not  Greek. 
It  is  doubtful  if  there  is  any  symbol  taken  from  heathenism ; 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BBVELATIOK  OF  JOHN.  431 

80  that  the  symbols  of  the  Apocalypse  are  to  be  read  from  the 
Jewish  and  not  from  the  Heathen  stand-point. 

Bnt  to  say  that  these  symbols  jar  npon  the  SBSthetic  sense,  is 
not  to  detract  from  their  value  as  symbols,  nor  to  decry  them 
as  violations  of  the  fitness  of  things.  It  may  be  fairly  asked  if, 
with  all  their  apparent  incongruity,  and  even  monstronsness, 
they  may  not,  after  all,  be  tme  to  a  higher  canon  of  congruity. 
Certain  it  is  that  the  great  visible  divine  economy,  both  of  nat- 
ure and  of  man,  distinctly  includes  the  grotesque,  the  mon- 
strous, the  ridiculous  (or  what  we  style  such).  We  recognize 
the  fact  in  the  phrase  '^  freaks  of  Kature.''  But  are  they  freaks  f 
Are  they  incongruous  ?  Until  we  shall  have  grasped  in  mind 
the  whole  hmnoa^  it  will  not  be  safe  for  us  to  answer  that 
question  too  positively.  The  apparent  incongruity,  viewed  from 
a  higher  plane,  may  merge  into  beautiful  congruity.  Tested  by 
a  more  subtile  sense ;  brought  into  connection  and  relation  with 
the  whole  region  of  mental  and  spiritual  phenomena;  regarded 
as  a  factor  of  that  larger  realm  which  embraces  ideas  and  spir- 
itual verities  along  with  external  phenomena;  the  outwardly 
grotesque  may  resolve  itself  into  the  spiritually  beautiful ;  the 
superficial  incongruity  into  essential  and  profound  harmony. 

This  possibility  emerges  into  fact  in  certain  utterances  of  our 
Lord,  notably  in  His  parables.  Long  since,  the  absurdity  has 
been  recognized  of  attempting  to  make  a  parable  ^^  go  on  all 
fours;"  in  other  words,  to  insist  on  a  hard  and  literal  corre- 
spondence between  the  minutest  details  of  the  symbol  and  the 
thing  symbolized.  Sound  exposition  has  advanced  to  a  broader, 
freer,  yet  deeper  and  more  spiritual  treatment  of  these  utter- 
ances, grasping  below  mere  correspondences  of  detail  to  that 
deeper,  ^^fundamental  harmony  and  parallelism  between  the 
two  grand  spheres  of  cosmic  being — ^that  of  Nature  and  that  of 
Spirit ;  between  the  three  kingdoms  of  Nature,  History,  and 
Revelation.  The  selection  of  symbols  and  parables  in  Script- 
ure, therefore,  is  not  arbitrary,  but  is  based  on  an  insight  into 
the  essence  of  things  "  (Milligan). 

Thus  then,  in  this  picture  of  the  Son  of  Man,  the  attempt 
to  portray  to  the  eye  the  girded  figure,  with  snow-white  hair, 
flaming  eyes,  and  a  sword  proceeding  out  of  His  mouth, — with 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


432  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

feet  like  shining  brass,  and  holding  seven  stars  in  His  hand, 
wonid  result  as  satisfactorily  as  the  attempt  to  picture  the 
mysterious  combination  of  eyes  and  wheels  and  wings  in  Eze- 
kiel's  vision.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  frankly  admit  the 
impossibility  of  this,  and  relegate  this  symbolism  to  a  higher 
region,  as  a  delineation  (imperfect  through  the  imperfection 
of  human  speech  and  the  inevitable  power  of  the  sensuous)  of 
deep-lying  spiritual  facts,  priestly  and  royal  dignity,  purity, 
divine  insight,  divine^indignation  at  sin ;  if  we  thus  bring  the 
deeper  suggestions  of  outward  humanity  and  nature  into  rela- 
tion with  their  true  correspondents  in  the  spiritual  realm — ^we 
gain  something  more  and  deeper  than  a  pictorial  appeal  to  the 
imagination.  We  grasp  what  we  cannot  formulate ;  neverthe- 
less we  grasp  it.  Dropping  the  outward  correspondence,  we 
are  the  freer  to  penetrate  to  the  depths  of  the  symbolism,  and 
reach  an  inner  correspondence  no  less  real  and  no  less  appre- 
hensible. 

17.  I  fell.  Compare  Exod.  xxiiL  20 ;  Ezek.  i28;  Dan,viiL 
17  sqq. ;  x.  7  sqq. ;  Luke  v.  8 ;  Apoc.  xix.  10.  The  condition 
of  the  seer,  in  the  Spirit^  does  not  supersede  existence  in  the 
body.    Compare  Acts  ix.  8-5. 

The  first  and  the  last.  This  epithet  is  three  times  ascribed 
to  Jehovah  by  Isaiah  (xli.  4;  xliv.  6;  xlviii.  12);  three  times 
in  this  book  (here,  ii.  8 ;  xxii.  18).  Richard  of  St  Victor  com- 
ments thus :  ^^I  am  the  first  and  the  last.  First  through  crea- 
tion, last  through  retribution.  First,  because  before  me  a  God 
was  not  formed  ;  last,  because  after  me  there  shall  not  be  an- 
other. First,  because  all  things  are  from  me ;  last,  because  all 
things  are  to  me ;  from  me  the  beginning,  to  me  the  end.  First, 
because  I  am  the  cause  of  origin ;  last,  because  I  am  the  judge 
and  the  end  "  (cit.  by  Trench). 

18.  I  anfi  He  that  liveth  {jcaX  6  ^v).  Kot  a  fresh  sentence 
connected  with  the  following  words  as  in  A.  Y.,  but  connected 
with  the  first  and  the  last  by  koX  and.  Bev.,  and  the  living  One. 
Compare  John  i  4 ;  xiv.  6 ;  v.  26. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


REVELATION  OP  JOHN.  433 

And  I  was  dead  {icaX  iyevdfjurfv  vexpo^).  Strictly,  Iheoame. 
So  Rev.,  in  margin.  Compare  Philip.  iL  8,  "  became  obedient 
mito  death." 

For  evermore.    See  on  ver.  6. 

Amen.    Omit. 

The  keys  of  Hell  and  Death.  Rev.,  correctly,  of  Death 
and  of  Hades.  Conceived  as  a  prison-house  or  a  walled  city. 
See  on  Matt.  xvi.  18.  The  keys  are  the  symbol  of  authority. 
See  Matt.  xvL  19 ;  Apoc.  iiL  7  ;  ix.  1 ;  xx.  1.  The  Rabbinical 
proverb  said:  "There  are  four  keys  lodged  in  God's  hand, 
which  He  committeth  neither  to  angel  nor  to  seraph :  the  key 
of  the  rain,  the  key  of  food,  the  key  of  the  tombs,  and  the  key 
of  a  barren  woman." 

19.  Write.    See  on  ver.  11.    Add  therefore. 

The  things  which  are  (2  eiaiv).  Some  render,  whai  they 
are  ;  i.e,j  what  they  signify ;  bnt  the  reference  of  /LterA  raOra 
after  theee^  hereafter  to  i  eiciv  which  arCy  seems  to  be  decisive 
in  favor  of  the  former  rendering,  which  besides  is  the  more 
natural. 

Shall  be  (jiiKKei  yivecr^iod).  Not  the  future  of  the  verb  to 
hcy  but  a^e  abov/t  (jiiXKet)  to  come  to  pose  {ylvecSaC).  Compare 
ver.  1,  "  must  come  to  pass."  Here  the  thought  is  not  the 
prophetic  neceasityy  but  the  seqicence  of  events. 

20.  Mystery  (jAv<m/fpu>v).  See  on  Matt.  xiiL  11.  Depend- 
ing in  construction  upon  the  verb  vmtey  and  in  apposition  with 
the  things  which  thou  sawest. 

Stars.  Symbols  of  pre-eminence  and  authority.  See  Num. 
xxiv.  17 ;  Dan.  xii.  3.  False  teachers  are  vHmdervryg  stars 
(Jude  13).    Compare  Isa.  xiv.  12. 

Angels  {&ff€Xf}C).    The  exact  meaning  of  the  term  here  is 
uncertain.    The  following  are  the  principal  interpretations : 
Vol.  n.^28 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


434  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

1.  2^  officials  knoum  as  angels  or  messengers  of  the  synor 
goguey  tranrferred  to  the  Christia/n  Church.  These  were  mere 
clerks  or  readers ;  so  that  their  position  does  not  answer  to  that 
of  the  angels  presiding  over  the  churches.  There  is,  besides, 
no  trace  of  the  transfer  of  that  office  to  the  Christian  Church. 

2.  Angels  proper.  Heavenly  guardians  of  the  churches. 
This  is  urged  on  the  ground  that  the  word  is  constantly  used 
in  the  Apocalypse  of  a  heavenly  being ;  by  reference  to  the 
angels  of  the  little  ones  (Matt,  xviii.  10),  and  to  Peter's  angel 
(Acts  xii.  15).  It  is  urged  that,  if  an  individual  may  have  a 
guardian  angel,  so  may  a  Church.  Seference  is  also  made  to 
the  tutelar  national  angels  of  Dan.  x.  21 ;  xiL  1. 

But  why  should  the  seer  be  instructed  to  write  to  heavenly 
messengers,  with  exhortations  to  repentance  and  fidelity,  and 
describing  them  as  "  rich,"  "  poor,"  "  lukewarm,"  etc  (ch.  ii  4 ; 
iu.  1, 16)t 

3.  The  amgds  are  a  personification  cfthe  (lurches  themsd^ies: 
the  Church  being  spoken  of  as  if  concentrated  in  its  angel  or 
messenger.  But  in  ver.  20,  they  are  explicitly  distinguished 
from  the  golden  candlesticks,  the  churches. 

4.  The  rulers  amd  teachers  of  the  congregation.  These  are 
compared  by  Daniel  (xii.  3)  to  stars.  See  Mai.  ii.  7,  where  the 
priest  is  called  the  messenger  (angel)  of  the  Lord  ;  and  iii.  1, 
where  the  same  word  is  used  of  the  prophet  See  also  Hag.  i. 
13.  Under  this  interpretation  two  views  are  possible,  (a)  The 
angels  are  Bishops ;  the  word  arfyeXo^  sometimes  occurring  in 
that  sense  (as  in  Jerome  and  Socrates).  This  raises  the  quest- 
ion of  the  existence  of  episcopacy  towards  the  close  of  the  first 
century.*  (5)  The  word  is  used  of  the  ministry  coUeotvvely ; 
the  whole  board  of  officers,  including  both  presbyters  and 
deacons,  who  represented  and  were  responsible  for  the  moral 
condition  of  the  churches.     See  Acts  xx.  17,  28 ;  1  Pet.  v.  1-5. 

Dr.  SchaflF  says :  "  This  phraseology  of  the  Apocalypse  already 
looks  towards  the  idea  of  episcopacy  in  its  primitive  form,  that 
is,  to  a  monarchical  concentration  of  governmental  form  in  one 


*  Se«  Bishop  Lightf oot'B  Enaj  on  the  OhristUn  Ministry,  in  his  **  Commen- 
tarj  on  Philippiaua." 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BBVBLATIOlf  OF  JOHN.  435 

person,  bearing  a  patriarchal  relation  to  the  congregation,  and 
responsible  in  an  eminent  sense  for  the  spiritoal  condition  of 
the  whole*  .  .  .  Bat  even  in  this  case  we  most  insist  oa 
an  important  distinction  between  the  ^  angels '  of  the  Book  of 
Bevelation  and  the  later  diocesan  Bishops.  For  aside  from  the 
verj  limited  extent  of  their  charges,  as  compared  with  the 
large  territory  of  most  Oreek,  Eoman  Catholic,  and  Anglican 
Bishops,  these  angels  stood  below  the  Apostles  and  their  legates, 
and  were  not  jet  invested  with  the  great  power  (particularly 
the  right  to  confirm  and  ordain)  which  fell  to  the  later  Bishops 
after  the  death  of  the  Apostles.  .  .  .  The  angels,  accord- 
ingly, if  we  are  to  understand  by  them  single  individuals,  must 
be  considered  as  forming  the  transition  from  the  presbyters  of 
the  apostolic  age  to  the  Bishops  of  the  second  century  "  (^^  His- 
tory of  the  Apostolic  Church  ")• 


CHAPTER  IL 

Each  of  the  epistles  to  the  seven  churches  contains:  1.  A 
command  to  write  to  the  angel  of  the  particular  Church.  2.  A 
sublime  title  of  our  Lord,  taken,  for  the  most  part,  from  the 
imagery  of  the  preceding  vision.  8.  An  address  to  the  angel 
of  the  Church,  always  commencing  with  /  hMym^  introducing  a 
statement  of  its  present  circumstances :  continuing  with  an  ex- 
hortation either  to  repentance  or  to  constancy ;  and  ending  with 
a  prophetic  announcement,  mostly  respecting  what  shall  be  at 
the  Lord's  coming.  4.  A  promise  to  him  that  overcometh, 
generally  accompanied  with  a  solemn  call  to  earnest  attention : 
"  He  that  hath  an  ear,**  etc  (Alford). 

In  two  churches,  Smyrna  and  Philadelphia,  the  Lord  finds 
matter  for  praise  only.  In  two,  Sardis  and  Laodicea,  with  a 
very  slight  exception  in  the  former,  for  rebuke  only.  In  Ephe- 
BUS,  Pergamum,  and  Thyatira  the  condition  is  a  mixed  one, 
calling  for  mingled  praise  and  rebuke. 

1.  Ephesus.  Ephesus  was  built  near  the  sea,  in  the  valley 
of  the  Cayster,  under  the  shadows  of  Coressus  and  Prion.    In 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


436  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

the  time  of  Paul  it  was  the  metropolis  of  the  province  of  Asia. 
It  was  styled  bj  Plinj  the  Light  of  Asia.  Its  harbor,  thoagh 
partly  filled  up,  was  crowded  with  vessels,  and  it  lay  at  the 
junction  of  roads  which  gave  it  access  to  the  whole  interior 
continent.  Its  markets  were  the  "  Vanity  Fair"  of  Asia.  He- 
rodotus says :  ^^  The  lonians  of  Asia  have  built  their  cities  in  a 
region  where  the  air  and  climate  are  the  most  beautiful  in  the 
whole  world ;  for  no  other  region  is  equally  blessed  with  Ionia. 
For  in  other  countries,  either  the  climate  is  over-cold  and  damp, 
or  else  the  heat  and  drought  are  sorely  oppressive"  (i.,  142). 

In  Paul's  time  it  was  the  residence  of  the  Koman  proconsul ; 
and  the  degenerate  inhabitants  descended  to  every  species  of 
flattery  in  order  to  maintain  the  favor  of  Home.  The  civiliza- 
tion of  the  city  was  mingled  Greek  and  Oriental.  It  was  the 
head-quarters  of  the  magical  art,  and  various  superstitions  were 
represented  by  different  priestly  bodies.  The  great  temple  of 
Diana,  the  Oriental,  not  the  Greek  divinity,  was  ranked  among 
the  seven  wonders  of  the  world,  and  Ephesus  called  herself  its 
sacristan  (see  on  Acts  xix.  27).  To  it  attached  the  right  of 
asylum.  Legend  related  that  when  the  temple  was  finished, 
Mithridates  stood  on  its  summit  and  declared  that  the  right  of 
asylum  should  extend  in  a  circle  round  it,  as  far  as  he  could 
shoot  an  arrow;  and  the  arrow  miraculously  flew  a  furlong. 
This  fact  encouraged  moral  contagion.  The  temple  is  thus  de- 
scribed by  Canon  Farrar:  "It  had  been  built  with  ungrudging 
magnificence  out  of  contributions  furnished  by  all  Asia — the 
very  women  contributing  to  it  their  jewels,  as  the  Jewish  women 
had  done  of  old  for  the  Tabernacle  of  the  "Wilderness.  To  avoid 
the  danger  of  earthquakes,  its  foundations  were  built  at  vast 
cost  on  artificial  foundations  of  skin  and  charcoal  laid  over  the 
marsh.  It  gleamed  far  off  with  a  star-like  radiance.  Its  peri- 
style consisted  of  one  hundred  and  twenty  pillars  of  the  Ionic 
order,  hewn  out  of  Parian  marble.  Its  doors  of  carved  cypress- 
wood  were  surmounted  by  transoms  so  vast  and  solid  that  the 
aid  of  miracles  was  invoked  to  account  for  their  elevation. 
The  staircase,  which  led  to  the  roof,  was  said  to  have  been  cut 
out  of  a  single  vine  of  Cyprus.  Some  of  the  pillars  were  carved 
with  designs  of  exquisite  beauty.   Within  were  the  masterpieces 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  437 

of  Praxiteles  and  Phidias  and  Scopas  and  Polycletns.  Paint- 
ings by  the  greatest  of  Greek  artists,  of  which  one — the  like- 
ness of  Alexander  the  Great  bj  Apelles — had  been  bought  for 
a  snm  equal  in  value  to  £5,000  of  modem  money,  adorned  the 
inner  walls.  The  roof  of  the  temple  itself  was  of  cedar-wood, 
supported  by  columns  of  jasper  on  bases  of  Parian  marble.  On 
these  pillars  hung  gifts  of  priceless  value,  the  votive  offerings 
of  grateful  superstition.  At  the  end  of  it  stood  the  great  altar 
adorned  by  the  bas-relief  of  Praxiteles,  behind  which  fell  the 
vast  folds  of  a  purple  curtain.  Behind  this  curtain  was  the  dark 
and  awful  shrine  in  which  stood  the  most  sacred  idol  of  classic 
heathendom ;  and  again,  behind  the  shrine,  was  the  room  which, 
inviolable  under  divine  protection,  was  regarded  as  the  wealth- 
iest and  securest  bank  in  the  ancient  world  "  (^^  Life  and  Work 
of  St  Paul,"  ii.,  12). 

Next  to  Borne,  Ephesus  was  the  principal  seat  of  Paul's  labors. 
He  devoted  three  years  to  that  city.  The  commonly  received 
tradition  represents  John  as  closing  his  apostolic  career  there. 
Nothing  in  early  Church  history  is  better  attested  than  his 
residence  and  work  in  Ephesus,  the  centre  of  the  circle  of 
churches  established  by  Paul  in  Ionia  and  Phrygia. 

Who  walketh  (o  irepvirar&v).  More  than  standeth.  The 
word  expresses  Christ's  activity  on  behalf  of  His  Church. 

2.  Thy  works  (tA  Spya  crov).    See  on  John  iv.  47. 

Labor  (jeiirov).  Originally  stiferingj  wecmnesa;  hence  «p- 
Jumsting  labor.  The  kindred  verb  Ktmi^  is  often  used  of 
apostolic  and  ministerial  labor  (Bom.  xvL  12 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  10 ; 
Gal.  iv.  11). 

Patience  (wo/iioi^V).  See  on  2  Pet  i.  6 ;  Jas.  v.  7.  Compare 
Paul's  exhortation  to  Timothy  in  Ephesus,  2  Tim.  ii.  25,  26. 

Bear  (ficurrdcrcu).  See  on  John  x.  31 ;  xii.  6.  Compare  Gal. 
vi.  2,  where  the  word  is  used  of  Christians  hearing  each  others' 
burdens. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


438  WOBD  8TUDIBS  IK  THB  HEW  TESTAMENT. 

Them  which  are  evil  (tcaxoifsi).  Trench  observes  that  "  it 
is  not  a  little  remarkable  that  the  grace  or  virtue  here  ascribed 
to  the  angel  of  the  Ephesian  Church  (compare  ver.  6)  shonld 
have  a  name  in  classical  Greek :  fuaxmovrjpta  haired  of  evil ; 
the  person  of  whom  the  grace  is  predicated  being  fuaxmimfpo^ 
hater  of  evil  /  while  neither  of  these  words,  nor  jet  anj  equival- 
ent to  them  occm^  in  the  New  Testament  It  is  the  stranger, 
as  this  hatred  of  evil,  purely  as  evil,  however  little  thought  of 
or  admired  now,  is  eminentlj  a  Ohristian  grace.^ 

Hast  tried  {(hnipdcrw).  Bev.,  didet  try.  See  on  triedj  1  Pet 
i.  7 ;  and  compare  1  Johii  iv.  1 ;  1  Cor.  xiL  10. 

3.  The  best  texts  omit  oif  tehcfi/rftca^  hast  not  grown  weary ^  and 
read  icol  oi  Keteoirla^ee^  hast  not  grown  weary.  The  transcribers 
supposed  the  verb  KonriM  to  mean  onlj  to  labor ;  whereas  it 
includes  the  sense  of  weariness  from  labor. 

4.  Somewhat.  Not  in  the  text,  and  unnecessary.  The  fol- 
lowing clause  is  the  object  of  /  have.  ^*  I  have  against  thee  that 
thou  hast  left,"  etc.  ^'  It  is  indeed  a  somewhat  which  the  Lord 
has  against  the  Ephesian  Church ;  it  threatens  to  grow  to  be  an 
everything ;  for  see  the  verse  following"  (Trench).  For  the 
phrase  hme  against,  see  Matt  v.  23 ;  Mark  xi.  25 ;  CoL  iii  13. 

Hast  left  (cupfjfea^).  Rev.,  more  correctly,  rendering  the 
aorist,  didst  leave.  The  verb  originally  means  to  send  away  or 
dismiss.    See  on  John  iv.  3. 

First  love.  Compare  Jer.  ii.  2.  The  first  enthusiastic  de- 
votion of  the  Church  to  her  Lord,  under  the  figure  of  conjugal 
love. 

6.  Thou  art  Allien  {hnrtTrrmma/^).    lit,  hast  fallen  out. 

Repent  (jierav&qcrw).     See  on  Matt  iii.  2 ;  xxi.  29. 

I  will  come  (Spx^M^)'    Bev.,  correctly,  I  come. 

Quickly.    Omit 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BBVELATIOK  OF  JOHN.  ^9 

Will  remove  thy  candlestick.  ^^Its  candlestick  has  been 
for  centuries  removed  out  of  his  place ;  the  squalid  Moham- 
medan village  which  is  nearest  to  its  site  does  not  count  one 
Christian  in  its  insignificant  population;  its  temple  is  a  mass  of 
shapeless  ruins ;  its  harbor  is  a  reedy  pool ;  the  bittern  booms 
amid  its  pestilent  and  stagnant  marshes ;  and  malaria  and  ob- 
livion reign  supreme  over  the  place  where  the  wealth  of  ancient 
civilization  gathered  around  the  scenes  of  its  grossest  supersti- 
tions and  its  most  degraded  sins"  (Farrar,  ^^Life  and  Work  of 
Paul,"  ii.,  43, 44). 

John  employs  the  verb  luvieo  remove  (Rev.,  move)  only  in  the 
Apocalypse,  and  only  once  besides  the  present  instance,  in  du 
vL  14,  whei-e,  as  here,  it  signifies  moving  tnjiHlffment. 

The  Nicolaitans.  From  pueSv  to  conquery  and  \a^  the 
jpeople.  There  are  two  principal  explanations  of  the  term. 
The  first  and  better  one  historical.  A  sect  springing,  according 
to  credible  tradition,  from  Nicholas  a  proselyte  of  Antioch,  one 
of  the  seven  deacons  of  Jerusalem  (Acts  vi.  5),  who  apostatized 
from  the  truth,  and  became  the  founder  of  an  Antinomian 
Gnostic  sect  They  appear  to  have  been  characterized  by  sen^ 
suality,  seducing  Christians  to  participate  in  the  idolatrous 
feasts  of  pagans,  and  to  unchastity.  HencQ  they  are  denoted 
by  the  names  of  Balaam  and  Jezebel,  two  leading  agents  of 
moral  contamination  under  the  Old  Testament  dispensation. 
Ealaam  enticed  the  Israelites,  through  the  daughters  of  Moab 
and  Midian,  to  idolatry  and  fornication  (Num.  xxv. ;  xxzi.  16). 
Jezebel  murdered  the  Lord's  prophets,  and  set  up  idolatry  in 
Israel.  The  Nicolaitans  taught  that,  in  order  to  master  sensu- 
ality, one  must  know  the  whole  range  of  it  by  experience ;  and 
that  he  should  therefore  abandon  himself  without  reserve  to 
the  lusts  of  the  body,  since  they  concerned  only  the  body  and 
did  not  touch  the  spirit.  These  heretics  were  hated  and  ex- 
pelled by  the  Church  of  Ephesus  (Apoc.  ii.  6),  but  were  tol- 
erated by  the  Church  of  Fergamum  (Apoc.  ii.  15).  The  other 
view  regards  the  name  as  symbolic,  and  Nicholas  as  the  Greek 
rendering  of  Balaam,  whose  name  signifies  destroyer  or  cor^ 
rupter  of  the  people.    This  view  is  adopted  by  Trench  (^^  Seven 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


440  WORD  BTUDIBS  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Churches "),  who  says :  "TheNicolaitans  are  the  Balaamites; 
no  sect  bearing  the  one  name  or  the  other ;  but  those  who,  in 
the  new  dispensation,  repeated  the  sin  of  Balaam  in  the  old, 
and  sought  to  overcome  or  destroy  the  people  of  God  by  the 
same  temptations  whereby  Balaam  had  sought  to  overcome 
them  before."  The  names,  however,  are  by  no  means  parallel : 
oongueror  of  the  people  not  being  the  same  as  corrupter  of  the 
people.  Besides,  in  ver.  14,  the  Balaamites  are  evidently  dis- 
tinguished from  the  Kicolaitans. 

Alford  remarks :  "  There  is  no  sort  of  reason  for  interpreting 
the  name  otherwise  than  historically.  It  occurs  in  a  passage 
indicating  simple  matters  of  historical  fact,  just  as  the  name 
Antipas  does  in  ver.  13." 

7.  He  that  hath  an  ear,  etc.  Compare  Matt.  xi.  15 ;  Mark 
iv.  9.  The  phrase  is  not  found  in  John's  Gospel.  It  is  used 
always  of  radical  truths,  great  principles  and  promises. 

To  him  that  overcometh  (r^S  vuc&vrC).  A  formula  common 
to  all  these  Epistles.  The  verb  is  used  absolutely  without  any 
object  expressed.  It  is  characteristic  of  John,  occurring  once 
in  the  Gospel,  six  times  in  the  First  Epistle,  sixteen  times  in 
the  Apocalypse,  and  elsewhere  only  Luke  xi.  22  ;  Bom.  iii.  4 ; 
xii.  21. 

Will  I  give.  This  phrase  has  a  place  in  every  one  of  these 
Epistles.  The  verb  is  John's  habitual  word  for  the  privileges 
and  functions  of  the  Son,  whether  as  bestowed  upon  Him  by 
the  Father,  or  dispensed  by  Him  to  His  followers.  See  John 
iii.  35 ;  v.  22,  27,  36  ;  vi.  65 ;  xiii.  8 ;  xvii.  6.  Compare  Apoc. 
ii.  23 ;  iiL  8  ;  vL  4 ;  xL  3. 

Of  the  tree  {ite^vKov).  The  preposition  U  out  of  occurs 
one  hundred  and  twenty-seven  times  in  the  Apocalypse,  and  its 
proper  signification  is  iJmost  universally  out  of;  but  this  ren- 
dering in  many  of  the  passages  would  be  so  strange  and  unidiom- 
atic,  that  the  New  Testament  Revisers  have  felt  themselves 
able  to  adopt  it  only  forty-one  times  out  of  all  that  number, 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


REVELATION  OP  JOHN.  441 

and  employ  of^from^  hy^  wUhj  on^  at^  heccmse  qfy  hy  reason  of^ 
from  among.  See,  for  instance,  ch.  ii.  7,  21,  22  ;  vi.  4,  10 ; 
viii.  11 ;  ix.  18  ;  xiv.  13  ;  xv.  2 ;  xvi.  21.  Compare  John  iiu 
31 ;  iv.  13,  vi.  13,  39,  51 ;  viii.  23,  44 ;  ix.  6 ;  xi.  1 ;  xii.  3, 
27,  32 ;  xvii.  15. 

Tree^  lit.,  wood.  See  on  Luke  xxiii.  31 ;  1  Pet.  iiL  24. 
Dean  Plumptre  notes  the  fact  that,  prominent  as  this  symbol 
had  been  in  the  primeval  history,  it  had  remained  unnoticed  in 
the  teaching  where  we  should  most  have  looked  for  its  presence 
— in  that  of  the  Psalmist  and  Prophets  of  the  Old  Testament. 
Only  in  the  Proverbs  of  Solomon  had  it  been  used,  in  a  sense 
half  allegorical  and  half  mystical  (Prov.  iii.  18 ;  xiii.  12 ;  xi. 
30 ;  XV.  4).  The  revival  of  the  symbol  in  the  Apocalypse  is  in 
accordance  with  the  theme  of  the  restitution  of  all  things. 
^'  The  tree  which  disappeared  with  the  disappearance  of  the 
earthly  Paradise,  reappears  with  the  reappearance  of  the 
heavenly."  To  eat  of  the  tree  of  life  expresses  participation  in 
the  life  etemaL  The  figure  of  the  tree  of  life  appears  in  all 
mythologies  from  India  to  Scandinavia.  The  Kabbins  and 
Mohammedans  called  the  vine  the  probation  tree.  The  Zend 
Avesta  has  its  tree  of  life  called  the  Death-Destroyer.  It  grows 
by  the  waters  of  life,  and  the  drinking  of  its  sap  confers  im- 
mortality. The  Hindu  tree  of  life  is  pictured  as  growing  out 
of  a  great  seed  in  the  midst  of  an  expanse  of  water.  It  has 
three  branches,  each  crowned  with  a  sun,  denoting  the  three 
powers  of  creation,  preservation,  and  renovation  after  destruc- 
tion. In  another  representation  Bndha  sits  in  meditation  under 
a  tree  with  three  branches,  each  branch  having  three  stems. 
One  of  the  Babylonian  cylinders  discovered  by  Layard,  repre- 
sents three  priestesses  gathering  the  fruit  of  what  seems  to  be 
a  palm-tree  with  three  branches  on  each  side.  Athor,  the 
Venus  of  the  Egyptians,  appears  half -concealed  in  the  branches 
of  the  sacred  peach-tree,  giving  to  the  departed  soul  the  fruit, 
and  the  drink  of  heaven  from  a  vial  from  which  tlie  streams  of 
life  descend  upon  the  spirit,  a  figure  at  the  foot  of  the  tree, 
like  a  hawk,  with  a  human  head  and  with  hands  outstretched. 

In  the  Norse  mythology  a  prominent  figure  is  Igdrasil,  the 
Aah'tree  of  Existence;  its  roots  in  the  kingdom  of  Hela  or 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


443  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Death,  its  trunk  reaching  to  heaven,  and  its  booghs  spread  over 
the  whole  universe.  At  its  foot,  in  the  kingdom  of  Death, 
sit  three  Nomas  or  Fates,  the  Past,  the  Present,  and  the 
Future,  watering  its  roots  from  the  sacred  well.  Compare  eh. 
xxii.  2,  14,  19.  Virgil,  addressing  Dante  at  the  completion  of 
the  ascent  of  the  Purgatorial  Mount,  says : 

*'  That  apple  sweet,  which  through  so  many  branches 
The  care  of  mortals  goeth  in  pursuit  of, 
To-daj  shall  put  in  peace  thy  hungerings." 

"  Purgatorio,"  xxvfl.,  115-117. 

Paradise.  See  on  Luke  xxiiL  43.  Omit  in  the  midst  of. 
n,ap6&euTo^  Paradise  ^^  passes  through  a  series  of  meanings, 
each  one  higher  than  the  last.  From  any  garden  of  delight, 
which  is  its  first  meaning,  it  comes  to  be  predominantly  ap- 
plied to  the  garden  of  Eden,  then  to  the  resting-place  of 
separate  souls  in  joy  and  felicity,  and  lastly  to  the  very  heaven 
itself ;  and  we  see  eminently  in  it,  what  we  see  indeed  in  so 
many  words,  how  revealed  religion  assumes  them  into  her  ser- 
vice, and  makes  them  vehicles  of  far  higher  truth  than  any 
which  they  knew  at  first,  transforming  and  transfiguring  them, 
as  in  this  case,  from  glory  to  glory  "  (Trench). 

8.  Smyrna.  Lying  a  little  north  of  Ephesns,  on  a  gulf  of 
the  same  name.  The  original  city  was  destroyed  about  b.c.  627, 
and  was  deserted  and  in  ruins  for  four  hundred  years.  Alex- 
ander the  Great  contemplated  its  restoration,  and  his  design 
was  carried  out  after  his  death.  The  new  city  was  built  a 
short  distance  south  of  the  ancient  one,  and  became  the  finest 
in  Asia  Minor,  being  known  as  the  glory  of  Asia.  It  was  one 
of  the  cities  which  claimed  the  honor  of  being  Homer's  birth- 
place. A  splendid  temple  was  erected  by  the  Smymaeans  to 
his  memory,  and  a  cave  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  city  was 
shown  where  he  was  said  to  have  composed  his  poems.  Smyr- 
na's fine  harbor  made  it  a  commercial  centre ;  but  it  was  also 
distinguished  for  its  schools  of  rhetoric  and  philosophy.  Poly- 
carp  was  the  first  bishop  of  its  church,  which  ^suffered  much 
from  persecution,  and  he  was  said  to  have  suffered  martyrdom 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BBVELATION  OF  JOHN.  448 

in  the  stadiam  of  the  city,  a.d.  166.  It  is  argued  with  soiue 
plausibility  that  Polycarp  was  bishop  of  Smyrna  at  the  time  of 
the  composition  of  the  Apocalypse,  and  was  the  person  ad- 
dressed here.  Tliis  question,  however,  is  bound  up  with  that 
of  the  date  of  composition  (see  Trench,  ^^  Epistles  to  the  Seven 
Churches  ").  The  city  was  a  seat  of  the  worship  of  Cybele  the 
Mother  of  the  gods,  and  of  Dionjsus  or  Bacchus. 

Was  dead  {iyhfero  ve/cpi^).    Lit,  became  dead. 

Is  alive  (S^rfo^v).  Lit.,  lived.  Bev.,  properly,  Uved  again; 
the  word  being  used  of  restoration  to  life.  See,  for  a  similaf 
usage.  Matt.  ix.  18 ;  John  v.  25. 

9.  Thy  works  and.    Omit. 

Tribulation  {SXiy^^v).  See  on  Matt.  xiii.  21.  Beferring  to 
the  persecutions  of  Jewish  and  heathen  oppressors.  See  on 
Smyrna^  ver.  8. 

Poverty  {irrayx^tav).  Because,  like  all  the  other  early  Christ- 
ian churches,  the  majority  of  its  members  were  of  the  poorer 
classes,  and  also,  perhaps,  with  reference  to  their  robbery  by 
persecutors.    See  on  jfoor^  Matt.  v.  3. 

Rich.  In  faith  and  grace.  Compare  Jas.  ii.  6,  7 ;  1  Tim. 
vi.  17, 18 ;  Luke  xii.  21 ;  Matt.  xix.  21. 

Blasphemy  {fikaa-tfyrjfilav).  See  on  Mark  vii.  22.  ISot  prim- 
arily direct  blasphemy  against  God,  but  reviling  at  believers. 

Jews.  Literally.  'Not  Christians,  as  in  Philip,  iii.  3;  Bom. 
iL  28,  29.  Actually  Jews  by  birth,  but  not  spiritually.  The 
title  is  not  given  them  by  the  Spirit,  nor  by  the  seer,  but  by 
themselves ;  and  none  would  use  that  title  except  such  as  were 
Jews  by  birth  and  by  religion.  The  enmity  of  the  Jews  against 
Christians  is  a  familiar  fact  to  all  readers  of  the  book  of  Acts ; 
and  it  is  a  matter  of  history  that  their  malignity  was  especially 
displayed  toward  the  Church  of  Smyrna.    In  the  circular  letter 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


444  WOBD  STUDIBB  IN  THB  NBW  TB8TAMBNT. 

addressed  by  the  Charch  of  Smyrna  to  the  charches  in  the 
Christian  world,  it  is  related  that  Jews  joined  with  heathen  in 
clamoring  that  Polycarp  should  be  cast  to  the  lions  or  burned 
alive,  and  were  foremost  ck  £9o9  airroh  {as  was  their  woni)  in 
bringing  logs  for  the  pile,  and  in  the  endeavor  to  prevent  the 
remains  of  the  martyr  from  being  delivered  to  his  Christian 
associates  for  burial. 

Synagogue  of  Satan.  For  synagogue^  see  on  as^enMy^  Jaa. 
ii.  2,  the  only  passage  in  which  the  word  is  used  for  a  Christian 
assembly.  This  fact  goes  to  support  the  literal  explanation  of 
the  term  Jevos.  For  ScUofij  see  on  Luke  x.  18.  For  John's  use 
of  the  expression  the  JewSy  see  on  John  i.  19.  The  use  of  the 
word  here  in  an  honorable  sense,  so  different  from  John's  cust- 
om, has  been  urged  against  his  authorship  of  the  Apocalypse. 
But  John  here  only  quotes  the  word,  and,  further,  employs  it 
without  the  article. 

10.  Fear  not  (jJurfBh  0o)9o&).  Lit,  fear  nothing.  For  the 
verb,  see  on  Luke  i.  50. 

Behold  {l8ot>  Sff).  The  particle  S^/or  certain,  which  is  not 
rendered,  gives  a  quality  of  assurance  to  the  prediction. 

The  Devil  {SuiffoKo^).  See  on  Matt.  iv.  1.  The  persecu- 
tion of  the  Christians  is  thus  traced  to  the  direct  agency  of 
Satan,  and  not  to  the  offended  passions  or  prejudices  of  men. 
Trench  observes :  "  There  is  nothing  more  remarkable  in  the 
records  which  have  come  down  to  us  of  the  early  persecutions, 
than  the  sense  which  the  confessors  and  martyrs  and  those  who 
afterwards  narrate  their  sufferings  and  their  triumphs  entertain 
and  utter,  that  these  great  fights  of  affliction  through  which 
they  were  called  to  pass,  were  the  immediate  work  of  the 
Devil.'' 

Shall  cast  (jiiKKei.  fiaXeiv).    Sev.,  rightly,  is  ahotU  to  oast. 
Prison  {^vKatc^v).    See  on  Acts  v.  21. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BBVBLATION  OP  JOHN.  445 

May  be  tried  {ireipaaSifre).    Tempted.     See  on  1  Pet.  i.  7. 

Tribulation  ten  days  {SXiy^t^v  tjfiep&v  Biiea).  JALyatrUm' 
lotion  often  days. 

Be  thou  (yivov).  The  exact  force  of  the  word  cannot  be 
given  by  a  corresponding  word  in  English.  Lit,  ^^  become  thou,^^ 
There  is  to  be  a  snccession  of  trials  demanding  an  increase  in 
the  power  and  a  variety  in  the  direction  of  faith.  With  refer- 
ence to  these  trials,  faithfulness  is  to  be  not  only  existent  bnt 
becominffj  developing  with  new  strength  and  into  new  applica- 
tions. 

Unto  death  {ixP^  Scwdrov).  Kot  faithful  until  the  time  of 
death,  bnt  faithful  up  to  a  measure  which  will  endure  death  for 
Christ's  sake.     ^^  It  is  an  intensive^  not  an  eostensive  term." 

A  crown  {rbv  aTi<f>avov).  Rev.,  rightly,  "  the  crown."  See 
on  1  Pet.  V.  4 ;  Jas.  i.  12.  Crovm  is  used  with  a  variety  of 
words :  crown  of  righteousness  (2  Tim.  iv.  8) ;  glory  (1  Pet.  v.  4) ; 
beauty  (Isa.  Ixii.  3,  Sept.,  A.  V.,  glory) ;  ^ride  (Isa.  xxviii.  1) ; 
rejoicing  (1  Thess.  ii.  19). 

Of  life  (t^  &^)*  The  full  phrase  is  the  crown  of  the  life: 
i.e.,  the  crown  which  consists  in  life  eternal.  The  image  is  not 
taken  from  the  Greek  games,  although  Smyrna  contained  a 
temple  of  Olympian  Jupiter,  and  Olympian  games  were  cele- 
brated there.  It  is  the  diadem  of  royalty  rather  than  the  gar- 
land  of  victory,  though  more  commonly  used  in  the  latter  sense. 
It  is  not  likely  that  John  would  use  an  image  from  the  games, 
since  there  was  the  most  violent  prejudice  against  them  on  the 
part  of  Jewish  Christians ;  a  prejudice  which,  on  occasions  of 
their  celebration,  provoked  the  special  ferocity  of  the  pagans 
against  what  they  regarded  as  the  unpatriotic  and  unsocial 
character  of  Christ's  disciples.  It  was  at  the  demand  of  the 
people  assembled  in  the  stadium  that  Polycarp  was  given  up 
to  death.  Moreover,  it  is  doubtful  whether  any  symbol  in  the 
Apocalypse  is  taken  from  heathenism.   The  imagery  is  Jewish. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


446  WORD  STUDIBB  Df  THE  HBW  TBBTAMEHTL 

IL  Be  hurt  {oBucffB^).    Strictlj,  wonted. 

Second  death.  An  ezpreisioQ  pecalur  to  the  Apoetljpee. 
See  XX.  6, 14;  xxL  8.  In  those  two  passages  it  is  defined  as  tAs 
lake  of  fire.    The  death  awaiting  the  wicked  after  judgment 

12.  Pergamos.  The  proper  fonn  of  the  name  is  P^r^oiTMifift. 
It  was  situated  in  Tenthnmia  in  Mysia,  in  a  district  watered  \>j 
three  rivers,  by  one  of  which  it  communicated  with  the  sea. 
The  original  city  was  built  on  a  lofty  hill,  which  afterward 
became  the  citadel  as  houses  sprang  up  around  its  basa  The 
local  legends  attached  a  sacred  character  to  the  place,  which, 
together  with  its  natural  strength,  made  it  a  place  of  deposit  for 
royal  treasure.  The  city  was  mainly  indebted  to  Eumenes  IL 
(B.C.  197-159)  for  its  embellishment  and  extension.  In  addition 
to  walks  and  public  buildings,  he  founded  the  library,  which 
contained  two-hundred-thousand  volumes,  and  was  second  only 
to  that  of  Alexandria.  The  kingdom  of  P^^mum  became  a 
Boman  province  b.o.  130  ;  but  the  city  continued  to  flourish,  so 
that  Pliny  styled  it  hy  far  the  most  iUvstrioiu  of  Asia,  All 
the  main  roads  of  Western  Asia  converged  there.  Pergamum 
was  celebrated  for  the  manufacture  of  ointments,  pottery,  tapes- 
tries, and  parchment,  which  derives  its  name  {cJiarta  Pergor 
mena)  from  the  city.  It  contained  a  celebrated  and  much-fre- 
quented temple  of  ^sculapius,  who  was  worshipped  in  the  form 
of  a  living  serpent  fed  in  the  temple.  Hence  ^sculapius  was 
called  the  god  of  Pergamum,  and  on  the  coins  struck  by  the 
town  he  often  appears  with  a  rod  encircled  by  a  serpent  The 
great  glory  of  the  city  was  the  Nioephorium,  a  grove  of  great 
beauty  containing  an  assemblage  of  temples.  The  city  has  been 
described  as  a  sort  of  union  of  a  pagan  cathedral-city,  a  univers- 
ity-town, and  a  royal  rcu^idence,  embellished  during  a  succession 
of  years  by  kings  who  all  had  a  passion  for  expenditure  and 
ample  means  of  gratifying  it.  The  streams  which  embraced 
the  town  irrigated  the  groves  of  ^icephorium  and  of  ^sculap- 
ius,  in  which  flourished  the  licentious  rites  of  pagan  antiquity. 
The  sacred  character  of  the  city  appears  in  coins  and  inscrip- 
tions which  desciibed  the  Pergamenes  by  the  title  claimed  by 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


RBVBLATION  OP  JOHN.  447 

the  worshippers  of  Diana  at  Ephesos,  vefOKopoi  temple-sweepers 
or  eacristana. 

The  sharp  sword  with  two  edges.    See  on  ch.  i.  16. 

13.  Dwellest  {icaTouceii).    See  on  Lnke  xL  26 ;  Acts  ii.  5. 

Seat  {^povof;).  Bev.,  rightly,  throne^  which  is  a  transcript  of 
the  Greek  word.  Better  than  Beat^  because  it  is  intended  to 
represent  Satan  as  exercising  dominion  there.  The  word  is 
nsed  in  the  New  Testament  of  a  ^tTi^^  throne  (Luke  i.  32,  52; 
Acts  ii.  30) :  of  ^A^  jvdioial  tribunal  or  bench  (Matt  xix.  28 ; 
Luke  xxii.  30) :  of  the  eecUe  of  the  eldere  (Apoc.  iv.  4 ;  xL  16). 
Also,  by  metonymy,  of  one  who  exercises  aiUhorityy  so,  in  the 
plural,  of  angels  (Col.  1.  16),  thrones  belonging  to  the  highest 
grade  of  angelic  beings  whose  place  is  in  the  inmiediate  pres- 
ence of  God. 

Holdest  fest  {Kparevi).    See  on  Matt  vii.  3 ;  Acts  iii  11. 

My  name.    See  on  1  John  i  7% 

My  feith.    See  on  Acts  yi.  7. 

Antipas.    There  is  no  other  record  of  this  martyr. 

14.  Doctrine  (SiSa;^).    Bev.,  better,  teaching. 

Balaam.  See  Num.  zzv.  1-9;  xxxL  15,  16.  Compare  2 
Pet  ii.  15 ;  Jude  11. 

A  stumbling-block  {crKdn^ctKov).  See  on  offend^  Matt  v. 
29,  and  offence^  Matt  xvi.  23. 

Before  (^m&itaoi/).   Lit,  i/n  the  sight  of.    See  on  Luke  zxiv.  11. 

Things  sacrificed  to  idols  (cJSooXtiStfra).  In  the  A.  Y.  the 
word  is  rendered  in  four  different  ways :  meats  offered  to  idols 
(Acts  XV.  29) :  things  offered  to  idols  (Acts  xxL  25) :  things  that 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


448  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

are  offered  in  sacrifice  unto  idols  (1  Cor.  viii.  4) ;  and  as  here. 
Rev.,  uniformly,  things  sacrifi^ced  to  idols. 

The  eating  of  idol  meats,  which  was  no  temptation  to  the 
Jewish  Christian,  was  quite  otherwise  to  the  Grentile.  The  act 
of  sacrifice,  among  all  ancient  nations,  was  a  social  no  less  than 
a  religious  act.  Commonly  only  a  part  of  the  victim  was  con- 
sumed as  an  offering,  and  the  rest  became  the  portion  of  the 
priests,  was  given  to  the  poor,  or  was  sold  again  in  the  markets. 
Hence  sacrifice  and  feast  were  identified.  The  word  originally 
used  for  killing  in  sacrifice  (^vtiv)  obtained  the  general  sense  of 
killing  (Acts  x.  13).  Among  the  Greeks  this  identification  was 
carried  to  the  highest  pitch.  Thucydides  enumerates  sacrifices 
among  popular  entertainments.  "  We  have  not  forgotten,"  he 
says,  "  to  provide  for  our  weary  spirits  many  relaxations  from 
toil.  "We  have  regular  games  and  sacrifices  throughout  the 
year  "  (ii.,  38).  So  Aristotle :  "  And  some  fellowships  seem  to 
be  for  the  sake  of  pleasure ;  those  of  the  followers  of  Love,  and 
those  of  club-diners ;  for  these  are  for  the  sake  of  sacrifice  and 
social  intercourse  "  ("  Ethics,"  viii.,  9,  5).  Suetonius  relates  of 
Claudius,  the  Roman  Emperor,  that,  on  one  occasion,  while  in 
the  Forum  of  Augustus,  smelling  the  odor  of  the  banquet 
which  was  being  prepared  for  the  priests  in  the  neighboring 
temple  of  Mars,  he  left  the  tribunal  and  placed  himself  at  the 
table  with  the  priests  ("  Claudius,"  33).  Also  how  Vitellius 
would  snatch  from  the  altar-fire  the  entrails  of  victims  and  the 
corn,  and  consume  them  ("Vitellius,"  13).  Thus,  for  the  Gent- 
ile, "refusal  to  partake  of  the  idol-meats  involved  absence 
from  public  and  private  festivity,  a  withdrawal,  in  great  part, 
from  the  social  life  of  his  time."  The  subject  is  discussed  by 
Paul  in  Rom.  xiv.  2-21,  and  1  Cor.  viii.  1-xi.  1.  The  council 
of  Jerusalem  (Acts  xv.)  forbade  the  eating  of  meat  offered  to 
idols,  not  as  esteeming  it  forbidden  by  the  Mosaic  law,  but  as 
becoming  a  possible  occasion  of  sin  to  weak  Christians.  In  his 
letter  to  the  Corinthians,  among  whom  the  Jewish  and  more 
scrupulous  party  was  the  weaker,  Paul,  in  arguing  with  the 
stronger  and  more  independent  party,  never  alludes  to  the  de- 
cree of  the  Jerusalem  council,  but  discusses  the  matter  from 
the  stand-point  of  the  rights  of  conscience.    While  he  admits 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BEVBLATIOK  OF  JOHN.  44ft 

the  possibility  of  a  blameless  participation  in  a  banquet,  even 
in  the  idol-temple,  be  dissnades  from  it  on  the  ground  of  its 
danjgerous  consequences  to  weak  consciences,  and  as  involving 
a  formal  recognition  of  the  false  worship  which  they  had  re- 
nounced at  their  baptism.  ^^  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Eomahs  we 
see  the  excess  to  which  the  scruples  of  the  weaker  brethren 
were  carried,  even  to  the  pitch  of  abstaining  altogether  from 
animal  food ;  as,  in  the  Nicolaitans  of  the  Apocalyptic  churches, 
we  see  the  excess  of  the  indifferentist  party,  who  plunged  with- 
out restraint  into  all  the  pollutions,  moral  as  well  as  ceremon-^ 
iai,  with  which  the  heathen  rites  were  accompanied  **  (Stanley, 
"On  Corinthians").  "  It  may  be  noted  as  accounting  for  the 
stronger  and  more  vehement  language  of  the  Apocalypse,  con- 
sidered even  as  a  simply  human  book,  that  the  conditions  of 
the  case  had  altered.  Christians  and  heathen  were  no  longer 
dwelling  together,  as  at  Corinth,  with  comparatively  slight  in* 
terruption  to  their  social  intercourse,  but  were  divided  by  a> 
sharp  line  of  demarcation.  The  eating  of  things  sacrificed  to 
idols  was  more  and  more  a  crucial  test,  involving  a  cowardly 
shrinking  from  the  open  confession  of  a  Christian'B  faith.  Dis- 
ciples who  sat  at  meat  in  the  idol's  temple  were  making  merry 
with  those  whose  hands  were  red  with  the  blood  of  their  fel- 
low-worshippers, and  whose  lips  had  uttered  blaspheming  scofb 
against  the  Holy  Name  ^  (Plumptre). 

In  times  of  persecution,  tasting  the  wine  of  the  libations  or 
eating  meat  offered  to  idols^  was  understood  to  signify  recanta* 
tion  of  Christianity. 

15.  So.  Even  as  Balak  had  Balaam  for  a  false  teacher,  #» 
hast  thou  the  Nicolaitan  teachers. 

Nicolaitans.    See  on  ver.  6. 

Which  thing  I  hate.    Omit. 

16.  I  will  make  war  {ir6\efAiiaw).  The  words  t^^^;^  and  make 
toa/r  occur  oftener  in  the  Apocalypse  than  in  any  other  book  of 
the  New  Testament.  "  An  eternal  roll  of  thunder  from  the 
throne ''  (Renan). 

Vol.  n.— 29 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


A50  WORD  8TUDIBS  IH  THB  HBW  TESTAMENT. 

.    17.  To  eat.    Omit 

Of  the  hidden  manna  (rot)  iiduva  roO  xticpvfifAivovy  The 
allugion  may  be  partly  to  the  pot  of  mamia  which  was  laid  up 
ill  the  ark  in  the  Banctnary.  See  Exod.  xvi.  32-34 ;  compare 
Ileb.  ix.  4.  That  the  imagery  of  the  ark  was  familiar  to  John 
appears  from  ch.  xL  19.  This  allusion  however  is  indirect,  for 
tlie  manna  laid  np  in  the  ark  was  not  for  food,  but  was  a 
memorial  of  food  once  enjoyed.  Two  ideas  seem  to  be  com- 
bined in  thefignre: 

1.  Christ  as  the  bread  from  heayen,  the  nonrishment  of  the 
life  of  believers,  the  true  manna,  of  which  those  who  eat  shall 
never  die  (John  vL  31-33  ;  48-51) ;  hidden,  in  that  He  is  with- 
drawn from  sight,  and  the  Christian's  life  is  hid  with  Him  in 
God  (CoL  iii.  3).  2.  The  satisfaction  of  the  believer's  desire 
when  Christ  shall  be  revealed.  The  hidden  manna  shall  not  re- 
main for  ever  hidden.  We  shall  see  Christ  as  He  is,  and  be  like 
Uim  (1  John  iii.  2).  Christ  gives  the  manna  in  giving  Himself. 
V  The  seeing  of  Christ  as  He  is,  and,  through  this  beatific  vision, 
being  made  like  to  Him,  is  identical  with  the  eating  of  the  hid- 
den manna,  which  shall,  as  it  were,  be  then  brought  forth  from 
the  sanctnary,  the  holy  of  holies  of  God's  immediate  presence 
ifrhere  it  was  withdrawn  from  sight  so  long,  that  all  may  par- 
take of  it ;  the  glory  of  Christ,  now  shrouded  and  concealed, 
lieing  then  revealed  to  His  people  "  (Trench). 

This  is  one  of  numerous  illustrations  of  the  dependence  of  the 
Apocalypse  upon  Old  Testament  history  and  prophecy.  "  To 
such  an  extent  is  this  the  case,"  says  Professor  Milligan,  ^^that 
it  may  be  doubted  whether  it  contains  a  single  figure  not  drawn 
from  the  Old  Testament,  or  a  single  complete  sentence  not 
more  or  less  built  up  of  materials  brought  from  the  same 
source."  See,  for  instance,  Balaam  (ii.  14) ;  Jezebel  (li.  20) ; 
Michael  (xii.  7,  compare  Dan.  x,  13 ;  xii.  1) ;  Abaddon  (ix. 
11) ;  Jerusalem,  Mt.  Zion,  Babylon,  the  Euphrates,  Sodom, 
Egypt  {xxL  2 ;  xiv.  1 ;  xvi.  19 ;  ix.  14 ;  xL  8) ;  Gog  and  Ma- 
gog (xx.  8,  compare  Ezek.  xxxviii.,  xxxix.).  Similarly,  the  tree 
of  life,  the  sceptre  of  iron,  the  potter's  vessels,  the  morning-star 
(ii.  7, 17,  27,  28).    Heaven  is  described  under  the  figure  of  the 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BEVELATIOK  OP  JOHN.  451 

tabernacle  iu  the  wilderness  (xi.  1, 19  ;  vi.  9 ;  viii.  8  ;  xL  19  ; 
iv.  6).  The  song  of  the  redeemed  is  the  song  of  Moses  (xv.  8). 
The  plagues  of  Egjpt  appear  in  the  blood,  lire,  thunder,  dark- 
ness and  locusts  (ch.  viii.).  "  The  great  earthquake  of  ch.  vi.  is 
taken  from  Haggai ;  the  sun  becoming  black  as  sackcloth  of 
hair  and  the  moon  becoming  blood  (ch.  viii )  from  Joel :  the 
stars  of  heaven  falling,  the  fig-tree  casting  her  untimely  figs, 
the  heavens  departing  as  a  scroll  (ch.  viii.)  from  Isaiah :  the 
scorpions  of  ch.  ix.  from  Ezekiel :  the  gathering  of  the  vine  of 
the  earth  (ch.  xiv.)  from  Joel,  and  the  treading  of  the  wine- 
press in  the  same  chapter  from  Isaiah."  So  too  the  details 
of  a  single  vision  are  gathered  out  of  different  prophets  or 
different  parts  of  the  same  prophet.  For  instance,  the  vision 
of  the  glorified  Redeemer  (i.  12-20).  The  golden  candlesticks 
are  from  Exodus  and  Zechariah ;  the  garment  down  to  the  foot 
from  Exodus  and  Daniel ;  the  golden  girdle  and  the  hairs  like 
wool  from  Isaiah  and  Daniel ;  the  feet  like  burnished  brass, 
and  the  voice  like  the  sound  of  many  waters,  from  Ezekiel ;  the 
two-edged  sword  from  Isaiah  and  Psalms;  the  countenance 
like  the  sun  from  Exodus;  the  falling  of  the  seer  as  dead 
from  Exodus,  Isaiah,  Ezekiel,  and  Daniel ;  the  laying  of  Jesus' 
right  hand  on  the  seer  from  DanieL 

^^  Kot  indeed  that  the  writer  binds  himself  to  the  Old  Testa- 
ment in  a  slavish  spirit.  He  ratlier  uses  it  with  great  freedom 
and  independence,  extending,  intensifying,  or  transfiguring  its 
descriptions  at  his  pleasure.  Yet  the  main  source  of  his  em- 
blems cannot  be  mistaken.  The  sacred  books  of  his  people  had 
been  more  than  familiar  to  him.  They  had  penetrated  his 
whole  being.  They  had  lived  within  him  as  a  germinating  seed, 
capable  of  shooting  up  not  only  in  the  old  forms,  but  in  new 
forms  of  life  and  beauty.  In  the  whole  extent  of  sacred  and 
religious  literature  there  is  to  be  found  nowhere  else  such  a 
perfect  fusion  of  the  revelation  given  to  Israel  with  the  mind 
of  one  who  would  either  express  Israel's  ideas,  or  give  utter- 
ance, by  means  of  the  symbols  supplied  by  Israel's  history,  to 
the  present  and  most  elevated  thoughts  of  the  Christian  faith  " 
(this  note  is  condensed  from  Professor  Milligan's  ^^  fiaird  Lec- 
tures on  the  Revelation  pf  St  John"). 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


453  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  TBDB  NBW  TBSTAMBNT. 

A  white  stone  {'^<l>ov  Xcu/c^i/).  See  on  <uyufUe^y  Luke  xir; 
38 ;  and  whUey  Luke  ix.  39.  The  foundation  of  the  figure  is 
not  to  be  Bought  in  Q^ntile  but  in  Jewish  customs.  ^'  White  is 
everywhere  the  color  and  livery  of  heaven  ^  (Trench).  See  ch. 
L  14  ;  iii.  5  ;  vii.  9  ;  xiv.  14 ;  xix.  8,  11,  14 ;  xx.  11.  It  is  the 
bright,  glistering  white.  Compare  Matt,  xxviii.  3  ;  Luke  xxiv. 
4 ;  John  xx.  13 ;  Apoc.  xx.  11 ;  Dan.  vii  9. 

It  is  impossible  to  fix  the  meaning  of  the  symbol  with  any 
certainty.  The  following  are  some  of  the  principal  views:  The 
Urim  and  Thummim  concealed  within  the  High-Priest's  breast- 
plate of  judgment.  This  is  advocated  by  Trench,  who  supposes 
that  the  Urim  was  a  peculiarly  rare  stone,  possibly  the  diamond, 
and  engraven  with  the  ineffable  name  of  God.  The  new  name 
he  regards  as  the  new  name  of  God  or  of  Christ  (ch.  iii.  13) ; 
some  revelation  of  the  glory  of  God  which  can  be  communicated 
to  His  people  only  in  the  higher  state  of  being,  and  which  they 
only  can  understand  who  have  actually  received. 

Professor  Milligan  supposes  an  allusion  to  the  plate  of  gold 
worn  on  the  High-Priest's  forehead,  and  inscribed  with  the 
words  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord,"  but,  somewhat  strangely,  runs 
the  figure  into  the  stone  or  pebble  used  in  voting,  and  regards 
the  white  stone  as  carrying  the  idea  of  the  believer's  acquittal 
at  the  hands  of  God. 

Dean  Plumptre  sees  in  the  stone  the  signet  by  which,  in 
virtue  of  its  form  or  of  the  characters  inscribed  on  it,  he  who 
possessed  it  could  claim  from  the  friend  who  gave  it,  at  any 
distance  of  time,  a  frank  and  hearty  welcome ;  and  adds  to  this 
an  allusion  to  the  custom  of  presenting  such  a  token,  with  the 
guest's  name  upon  it,  of  admission  to  the  feast  given  to  those 
who  were  invited  to  partake  within  the  temple  precincts — a 
feast  which  consisted  wholly  or  in  part  of  sacrificial  meats. 

Others,  regarding  the  connection  of  the  stone  with  the  manna, 
xefer  to  the  use  of  the  lot  cast  among  the  priests  in  order  to 
•determine  which  one  should  offer  the  sacrifice. 

Others,  to  the  writing  of  a  candidate's  name  at  an  election 
by  ballot  upon  a  stone  or  beau. 

In  short,  the  commentators  are  utterly  divided,  and  the  true 
interpretation  remains  a  matter  of  conjecture. 


Digitized  by  (^OOQIC 


BBVBLATION  OF  JOHN.  458 

A  new  name.  Some  explain  the  new  name  of  Gkxl  or  of 
Christ  (compare  ch.  iii.  12);  others,  of  the  recipient's  own 
name.  ^^A  new  name  however^  a  revelation  of  his  everlasting 
title  as  a  son  of  Ood  to  glory  in  Christ,  but  consisting  of  and 
revealed  in  those  personal  marks  and  signs  of  Ood's  peculiar 
adoption  of  KitMelf^  which  he  and  none  other  is  acquainted 
with"  (Alford).  Bengelsays:  "Wouldst  thou  know  what  kind 
of  a  new  name  thou  wilt  obtain  %  Overcome.  Before  that  thou 
wilt  ask  in  vain,  and  after  that  thou  wilt  soon  read  it  inscribed 
on  the  white  stone." 

18.  Thyatira.  Situated  on  the  confines  of  Mysia  and  Ionia. 
According  to  Pliny  it  was  known  in  earlier  times  as  Pelopia 
and  Euhippia.  Its  prosperity  received  a  new  impulse  under 
the  Roman  Emperor  Vespasian.  The  city  contained  a  number 
of  corporate  guilds,  as  potters,  tanners,  weavers,  robe-makers, 
and  dyers.  It  was  from  Thyatira  that  Lydia  the  purple-seller 
of  Philippi  came,  Paul's  first  European  convert  The  numer^ 
ous  streams  of  the  adjacent  country  were  full  of  leeches.  The 
principal  deity  of  the  city  was  Apollo,  worshipped  as  the  Sun- 
god  under  the  surname  Tyrimnas.  A  shrine  outside  the  walls 
was  dedicated  to  Sambatha,  a  sibyl.  The  place  was  never  of 
paramount  political  importance. 

Son  of  God.  Compare  Son  of  man^  ch.  i  13 ;  Ps.  ii.  7 ; 
ch.  xix.  13. 

Who  hath  His  eyes,  etc.    See  on  ch.  i.  14, 15. 

Thy  works,  and  the  last,  etc.  Omit  andy  and  read,  as  Bev., 
and  that  thy  last  works  are  more  than  the  first. 

20.  A  few  things.    Omit 

Thou  sufFerest  (^09).     Used  absolutely.     ToUrateet. 

That  woman.    Rev.,  the  tooman.    Some  translate  thy  wife. 

Jezebel.  Used  symbolically,  but  with  reference  to  the  no- 
torious historic  Jezebel.    She  was  the  daughter  of  Ethbaal,  king 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


4S4  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NBW  TBSTAJIENT. 

of  8idon  (1  Kings  xvi.  31),  formerly  a  priest  of  Astarte,  and 
who  had  made  his  way  to  the  throne  by  the  murder  of  his  pre- 
decessor Pheles.  Ahab's  marriage  with  her  was  the  first  instance 
of  a  marriage  with  a  heathen  princess  of  a  king  of  the  northern 
kingdom  of  Israeh  This  alliance  was  a  turning-point  in  the 
moral  history  of  the  kingdom.  From  the  times  of  David  and 
Solomon  many  treaties  had  been  concluded  between  Phoenicia 
and  Israel ;  but  it  was  at  the  same  time  the  special  business  of 
the  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes  to  restore  the  ancient  rigidness 
of  the  nationality  of  Israel.  Jezebel  looked  down  with  perverse 
pride  upon  a  people  whose  religion  she  neither  understood  nor 
respected.  Though  the  ten  tribes  had  yielded  to  idolatry  in 
the  worship  of  the  calves,  the  true  Ood  was  still  worshipped 
and  the  law  of  Moses  acknowledged.  Fi*om  the  time  of  Ahab's 
marriage  the  apostasy  of  Israel  became  more  decided  and  deadly. 
She  was  ^^  a  woman  in  whom,  with  the  reckless  and  licentious 
habits  of  an  Oriental  queen,  were  united  the  fiercest  and  sternest 
qualities  inherent  in  the  old  Semitic  race.  Her  husband,  in 
whom  generous  and  gentle  feelings  were  not  wanting,  was  yet  of 
a  weak  and  yielding  character  which  soon  made  him  a  tool  in 
her  hands.  .  .  .  The  wild  license  of  her  life  and  the  magical 
fascination  of  her  arts  or  her  character  became  a  proverb  in 
the  nation.  Hound  her  and  from  her,  in  different  degrees  of 
nearness,  is  evolved  the  awful  drama  of  the  most  eventful 
crisis  of  this  portion  of  the  Israelite  history'*  (Stanley,  "Jewish 
Church").  She  sought  to  exterminate  the  prophets  of  Jehovah 
(1  E[ings  xviiL  13),  and  inaugurated  the  worship  of  Baal  the 
Sun-god  on  a  magnificent  scale.  Two  sanctuaries  were  estab- 
lished, one  for  each  of  the  great  Phoenician  deities,  at  each  of 
the  two  new  capitals  of  the  kingdom,  Samaria  and  Jezreel. 
The  sanctuary  of  Astarte  or  Ashtaroth  (the  Phoenician  Venus) 
at  Jezreel  was  under  Jezebel's  special  sanction,  and  there  is 
reason  to  suppose  that  she  ministered  as  a  priestess  in  that 
licentious  worship.  Four  hundred  priests  or  prophets  were 
attached  to  this  sanctuary  and  were  supported  at  her  table. 
The  sanctuary  to  Baal  at  Samaria  was  large  enough  to  contain 
all  the  worshippers  of  the  nortliem  kingdom.  Its  staff  con- 
sisted of  four  hundred  and  fifty  priests,  and  the  interior  con^ 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BEYBLATIOK  OF  JOHN.  455 

.tained  representations  of  the  Snn-god  on  small  pillars,  while  a 
large  statue  of  the  same  deitj  was  set  up  in  front.  At  these 
sanctuaries  Ahab  in  person  offered  sacrifices. 

Expositors  are  divided  as  to  the  symbolic  import  of  the  name 
in  this  passage,  some  referring  it  to  a  single  person — ^^  some 
single  wicked  woman  in  the  Church  of  Thyatira  inheriting  this 
name  of  infamy  in  the  Church  of  God,"  giving  herself  out  as  a 
prophetess,  and  seducing  the  servants  of  Christ  to  commit  forn- 
ication and  to  eat  tilings  offered  to  idols.  Others  interpret 
the  name  as  designating  an  influential  heretical  party  in  the 
Church :  but,  as  Alford  remarks,  ^^  the  real  solution  must  lie 
hidden  until  all  that  is  hidden  shall  be  known."  It  is  clear,  at 
any  rate,  that  Thyatira,  like  the  Church  of  old,  had  sinned  by 
her  alliance  with  a  corrupt  faith  and  practice. 

To  teach  and  to  seduce  {BiMa-ieeiv  icai  irXavaaSat),  The 
best  texts  read  teal  BtBdcfcei  koI  wXava  and  she  teacheU^  cmd 
seduoeth.  So  Rev.  For  sedueeth  see  on  err^  Mark  xiL  24,  and 
deoeimr  and  error^  Matt  xxviii.  63,  64.  The  word  irkayav  to 
deduce  is  found  of tener  in  the  Apocalypse  than  elsewhere  in 
the  New  Testament  It  never  means  mere  error  as  such,  bat 
fundamental  departfwrefram  the  truth. 

To  commit  fornication  and  to  eat  things  sacrificed  to 
idols.  Both  sins  of  the  historical  Jezebel.  See  2  £ings  ix.  38, 
80 ;  Jer.  iv.  80;  Nahum  iii.  4. 

21.  Space  (jcpovov).    Lit,  titMy  as  Bev. 

Repent  {/leropoi/fayj).    See  on  Matt  iii.  2 ;  xxi  29. 

Of  her  fornication  (iie).  Lit.,  otU  of;  i.e.,  so  as  to  come  out 
of  and  escape  fi*om  her  sin.    See  on  ver.  7. 

22.  Into  a  bed.  Of  anguish.  The  scene  of  the  sin  is  also, 
the  scene  of  the  punishment 

Commit  adultery  (/AOi^^evoin-o?).  A  wider  term  than 
wopvevaoi  to  commit  /o7*nication.    Compare  the  metaphorical 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


.466  WORD  8TUDIEB  IS  THE  KSW  TESTAMENT. 

meaning  ezpressing  the  rebellion  and  idolatiy  of  Israel  ( Jer.  iiL 
8;  T.7;  £^  xvL  33). 

With  her  (/tier'  ovr^).  Not  with  her  as  the  conjum  advUeriij 
but  who  share  toith  her  in  her  adrdteriee. 

Of  their  deeds  {iic  r&v  ipywf  a\n&v\  Bead  avrtf:  her 
(deeds).    Bepent  out  ofiix)  as  in  ver.  21. 

S)8.  Children  (riicva).  Emphatic.  Distinguished  from  the 
parUcipcdare  of  ver.  23,  as  her  proper  adherents,  '^  who  are 
begotten  of  her  and  go  to  constitute  her."  Others,  however, 
deny  any  distinction  (Milligan),  and  others  (as  Trench)  explain 
as  the  lee9  forward  and  prominent  members  of  the  wicked  com- 
pany, deceived  where  the  others  were  the  deceivers. 

With  death  (^i^  ^av6n^).  To  kill  with  death  is  a  very  strong 
expression.  Compare  Lev.  xx.  10,  Sept,  Bavdr^  SawirowrSfaaaw 
ehall  be  put  to  death  (A.  Y.  and  Rev.).  Lit,  let  them  he  put  to 
death  with  death.  The  reference  can  hardly  be  to  the  slaughter 
of  Ahab's  seventy  sons  (2  Kings  x.  6, 7)  who  were  not  Jezebel's 
children. 

All  the  churches.  Not  merely  the  seven  churches,  but 
the  churches  throughout  the  world. 

Shall  know  {^pwHrovrai).    See  on  John  iL  24. 

Search eth  {ipemfSmf).  See  John  v.  39 ;  vii.  52 ;  Bom.  viii. 
27.  Compare  Jer.  xi.  20 ;  xvii.  10 ;  xx.  12 ;  1  Pet  i.  11.  De- 
noting a  CQreful  search,  a  following  up  or  tracking.  See  Gten. 
xxxi.  35 ;  1  Kings  xx.  6 ;  Prov.  xx.  27 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  10. 

Reins  {ve^pob^).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  Strictly, 
hidneye.  Used  of  the  thoughte^  fedmgs^  and  pwrpoeee  of  the 
soul.  A  similar  use  of  the  physical  for  the  spiritual  organ  is 
cirKiirfxya  howeU  for  hea/rt.    See  onpitifidy  1  Pet.  iii.  8. 

t  24.  And  unto  the  rest    Omit  andj  and  render,  as  Bev.,  to 
2/kpu  leay,  to  the  reet^  etc. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BEYBLATION  OF  JOHN.  457 

And  which  {fcai  omve;).  Omit  xal  and.  The  compound 
relative,  which^  classifies ;  which  are  of  those  who  know  notj  etc. 

The  depths  of  Satan  (t^  fiddfi  rov  Sarcufa).  The  reference 
is,  most  probably,  to  the  Gnostic  sect  of  the  Ophites  (o^£9  a  ser- 
j>efU\  or,  in  Hebrew,  Naasenes  {naash  a  9erpen£)y  serpent-wor- 
shippers, a  sect  the  origin  of  which  is  unknown,  but  which 
existed  as  late  as  the  sixth  century ;  since,  in  530,  Justinian 
passed  laws  against  it  ^^The  veneration  of  the  serpent  was 
but  the  logical  development  of  a  theory,  the  germ  of  which  is 
common  to  many  of  the  Gnostic  sects.  Proceeding  on  tlie  as- 
sumption that  the  creator  of  the  world  is  to  be  regarded  as  an 
evil  power,  a  thing  in  hostility  to  the  supreme  God,  it  follows 
as  a  natural  consequence  that  the  fall  of  man  through  disobedi- 
ence to  the  command  of  his  maker  must  be  regarded,  not  as  a 
transgression  against  the  will  of  the  supreme  God,  but  as  an 
emancipation  from  the  authority  of  an  evil  being.  The  serpent, 
therefore,  who  tempted  mankind  to  sin,  is  no  longer  their  de- 
stroyer but  their  benefactor.  He  is  the  symbol  of  intellect,  by 
whose  means  the  first  human  pair  were  raised  to  the  knowledge 
of  the  existence  of  higher  beings  than  their  creator.  This  con- 
ception, consistently  carried  out,  would  have  resulted  in  a  direct 
inversion  of  the  whole  teaching  of  scripture ;  in  calling  evil 
good  and  good  evil ;  in  converting  Satan  into  God  and  God 
into  Satan.  The  majority  of  the  Ophite  sects,  however,  seem 
to  have  shrunk  from  this  portentous  blasphemy.  While  ac- 
knowledging the  fall  of  man  as,  in  some  manner,  a  deliverance 
from  evil  and  an  exaltation  of  human  nature,  they  hesitated  to 
carry  out  their  principle  by  investing  the  evil  spirit  with  the 
attributes  of  deity.  A  kind  of  compromise  was  made  between 
scripture  and  philosophy.  The  serpent  was,  notwithstanding 
his  service  to  mankind,  represented  as  a  being  of  evil  nature 
and  an  enemy  to  man,  though  his  work  was  overruled  to  man's 
good,  and  he  himself  was,  beyond  his  intention,  the  instrument 
of  a  higher  wisdom.  But  in  one  sect  at  least  of  the  Ophites, 
the  more  logical  and  thoroughly  blasphemous  consequences  of 
the  first  principles  were  exhibited  openly  and  unblnshingly  *' 
(Mansel,  ^<  Gnostic  Heresies  ").    The  characteristic  boast  of  the 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


458  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Onostics  was  their  knowledge  of  the  depths  of  divine  things. 
In  this  they  were  probably  perverting  and  caricatoring  the 
words  of  Paul  (Rom.  xL  33 ;  1  Cor.  IL  10). 

As  they  speak.  Bev.,  ae  they  say.  The  questions  are, 
1st.  What  is  the  phrase  allnded  to?  Is  it  the  familiar  formula 
of  these  heretics,  "  the  depths,^  or  "  the  depths  of  God,"  the 
dqpths  of  Satan  being  added  by  the  Lord  himself  in  ironical 
contrast  with  the  depths  of  divine  knowledge, — or  is  it  the 
depths  of  Saianf  2d.  Does  as  they  say  refer  to  Chnstians^ 
describing  the  depths  of  the  Onostics  as  depths  of  Satauy  or 
does  it  refer  to  the  heretics  themselves,  calling  their  own  mys- 
teries depths  of  Satan? 

The  majority  of  commentators  regard  as  they  say  as  referring 
to  the  heretics,  and  as  applying  only  to  the  word  depths ;  of 
S<Uwn  being  added  by  the  Lord  in  indignation.  Alford  says 
that  no  such  formula  as  depths  of  Satan^  or  any  resembling  it, 
is  found  as  used  by  the  ancient  Gnostic  heretics. 

Other  burden  {SKKo  Kaposi).  The  words  for  burden  in  the 
New  Testament  are  *y/co9  (only  in  Heb.  xii.  1),  fiapo^  (Matt  xx. 
12 ;  Gal.  vL  2),  and  ifoprlop  (Matt.  xi.  30 ;  xxiii.  4 ;  Gal.  vi.  5). 
^Oyico^  refers  to  InUky  fidpo^  to  weighty  ^prCov  to  a  burden  so 
far  as  it  is  home  {(f>€p<o).  Thus  in  Heb.  xii.  1,  '^  lay  aside  every 
weight  {Syicos;)^^^  the  figure  being  that  of  runners  in  the  race- 
course, and  the  word  appropriate  as  denoting  the  bulky  robes 
and  the  accoutrements  of  the  ordinary  dress  which  might  im- 
pede the  freedom  of  the  limbs.  In  Matt.  xx.  12,  "  the  iurden 
(J3dpo<:)  and  heat  of  the  day,"  the  idea  is  that  of  heavy  toil  press- 
ing like  a  weight.  So  Gal.  vi.  2,  ^^  Bear  ye  one  another's  burd- 
ens.^ But  in  Gal.  vi  5,  the  emphasis  is  on  the  act  of  bearing; 
and  therefore  <f>opTiop  is  used :  ^^  Every  man  shall  bear  his  own 
burden  ;  "  i.e.,  every  man  shall  carry  that  which  it  is  appointed 
him  to  bear.  The  reference  in  that  passage  is  probably  to  the 
prohibition  enjoined  by  the  apostolic  council  of  Jerusalem, 
which  concerned  the  very  things  which  are  rebuked  here — ^fom- 
ication  and  abstinence  from  idol-meats.  In  the  niarrative  of 
that  council  the  phrase  occurs  ^^to  lay  upon  you  no  greater 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BEVSLATIOK  OF  JOHN.  459i 

hjtrden  "  (Acts  xv.  28).  The  meaning  accordingly  will  be,  ^^  I 
pat  npon  yon  no  other  harden  than  abstinence  from  and  pro* 
test  against  these  abominations." 

35.  Hold  fast  (/rponfo-are).    See  on  Mark  vii.  3 ;  Acts  iiL  11. 

Till  I  come  {^XP^  ^^  ^^  ^^)*  '^^^  conditional  particle  &p 
marks  the  time  of  His  coming  as  uncertain. 

26.  Keepeth  my  works  {rrfp&p  tA  ipya  funi).  The  phrase 
occnrs  only  here  in  the  New  Testament  The  toarks  are  those 
which  Christ  oammanda^  which  He  doeSf  and  which  are  the 
Jruita  of  IBs  Spirit.    See  on  John  iv.  47. 

Power  {i^ualaif).  See  on  John  i  12.  Bev.,  better,  at^ 
thorUy. 

Nations  (iSv&v).  See  on  Matt  xxy.  32,  and  OenttUsj  Lake 
ii.  32.  Properly,  here,  the  Gentiles,  as  opposed  to  the  trae  Israel 
of  God. 

27.  Shall  rule  (woifuweZ).  Lit,  ahail  aheph&rd.  A  com- 
parison with  ch.  yii.  17,  brings  oat  the  terrible  irony  in  this 
word.  Compare  Ps.  ii.  9,  Sept.,  where  the  same  word  is  nsed. 
A.  y.,  break.  See  on  nde^  Matt.  iL  6 ;  feedy  Acts  xx.  28 ;  1 
Pet  V.  2 ;  Jnde  12. 

Rod  (pdfiSip).  Commonly  rendered  etqf^  once  eoeptre^  Heb. 
i.  8.    This  is  its  meaning  here. 

Vessels  {tncevri).    See  on  gooda^  Matt  xii  29;  veeeell^  1  Pet 

iii.  7. 

Of  the  potter  {Kepafwei).    From  tdpe^io^  jwtter^s  day. 

Shall  they  be  broken  to  shivers.  The  A.  Y.  follows  the 
reading  awrpifiiiaenu,  the  futare  tense  of  the  verb.  The  cor* 
rect  reading  is  {nwrpifierai,  the  present  tense.  Bender  there^ 
fore,  as  liev.,  <<  as  the  vessels  of  the  potter  are  Iroken.^    Se^ 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


460  WORD  STUDIEB  IH  THE  KKW  TBSTAMENT. 

on  Mark  v.  4,  and  bruisinffj  Luke  ix.  39.    The  oAp  toffeiher 
gives  the  picture  of  the  fragments  collapsing  into  a  lieap. 

28.  The  morning-star  (toi/  curripa  rov  wp^ipov).  TTiestarj 
iKat  of  the  morning.  One  of  John's  characteristic  construct- 
ions. See  on  1  John  iv.  9.  The  reference  is,  most  probably, 
to  Christ  himself.  See  ch.  xxiL  16.  He  will  giro  Himself. 
This  interpretation  falls  in  with  the  promise  of  power  over  the 
nations  in  ver.  26.  The  star  was  the  ancient  emblem  of  sover- 
eignty. See  Num.  xxiv.  17 ;  Matt.  ii.  2.  "  It  was  the  symbol 
of  sovereignty  on  its  brighter  and  benignant  side,  and  was 
therefore  the  fitting  and  necessary  complement  of  the  dread 
attributes  that  had  gone  before.  The  king  came  not  only  to 
judge  and  punish,  but  also  to  illumine  and  cheer  "  (Plumptre). 
Compare  2  Pet  i.  19. 


CHAPTER  IIL 

1.  Sardis.  The  capital  of  the  ancient  kingdom  of  Lydia. 
It  was  situated  in  a  plain  watered  by  the  river  Pactolns.  The 
city  was  of  very  ancient  origin.  Herodotus  (i.,  84)  gives  the 
account  of  its  siege  and  capture  by  Cyrus,  and  of  its  previous 
fortification  by  an  old  king,  Meles.  It  was  ruled  by  a  series  of 
able  princes,  the  last  of  whom  was  Croesus,  celebrated  for  his 
wealth  and  his  misfortunes.  In  the  earlier  part  of  his  reign  he 
extended  his  dominion  over  the  whole  of  Asia  Minor,  with  the 
exception  of  Lycia  find  Cilicia.  The  Lydian  rule  was  termin* 
ated  by  the  conquest  of  Cyrus.  From  the  Persians  it  passed 
into  the  hands  of  Alexander  the  Oreat,  after  which,  for  the 
next  three  hundred  years,  its  fortunes  are  obscure.  In  b.o.  214 
it  was  taken  and  sacked  by  Antiochus  the  Great  after  a  siege 
of  two  years.  The  kings  of  Pergamus  next  succeeded  to  the 
dominion,  and  from  them  it  passed  into  the  hands  of  the  Bo- 
xnans. 

In  the  time  of  Tiberius  it  was  desolated  by  an  earthquake, 
together  with  eleven  or  twelve  other  important  cities  of  Asia, 
and  the  calamity  was  increased  by  a  pestilence. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BEYBLATIOK  OF  JOHN.  461 

Sardis  was  in  very  early  times  an  important  commercial  city. 
Pliny  says  that  the  art  of  dyeing  wool  was  invented  there,  and 
it  was  the  entrepdt  of  the  dyed  woollen  manofactores,  carpets, 
etc.,  the  raw  material  for  which  was  furnished  by  the  flocks  of 
Fhrygia.  It  was  also  the  place  where  the  metal  dectrum  was 
procured.  Gold  was  foand  in  the  bed  of  the  Pactolns.  Silver 
and  gold  coins  are  said  to  have  been  first  minted  there,  and  it 
was  at  one  time  known  as  a  slave-mart.  The  impure  worship 
of  the  goddess  Cybele  was  celebrated  there,  and  the  massive 
ruins  of  her  temple  are  still  to  be  seen.  The  city  is  now  a 
heap  of  ruins.  In  1850  no  human  being  found  a  dwelling 
there. 

The  seven  Spirits  of  God.    See  on  ch.  i.  4. 

2.  Bo  watchful  i^bfou  yfyriyop&v).  Lit,  iecame  anoalce  a/nd 
on  the  watch.  See  on  Mark  xiiL  35 ;  1  Pet  y.  8.  Become 
what  thou  art  not 

Strengthen  {anjpi^v).  See  on  1  Pet  y.  10,  and  compare 
Luke  xxii.  32;  Eom.  i.  11;  2  Thess.  iii.  3. 

That  are  ready  to  die  (&  fUXXei  inroBiwuv).  Eead  ifjLeXKop 
were  ready  or  about  (to  die). 

I  have  not  found  thy  works  {oi  eipr^xd  aov  rh  Ipya). 
Some  texts  omit  the  article  before  worksj  in  which  case  we 
should  render,  Ihamefotmd  no  works  of  thine.    So  Rev, 

Perfect  {iren''Xafpci>fUya).    lAty/tdJUled.    So  Bev. 

God.    The  best  texts  insert  fAov,  ^^  my  Qod.^ 

3.  Thou  hast  received  and  heard  {elXjrf4>^  KaHi/covca^). 
The  former  of  these  verbs  is  in  the  perfect  tense:  diou  hast 
received  the  truth  as  a  permanent  deposit.  It  remains  with 
thee  whether  thou  regardest  it  or  not.  The  latter  verb  is  in 
the  aorist  tense,  didst  hear  (so  Kev.),  denoting  merely  the  act 
of  hearing  when  it  took  place. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


463  WORD  8TUDIE8  IN  THB  "SEW  TESTAMENT. 

Watch.    See  on  ver.  2. 

On  thee.    Omit 

As  a  thief  {m  teKhmf^).  Thirf^  as  distingnished  from  Xi^ 
Tf^  robbery  a  planderer  on  a  larger  scale,  who  secures  bis 
booty  not  bj  stealth,  but  by  violence.  Hence  the  word  is  ap- 
propriate here  to  mark  the  unexpected  and  stealthy  coming  of 
the  Lord.    Compare  1  Thess.  v.  2,  4 ;  2  Pet  iii.  10. 

Thou  shalt  not  know  what  hour  I  will  come  upon  thee. 

The  Greek  proverb  says  that  the  feet  of  the  avenging  deities 
are  shod  with  wool.  The  sentiment  is  voiced  in  the  two  fol- 
lowing fragments  from  JSschylns : 


**  VHiether  one  sleep  or  walk  or  sit  at  < 
Unfleen  and  yoiceless  Jostice  dogs  his  steps, 
Striking  athwart  his  path  from  right  or  left ; 
Nor  what  is  foullj  done  will  night  oonoeal : 
Whatever  thou  doest  some  god  beholdeth  thee.** 

'*  And  dost  thou  deem  that  thou  shalt  e'er  overcome 
Wisdom  divine  ?    That  retribntion  lies 
Somewhere  remote  from  mortals  ?    Close  at  hand^ 
Unseen  itself,  it  sees  and  knows  full  well 
Whom  it  befits  to  smite.     Bat  thou  know'st  not 
The  hoar  when,  swift  and  sadden,  it  shall  oom« 
And  sweep  awaj  the  wioked  from  the  earth." 

4.  Thou  hast  a  few  names.  The  best  texts  insert  ^XXi 
hvi  between  these  words  and  the  close  of  the  preceding  verse. 
So  Bev.  Buty  notwithstanding  the  general  apathy  of  the 
Church,  thou  hast  a  few,  etc.  Compare  ver.  1,  thou  hast  a 
namey  and  see  on  ch.  xi.  13.  Names  is  equivalent  to  persona^ 
a  few  who  may  be  rightly  named  as  exceptions  to  the  general 
conception. 

Even  in  Sardis.    Omit  iccA  even. 

Defiled  {ifUtKwmi),    See  on  1  Pet.  L  4. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BEVELATION  OF  JOHN.  468 

Garments.  See  the  same  figure,  Jade  23.  Tlie  meaning 
is,  have  not  sullied  the  pnrity  of  their  Christian  life. 

In  white  {h  TuevKolsi).  With  ifunloi,^  garments  understood. 
See  on  ch.  ii.  17,  and  compare  Zech.  iii.  8,  6.  "  White  colors 
are  suitable  to  the  gods  ^  (Plato,  "Laws,''  xii.,  966).  So  Virgil, 
of  the  tenants  of  Elysium : 

"  Lo,  priests  of  holj  life  ftnd  ohsste  while  thej  in  life  had  part ; 
Iio,  god-loved  poets,  men  who  spake  things  worthy  Phoebus'  heart : 
And  thej  who  bettered  life  on  earth  bj  new-foond  masterj ; 
And  the/  whose  good  deeds  left  a  tale  for  men  to  name  them  bj : 
And  all  thej  had  their  brows  abont  with  snowj  flUets  bonnd." 

"janeid,"vi.,  661-665- 

The  same  shall  be  clothed  (o&ro9 irc/oi^oXeircu).  For o&ro9 
this,  or  the  same^  read  oirrto^  thus:  ^^ shall  thus  be  arrayed."  So 
Bev.  The  verb  denotes  a  solemn  investiture,  and  means  liter- 
ally to  throw  orj}tit  around. 

5.  Book  of  life.  Lit,  the  hook  of  the  Ufe.  For  the  figure, 
see  Exod.  xxxiL  32 ;  Ps.  Ixix.  28 ;  Dan.  xii  1 ;  Philip,  iv.  8. 
Compare  Lnke  x.  20 ;  Heb.  xii.  23. 

I  will  confess  {i^fioTioyiimfuu).  Openly  confess  {i^.  See 
on  Matt  xi.  25 ;  Acts  xix.  18 ;  Jas.  v.  16. 

7.  Philadelphia.  Seventy-five  miles  southeast  of  Sardis. 
Tlie  second  citj  in  Ljdia.  The  adjacent  region  was  celebrated 
as  a  wine-growing  district,  and  its  coins  bore  the  head  of  Bac- 
chus and  the  figure  of  a  Bacchante.  The  population  included 
Jews,  Jewish  Christians,  and  converts  from  heathenism.  It 
suffered  from  frequent  earthquakes.  Of  all  the  seven  churches 
it  had  the  longest  duration  of  prosperity  as  a  Christian  city.  It 
still  exists  as  a  Turkish  town  under  the  nanie  of  Allah  Shehr^ 
City  of  God.  The  situation  is  picturesque,  the  town  being  built 
on  four  or  five  hills,  and  well  supplied  with  trees,  and  the  clim- 
ate is  healthful.  One  of  the  mosques  is  believed  by  the  native 
Christians  to  have  been  the  gathering-place  of  the  church  ad- 
dressed in  the  Apocalypse.     ^^  One  solitary  pillar  of  high  an- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


464  WORD  STODIBS  Df  THB  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

tiqoitj  has  been  often  noticed  as  reminding  beholdOTS  of  the 
words  in  ch.  iii.  12 :  ^  Uim  that  overcometh  will  I  make  a 
pillar  in  the  temple  of  my  God.'  ^ 

He  that  is  holy  (o  iryuy;).  See  on  Acts  xxvi.lO.  Christie 
called  holy.  Acts  ii.  27 ;  xiii.  35 ;  Heb.  viL  26 ;  in  all  which 
passages  the  word,  however,  is  oaio^,  which  is  holj  bt/  sanctiofiy 
applied  to  one  who  diligently  observes  all  the  sanctities  of  re- 
ligion. It  is  appropriate  to  Christ,  therefore,  as  being  the  one 
in  whom  these  eternal  sanctities  are  grounded  and  reside. 
M7to9>  the  word  used  here,  refers  ratlier  to  separation  from 
evil. 

He  that  is  true  (o  aXi/S^i^).  See  on  John  i.  9.  ^AXf^tvo^ 
is  not  merely  genuine  as  contrasted  with  the  absolntely  false, 
bat  as  contrasted  with  that  which  is  only  snbordinately  or  typi- 
cally true.  It  expresses  the  j}erfect  realization  of  an  idea  as  con- 
trasted with  its  partial  realization.  Thas,  Moses  gave  bread,  but 
the  Father  giveth  the  true  bread  {top  aprov  rov  dXrfl^tvSv).  Isi*ael 
was  a  vine  of  God's  planting  (Ps.  Ixxx.  8),  Christ  is  the  true  (ij 
aXrjSivff)  vine  (John  xv.  1).  The  word  is  so  characteristic  of 
John  that,  while  found  only  once  in  the  Synoptic  Gospels,  once 
in  a  Pauline  Epistle,  and  four  times  in  the  Epistle  to  the  He- 
brews, it  occurs  nine  times  in  the  fourth  Gospel,  four  times  in 
John's  First  Epistle,  and  ten  times  in  the  Apocalypse,  and  in 
every  instance  in  these  three  latter  books  in  its  own  distinctive 
signification. 

The  key  of  David.  See  on  ch.  i.  18,  and  compare  Isa.  xxii. 
22.  David  is  the  type  of  Christ,  the  supreme  ruler  of  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.  See  Jer.  xxx.  9;  Ezek.  xxxiv.  28 ;  xxxvii. 
24.  The  house  of  David  is  the  typical  designation  of  the  king- 
dom of  Jesus  Christ  (Ps.  cxxii.  6),  The  holding  of  the  keys, 
the  symbols  of  power,  thus  belongs  to  Christ  as  Lord  of  the 
kingdom  and  Church  of  God.  See  on  Matt  xvi.  19 :  He  ad- 
mits and  excludes  at  His  pleasure. 

No  man  shutteth  (ouSei^  fcKeUi).  Bead  /eKela-ei  ehaU  shut. 
SoKev. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BEVELATION  OF  JOHN.  46& 

8.  I  have  set  {SiS^oiea).  lat^  /  have  given.  For  a  Bimilar 
phrase  see  Lnke  zii  51. 

An  open  door  {Bvpay  ivt^fAhnip).  Bev.,  more  literallj, 
a  door  opened.  This  is  variously  explained.  Some  refer  it  to 
the  entrance  into  the  joy  of  the  Lord ;  others  to  the  initiation 
into  the  meaning  of  scriptare ;  others  again  to  the  opportunity 
for  the  mission-work  of  the  Church.  In  this  last  sense  the 
phrase  is  often  used  by  Paul.  See  1  Cor.  xvi.  9 ;  2  Cor.  ii.  12 ; 
Col.  iv.  3.  Compare  Acts  xiv.  27.*  I  have  gvoen  is  appropri- 
ate, since  all  opportunities  of  service  are  gifts  of  God.  See  on 
ch.  ii.  7. 

For  thou  hast  {iri  ^€k).  Some  texts  make  hehold--ehui 
parenthetical,  and  render  St^  ihatj  defining  thy  worksj  etc.  So 
Rev. 

A  little  strength  (jAucpl^  Bvpofuv).  This  would  mean,  then 
bast  some  power,  though  small.  Many,  however,  omit  the  in- 
definite article  in  translating,  and  render  thou  hast  little  strength; 
ie.,  thou  art  poor  in  numbers  and  worldly  resources.  So  Al- 
ford.  Trench,  and  Dusterdieck. 

And  {fcaX),  John's  single  copula  instead  of  a  partido  of 
logical  connection.  See  on  John  i  10 ;  vL  46 ;  1  John  L  6  ; 
John  viiL  20.  ' 

Hast  kept  my  word  {iTiiprf<rd9  fwv  rhv  Xiyop).  Rev.,  ren- 
dering the  aorist  more  strictly,  didst  keep.  For  the  phrase,  see 
John  xvii.  6,  8. 

9.  I  will  make  (S^/u).  Roy.,  rightly,  I  give.  See  on  ver. 
8.    The  sense  is  broken  off  there  and  resumcKi  here. 

Of  the  synagogue  (iK  rtf:  trwaycoyrisi).  Certain  ones  of  the 
synagogue.    Most  interpreters  refer  to  the  Jews.     Others  ex- 


*  This  is  the  ezplaDitioxi  of  Trench,  Plamptre,  Diisterdieok,  tad  Alford, 
ftDd  seems,  on  the  whole,  to  be  the  prefenble  one.    Professor  Milligan  argues 
si  length  for  the  second  explanation,  which  is  Bongel's. 
Vol.  IL— 80 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


469  WOBD  STUBIBB  IN  THB  ITBW  TESTAMENT. 

plain  more  generally,  of  the  bowing  down  of  the  Church's  ene- 
mies at  her  feet.  Trench  refers  to  a  passage  in  the  Epistle  o£ 
Ignatius  to  this  Fhiladelphian  church,  implying  tlie  actual 
presence  m  the  midst  of  it  of  converts  from  Judaism^  who 
{)reached  the  faith  which  they  once  persecuted. 

Of  Satan.    See  on  ch.  iL  9. 

I  will  make  them  to  come  (iron^  ovro^  &a  ^foM-Ay). 
Lit,  I  will  make  them  that  they  shall  came. 

Worship  before  thy  feet.    Compare  Isa.  Ix.  14;  zlix.  28. 

>  10.  The  word  of  my  patience  (r^y  XoysvT^viro/bun^^iet;). 
^ot  the  words  which  Christ  has  spoken  concerning  patience,  but 
the  word  of  Christ  which  reqaires  patience  to  keep  it;  the 
gospel  which  teaches  the  need  of  a  patient  waiting  for  Christ. 
OnjHXtiencey  see  on  2  Pet.  i  6 ;  Jas.  v.  7. 

From  the  hour  {Ik).  The  preposition  implies,  not  a  keeping 
from  temptation,  but  a  keeping  in  temptation,  as  the  result  of 
which  they  shall  be  delivered  out  qfits  power.  Compare  John 
zvii.  15. 

Of  temptation  {roO  ireipaa-fiov).  lit.,  "of  Mtf  trial"  See 
on  Matt  vi.  13  ;  1  JPet  i  7.     Eev.,  trial. 

World  {oUovfiipfyi).    See  on  Luke  iL  L 

11.  Behold.    Omit 

That  no  one  take  thy  crown  (&a  p^UXdfiff  rovirri^avop 
<rov).  Take  it  away.  The  idea  is  not  that  of  one  believer 
stepping  into  the  place  which  was  designed  for  another,  but  of 
an  enemy  taking  away  from  another  the  reward  which  he  him- 
self has  forfeited.  The  expression  is  explained  by  Col.  ii.  18. 
It  is  related  by  Mahomet  that,  after  having  attempted,  in  vain, 
to  convert  one  Abdallah  to  the  faith,  and  having  been  told  by 
him  to  go  about  his  business  and  to  preach  only  to  those  who 
should  come  to  him — he  went,  downcast,  to  a  friend's  house. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


RBVBLATIOir  OF  JOBS.  467 

His  friend,  perceiving  that  he  was  sad,  asked  him  the  reason ; 
aind  on  being  toM  of  Abdatlah's  insnlt,  said,  ^^  Treat  him  gently ; 
for  I  swear  that  when  Qod  aeot  tiiee  to  ns,  we  had  already 
Strang  pearls  to  crown  him,  and  be  seeth  that  thoa  hast 
snatched  the  kingdom  out  of  his  grasp.'*  For  awony  see  on  ch» 
ii.  10.  Tky  crown  is  not  the  crown  whicb  thou  hcutj  but  the 
crown  which  thou  sAaU  hwoe  if  thon  shalt  prov^  futhf al. 

12.  Pillar  (<rrt5X4)v).  The  word  occurs,  Gal.  ii.  9 ;  1  Tim.  iii. 
16 ;  Apoc  X.  1.  The  reference  here  is  not  to  any  prominence 
in  the  earthly  chnrch,  as  Oal.  ii.  9,  bat  to  blessedness  in  the 
fatare  state.  The  exact  meaning  is  doubtfal.  Some  explain, 
hesAaUAa/veafix6dandimjport(ifUj>laceinthe  gl^ 
Compare  Matt  xix.  28.  Others  emphasize  the  idea  of  staibilitf^ 
and  find  a  possible  local  reference  to  the  frequent  earthquakes 
from  which  Philadelphia  had  suffered,  and  which  had  shaken 
its  temples.  Strabo  says :  ^^  And  Philadelphia  has  not  even  its 
walls  unimpaired,  but  daily  they  are  shaken  in  some  way,  and 
gaps  are  made  in  them.  But  the  inhabitants  continue  to  oc- 
cupy the  land  notwithstanding  their  sufferings,  and  to  build 
new  houses."  Others  again  emphasize  the  idea  of  hecmiy. 
Compare  1  Pet.  ii.  5,  where  the  saints  are  described  as  living 
itonea. 

Temple  (vo^)*    See  on  Matt  iv.  5. 

Upon  him.  I%e  conqueror^  not  the  piUar.  Compare  ch. 
vii.  3 ;  ix.  4 ;  xiv.  1 ;  xxii.  4.  Pi-obably  with  reference  to  the 
golden  plate  inscribed  with  the  name  of  Jehovah,  and  worn  by 
the  High-Priest  upon  his  forehead  (Exod.  xxviiL  36,  38).  See 
on  ch.  ii.  17. 

New  Jerusalem.  See  Ezek.  xlviii.  85«  The  believer  whose 
brow  is  adorned  with  this  name  has  the  freedom  of  the  heav- 
enly city.  Even  on  earth  h^  commonwealth  is  in  heaven 
(Phil.  iii.  20).  ^^ Still,  his  citizenship  was  latent:  he  was  one 
of  God's  hidden  ones ;  but  now  he  is  openly  avouched,  and  has 
a  right  to  enter  in  by  the  gates  to  the  city  ^  (Trench).  The 
city  is  called  by  John^  ihe  great  and  hoJy  (ch.  xxL  10) ;  by 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


468  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THH  NBW  TBBTAMENT. 

Matthew,  the  holy  cUy  (iv.  5) ;  by  Panl,  Jerusalem  which  i$ 
above  (Oal.  iv.  6) ;  by  the  writer  to  the  Hebrews,  the  city  of 
the  living  Ood^  the  heavenly  Jeruealem  (Heb.  xii  22).  Plato 
caUs  his  ideal  city  CaUipclie^  the  fair  cUy  ("Republic,"  vii,  527), 
and  the  name  Ouranopoliej  heavenly  city,  was  applied  to  Borne 
and  Byzantium.  For  new  (/r£ui%),  see  on  Matt  xxvi.  29.  The 
new  Jerusalem  is  not  a  city  freshly  built  (i^),  but  is  new  (/oui^) 
in  contrast  with  the  old,  outworn,  sinful  city.  In  the  Gospel 
John  habitually  uses  the  Oreek  and  civil  form  of  the  name, 
'l€poa'6\vfia;  in  the  Apocalypse,  the  Hebrew  and  more  holy 
appellation,  ^lepovcdKfffi.* 

14.  Of  the  Laodiceana  (AaoBudnov).  Bead  iv  AaoSucela  in 
Laodicea.  Laodicea  menus  ji^ice  of  the  j)eople.  As  Laodice 
was  a  common  name  among  the  ladies  of  the  royal  house  of  the 
Seleucidffi,  the  name  was  given  to  several  cities  in  Syria  and 
Asia  Minor.  The  one  here  addressed  was  on  the  confines  of 
Phrygia  and  Lydia,  about  forty  miles  east  of  Ephesus,  and  was 
known  as  Laodicea  on  the  Lycus.  It  had  borne  successively 
the  names  of  Diospolis  and  Bhoas,  and  was  named  Laodicea 
when  refounded  by  Antiochus  Theos,  b.o.  261-246.  It  was 
situated  on  a  group  of  hills  between  two  tributaries  of  the 
Lycus — the  Asopus  and  the  Caprus.  Towards  the  end  of  the 
Boman  Bepublic,  and  under  the  first  emperors,  it  became  one  of 
the  most  important  and  flourishing  cities  of  Asia  Minor.  One 
of  its  citizens,  Hiero,  bequeathed  all  his  enormous  property  to 
the  people,  and  adorned  the  city  with  costly  gifts.    It  was  the 

*  The  literature  of  hjmnologj  is  rwj  rioh  in  hjmns  depicting  the  glorj  ni 
the  heavenly  city.  In  Latin  there  are  Jeruiolem  luminoMf  which  reappears 
in  JertucUem  my  happy  home,  and  0  Mother  dear  J&ru$aiem:  Urt>$  beata  Je^ 
rtualem^  which  reappears  in  Bletted  eHy,  heavenly  Salem :  Urb$  Bion  Aurea^ 
in  Jenualem  (he  ffdden  and  Jeruealem  the  ghriaue.  Of  thia  0  bona  patria^ 
translated  in  To  thee^  0  dear,  dear  Country,  is  a  portion.  Also  Bernard's  Me 
reeeptet  8ion  iUa.  In  English  maj  be  noted,  besides  the  translations  just  re- 
ferred to,  Sweet  plaeej  eweet  place  alone;  Bear  tehat  Ood  the  Lord  hath  epoken  ; 
Jerusalem,  my  happy  home,  when  ^uxU  I  come  to  theef  In  German,  Mejfarfi 
Jeruealem  du  hoOigdMute  Stadt,  and  HiUer's  0  Jeruealem  du  Schdne.  Of  Mey- 
fart's  hjmn  there  are  two  English  translations,  one  bj  Miss  Winkworth,  J&' 
ruealem,  thou  city  fair  and  high,  and  the  other  bj  Bishop  Whittingham  of 
Maryland,  Jeruealem^  high  tower  thy  gterioue  walk. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BEVBLATION  OF  JOHN.  469 

seat  of  large  money  transactions  and  of  an  extensive  trade  in 
wood.  The  citizens  developed  a  taste  for  Greek  art,  and  were 
distinguished  in  science  and  literature.  Laodicea  was  the  seat 
of  a  great  medical  school.  During  the  Boman  period  it  was 
the  chief  city  of  a  Soman  conventtis  or  political  district,  in 
which  courts  were  held  by  the  proconsul  of  the  province,  and 
where  the  taxes  from  the  subordinate  towns  were  collected. 
Cicero  held  his  court  there,  and  many  of  his  letters  were  writ- 
ten thence.  The  conventus  represented  by  Laodicea  comprised 
not  less  than  twenty-five  towns,  and  inscriptions  refer  to  the 
city  as  "  the  metropolis.''  The  Greek  word  Sioitcrfcii;^  corre- 
sponding to  the  Latin  conventuSj  was  subsequently  applied  to 
an  ecclesiastical  district,  and  appears  in  diocese.  The  tutelary 
deity  of  the  city  was  Zeus  (Jupiter).  Hence  its  earlier  name, 
DiospoliSy  or  OUy  of  Zeus.  Many  of  its  inhabitants  were  Jews. 
It  was  subject  to  frequent  earthquakes,  which  eventually  re^ 
suited  in  its  abandonment  It  is  now  a  deserted  place,  but 
its  ruins  indicate  by  their  magnitude  its  former  importance. 
Among  these  are  a  racecourse,  and  three  theatres,  one  of  which 
is  four  hundred  and  fifty  feet  in  diameter.  An  important 
church  council  was  held  there  in  the  fourth  century. 

The  Amen.  Used  only  here  as  a  proper  name.  See  Isa. 
Ixv.  16,  where  the  correct  rendering  is  the  Ood  of  the  Amenj 
instead  of  A.  Y.  Ood  of  truth.  The  term  applied  to  the  Lord 
signifies  that  He  Himself  is  the  fulfilment  of  all  that  Gk>d  has 
spoken  to  the  churches. 

Faithful  (wA^rrw).  The  word  occurs  in  the  New  Testament 
in  two  senses :  trusty^  faithful  (Matt  xxiv.  45 ;  xxv.  21,  28 ; 
Luke  xii.  42) ;  and  ielievingj  confiding  (John  xx.  27 ;  Gal.  iii. 
9 ;  Acts  xvi.  1).    Of  GK>d,  necessarily  only  in  the  former  sense. 

True  (oXi^M^).  See  on  ver.  7.  The  veracity  of  Christ  is 
thus  asserted  in  the  word  fadthftdj  true  being  not  true  as  dis- 
tinguishedfromfalsej  but  true  to  the  normal  idea  of  a  witness. 

The  beginning  {fi  apx^.  The  legwiner^  or  author ;  not  as 
CoL  i  15,  thefa^  and  most  excellent  creature  of  Ood^s  hands. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


470  WORD  8TUDIB8  IN  THB  NHW  TBBTAMSNT. 

^^  The  stress  laid  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians  on  the  inferi- 
ority of  those  to  whom  the  self -same  name  of  ipxf^  beginningf^ 
princijxdiiiea  was  given  ...  to  the  One  who  was  the  true 
beginning,  or,  if  we  might  Tentnre  on  an  unfamiliar  use  of  a 
familiar  word,  the  true  Prifunpaliiy  of  Ood's  creation,  may 
account  for  the  prominence  which  the  name  had  gained,  and 
therefore  for  its  use  here  in  a  message  addressed  to  a  church 
exposed,  like  that  of  Colosssd,  to  the  risks  of  angelolatrj,  of 
tlie  substitution  of  lower  principalities  and  created  mediators 
fur  Him  who  was  the  Head  over  all  things  to  His  Church** 
(Plumptre).    Compare  Heb.  xiL  2,  Apxtyoy  leader. 

15.  Cold  i'^^fxpo^).  Attached  to  the  world  and  actively  op- 
posed to  the  Church.  ^^  This,"  as  Alford  remarks,  ^^as  well  aa 
the  opposite  state  of  spiritual  fervor,  would  be  an  intelligible 
and  plainly-marked  condition ;  at  all  events  free  from  the  dan- 
ger of  mixed  motive  and  disregarded  principle  which  belonga 
to  the  lukewarm  state :  inasmuch  as  a  man  in  earnest,  be  he 
right  or  wrong,  is  ever  a  better  man  than  one  professing  what 
he  does  not  feel." 

Hot  ((coT^).  From  l^im  to  bail  or  seethe.  See  on  feroetd^ 
Acts  zviiL  25. 

16.  Lukewarm  (^Xuip^)*  Only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment 

Foremost  and  roost  numerous  among  the  lost,  Dante  places 
those  who  had  been  content  to  remain  neutral  in  the  great  con« 
test  between  good  and  evil. 

*«  Master,  wliai  Is  this  which  now  I  hesr  f 
What  f oUc  is  this,  which  seems  bj  pain  so  vanqnished  f  " 
And  he  to  me :  *'  This  miserable  mode 
Maintain  the  melancholy  sonls  of  those 
Who  lived  withoaten  infamy  or  praise. 
Oommingled  are  thej  with  that  caitiff  choir 
Of  angels,  who  have  not  rebellions  been, 
Kor  faithful  were  to  God,  bat  were  for  sell 
The  heavens  expelled  them,  not  to  be  less  fair ; 
Kor  them  the  nethermore  abjras  recelTes, 
For  glory  none  the  damned  would  have  from  them." 

"  Inferno,"  iU.,88-4a. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BKVBLATIOV  OF  JOHV.  471 

I  will  (jiiXXn).  Jam  ahovi  or  hatoe  in  mind.  Not  a  decUv- 
ation  of  immediate  and  inexorable  doom,  bat  imj^ying  a  poa- 
sibilitj  of  the  determination  being  changed. 

Spue  {iiUcai).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament  Oobi- 
pare  Lev.  xviii.  28 ;  zx.  22. 

17.  Because  thou  aayest.    Connect,  as  A.  Y.  and  Ber^ 

with  what  follows,  not  with  what  precedes.    Some  interpret 
/ii^  ^tid  Me0  c>t4  ^iny  9n<n^  &0oatM0  Mou  «ayM^  eto^ 

Increased  with  goods  (irerXotm^mi).  Bev.,  haoe  goUm 
riches.  The  reference  is  to  imagined  spiritttal  richeSi  not  U^ 
worldly  possessions. 

Thou.    Emphatic 

Wretched  (o  raKoUirnpo^).  Sey.,  better,  giving  the  force  ojf 
the  article,  the  vrretohed  one.  From  rXoca  to  endfu/re^  and  ire^pi 
atrial. 

Miserable  (^Xetfii^).  Only  here  and  1  Oor.  xv.  19.  Anob^* 
ject  oijpUy  {SKiosi). 

Poor  (irrwx^).    See  on  Matt  t.  8. 

18.  I  counsel  {<rvfil3cvKevm).  With  a  certain  irony.  Though 
He  might  command,  yet  He  advises  those  who  are,  in  their 
own  estimation,  supplied  with  everything. 

To  buy.  Compare  Isa.  Iv.  1 ;  Matt  xiii.  44, 46.  Those  whd 
think  themselves  rich,  and  yet  have  just  been  called  heggare  by 
the  Lord,  are  advised  by  Him  to  buy.  The  irony,  howeverv 
covers  a  sincere  and  gradous  invitation.  The  goods  of  Christ 
are  freely  given,  yet  they  have  their  price— renunciation  of  self 
and  of  the  world. 

Gold  ixpvtrtop).  Often  of  gold  manm/  or  ornaments.  So  % 
PetLlS;  Actsiii.  6;  iPetiii.  8.  Also  of  no^iw  gold  and 
gold  which  has  been  smelted  ^d  wrought  (Heb.  ix.  4).    Them 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


47S  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

may  very  properly  be  a  reference  to  the  extensive  money  trans- 
•actiona  of  Laodicea. 

Tried  in  the  fire  {irenvpoifihop  ite  nvphs).  The  verb  means 
4o  hurtij  to  he  an  fire:  in  die  perfect  passive,  as  here,  kindledy 
made  to  glow;  thence  melted  hy  fire,  and  so  refi/ned.  Bev^  re- 
finad  hyfire.  By&reiB,  literally,  otU  of  the  fire  {ix;  see  on 
-ch.  iL  7). 

White  raiment.    Bev.,  garmenta.    See  on  ver.  4. 

Mayest  be  clothed  (ireptfi^Kfi).  Bev^  more  literally,  iTuiy- 
^eet  dothe  ihysdf.     See  on  ver.  5. 

Do  not  appear  (^^  <f)av€p<»Sff).  Rev.,  more  literally,  he  not 
made  manifest.  See  on  Jolin  xxi.  1.  Stripping  and  exposure 
is  a  frequent  method  of  putting  to  open  shame.  See  2  Sam.  x. 
4 ;  Isa.  XX.  4 ;  xlvii.  23  ;  Ezek.  xvL  37.  Compare  also  Matt. 
:xxiL  11-13;  CJol.  iii.  10-14. 

Anoint  thine  eyes  with  eye-aalve  {tcoXKoipunf  hfxpurw 
ToiK  wf^BoKfLov^  cov).  The  correct  reading  is  SyxpiatUy  the  in- 
finitive, to  anointy  instead  of  the  imperative.  So  Rev.,  eye-9alve 
to  anoint  thine  eyes.  KoXKovp$oy,  of  which  the  Latin  ooUyriutn 
is  a  transcript,  is  a  diminutive  of  xoXXvpa  a  roll  of  ooarse  hread. 
|3ee  1  Kings  xiv.  3,  Sept ;  A.  Y.,  cracknels.  Here  applied  to 
a  roll  or  stick  of  ointment  for  the  eyes.  Horace,  describing  his 
JBmndisian  journey,  relates  how,  at  one  point,  he  was  troubled 
with  inflamed  eyes,  and  anointed  them  with  black  eye-salve 
{nigra  ooUyria.  Sat,  i.,  v.,  30).  Juvenal,  describing  a  super- 
stitious woman,  says :  **  If  the  comer  of  her  eye  itches  when 
rubbed,  she  consults  her  horoscope  before  calling  for  saloe^ 
{eoUyria;  vi.,  577).  The  figure  sets  forth  the  spiritual  anoint- 
ing by  which  the  spiritual  vision  is  purged.  Compare  Angus- 
tine,  "  Confessions,  vii.,  7,  8.  "  Through  my  own  swelling  was 
I  separated  from  Thee ;  yea,  my  pride-swollen  face  closed  np 
mine  eyes.  ...  It  was  pleasing  in  Thy  sight  to  reform  my 
deformities;  and  by  inward  goads  didst  Thou  rouse  me«  that  I 
should  be  ill  at  ease  until  Thou  wert  manifested  to  my  inward 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


RBVBLATIOH  OF  JOHN.  478 

sight  Thus,  by  the  secret  hand  of  Thy  medicming,  was  mj 
swelling  abated,  and  the  troubled  and  bedimmed  eyesight  of 
my  mind,  by  the  smarting  anointings  of  healthful  sorrows,  was 
from  day  to  day  healed."    Compare  1  John  iL  20,  27. 

19.  As  many  as  I  love.  In  the  Greek  order  /  stands  first 
as  emphatic. 

Rebuke  {iKeyxpo).    See  on  John  iii.  20.    Rev.,  reprove. 

Chasten  (inuSeuo)).    See  on  Luke  xxiii.  16. 

Be  zealous  ((i^Xeve).  The  verb  is  akin  to  (effT6^  hot  in  ver. 
16,  on  which  see  note. 

Repent.    See  on  Matt  iii  2 ;  xxi.  29. 

20.  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock.  Compare  Cant  v.  2. 
Kpow»  I  knock  was  regarded  as  a  less  classical  word  than  Koirra^. 
Kpov€j  is  to  knock  vnth  the  hnuchUe^  to  rap;  Kiirrf»^  with  a 
heavy  blow;  y^v^Jv  of  the  knocking  of  some  one  within  the  door, 
warning  one  without  to  withdraw  when  the  door  is  opened. 
Compare  Jas.  ▼.  9.  ^^  He  at  whose  door  we  ought  to  stand  (for 
He  is  the  Door,  who,  as  such,  has  bidden  us  to  knock),  is  con- 
tent that  the  whole  relation  between  Him  and  us  should  be 
reversed,  and,  instead  of  our  standing  at  His  door,  condescends 
Himself  to  stand  at  ours ''  (Trench).  The  Oreeks  had  a  word 
SvpauXeiv  for  a  lover  waiting  at  the  door  of  his  beloved.  Trench 
cites  a  passage  from  Nicolaus  Cabasilas,  a  Greek  divine  of  the 
fourteenth  century :  "Love  for  men  emptied Ood  (Philip,  ii.  7). 
For  He  doth  not  abide  in  His  place  and  summon  to  Himself  the 
servant  whom  He  loved ;  but  goes  Himself  and  seeks  him ;  and 
He  who  is  rich  comes  to  the  dwelling  of  the  poor,  and  discloses 
His  love,  and  seeks  an  equal  return ;  nor  does  He  withdraw 
from  him  who  repels  Him,  nor  is  He  disgusted  at  his  insolence ; 
but,  pursuing  him,  remains  sitting  at  his  doors,  and  that  He 
may  show  him  the  one  who  loves  him,  He  does  all  things,  and 
sorrowing,  bears  and  dies." 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


474  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NSW  TESTAMBNT. 

My  voice.  Christ  not  only  knocks  bat  speaks.  '^  The  Toioe 
very  often  will  interpret  and  make  intelligible  the  purpose  of 
the  knock ''(Trench). 

Hear — open  the  door.    No  irresistible  grace. 

Will  sup  {Seinvija'ai).  See  on  Luke  xiv.  12.  For  the  image» 
compare  Cant.  v.  2-6 ;  iv.  16 ;  ii.  8.  Christ  is  the  Bread  of 
Life,  and  invites  to  the  great  feast  See  Matt  viii.  11 ;  xxv. 
1  sqq.  The  consummation  will  be  at  the  marriage-sapper  of 
the  Lamb  (Mark  xiv.  26 ;  Apoc.  xix.  7-9). 

He  with  me.  It  is  characteristic  of  John  to  note  the  say- 
ings of  Christ  which  express  the  reciprocal  relations  of  Himself 
and  His  followers.  See  John  vi.  66  ;  x.  88 ;  xiv.  20  ;•  xv.  4,  6; 
xviL  21,  26.     Compare  John  xiv.  28. 

21.  He  that  overcometh.    See  on  ch.  iL  7. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Thb  Bevelation  proper  now  b^ns. 

1.  After  this  (/mt^  raShd).  Bev.,  literally,  after  the$e  things. 
Not  indicating  a  break  in  the  ecstatic  state  of  the  seer,  but  only 
a  succession  of  separate  visions. 

I  looked  (cZSoy).  Sev.,  better,  I  saw.  Not  of  the  direcUng 
ofaUentionj  but  of  the  simple  reception  of  the  vision. 

A  door  was  opened  {^6pa  Apetpyfieinf).  Rev.,  rightly,  omits 
was.  A  door  set  open.  The  A.  V.  implies  that  the  seer  wit- 
nessed the  opening  of  the  door. 

In  Heaven.  Compare  Ecek.  i.  1 ;  Matt.  iiL  16 ;  Acts  viL 
86 ;  X.  11.    In  all  these  heaven  itself  is  opened. 

Was.    Omit    Bender,  as  Bev.,  ^^a  voice  as  of  a  trumpet" 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BSVSLATION  OF  JOHN.  475 

A  trumpet  {adkinrffoq).  See  on  Matt.  zxiv.  81.  Froperljr 
a  war-trumpety  thoagh  the  word  was  also  need  of  a  sacred 
trampet,  with  the  epithet  Upd  sacred. 

Speaking — saying  (XaXovoi;? — Xiyovaa).  See  on  Matt 
xxviiL  18.  The  former  verb  indicates  the  breaking  of  the! 
silence,  the  latter  the  matter  of  the  address. 

Hereafter  (/mt^  ravra).  Some  editors  connect  these  words 
with  the  succeeding  verse,  substituting  them  for  teal  and  at 
the  beginning  of  that  verse,  and  rendering,  ^^  I  will  show  thee 
the  things  wliich  must  come  to  pass.  After  these  things  straight- 
way I  was,"  etc 

2.  I  was  in  the  Spirit  (iyevSfM/tpf  h  wvevfunC).  Strictly,  / 
became:  I  found  myself  in.  Appropriate  to  the  sudden  and 
unconscious  transportation  of  the  seer  into  the  ecstatic  state, 
l^us  Dante  describes  his  unconscious  rapture  into  Paradise : 

*'  And  faddenlj  it  teemed  that  dsj  to  dsj 
Was  added,  as  if  He  who  had  the  power 
Had  with  another  son  the  heaven  adorned.** 

Beatrice,  noting  his  amazement,  says : 

**  Thon  makest  thjself  so  dnU 
With  false  imagining,  that  thoa  seest  not 
What  thon  wooldst  see  if  thon  hadsfc  shaken  it  oft  ,  i 

Thon  art  not  npon  earth  as  thoa  helievest ; 
Bat  lightning,  fleeing  its  appropriate  site. 
Ne'er  ran  as  thoa,  who  thitherward  retamest.** 

«*Pandiso^''L,«0-M. 

A  throne.    See  Ezek.  L  26-28. 

Was  set  {i/ce$ro).  Denoting  merely  jpositicnj  not  that  the 
seer  saw  the  placing  of  the  throne.    Compare  John  ii  6. 

One  sitting.  He  is  called  henceforward  throughout  the 
book  Se  that  sitteth  on  the  throne^  and  is  distinguished  from  the 
Son  in  ch.  vL  16 ;  TiL  10,  and  from  the  Holy  Spirit  in  ver.  & 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


476  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  HEW  TESTAMENT. 

He  ifl  commonly  understood  to  be  God  the  Father ;  but  some 
uiderstand  the  triune  Gk>d.* 

8.  Jasper  stone.  The  last  of  the  twelve  stones  in  the  HJgh- 
Priest's  breastplate  (Exod.  xxviiL  20 ;  xxxix.  13),  and  the  first 
of  the  twelve  enumerated  in  the  foundation  of  the  New  Je- 
rusalem (Apoc.  xxi.  19).  Also  the  stone  employed  in  the  super- 
Btructare  of  the  wall  of  the  Heavenly  City  (ch.  xxi.  18).  The 
Btone  itself  was  of  different  colors,  the  best  being  purple.  Ac- 
cording to  ch.  XXL  11,  it  represents  a  crystalline  brightness. 

Sardine.  Bev.,  Sardius.  The  sixth  foundation-stone  o£ 
the  Heavenly  Jerusalem  in  ch.  xxi.  20.  A  red  stone,  supposed 
to  answer  to  our  cornelian.  Pliny  derives  its  name  from  Sardis 
where  it  was  discovered.  Others  from  the  Persian  sered,  yd- 
hwiah  red.  The  exact  meaning  of  the  symbolism  must  remain 
uncertain,  owing  to  our  ignorance  of  the  precise  meaning  of 
'^  jasper,"  a  name  which  seems  to  have  covered  a  variety  of 
stones  now  known  under  other  classifications.  Some  interpret- 
ers, assuming  the  jasper  to  be  sparkling  white,  find  in  it  a  rep- 
resentation of  the  holiness  of  God,  and  in  the  fiery  sardius  a 
representation  of  His  wrath. 

Rainbow  (Ip^).  Only  here  and  ch.  x.  1.  The  word  is 
identical,  and  seems  to  have  had  some  original  connection  with 
Iris,  the  deity  known  as  the  messenger-goddess  of  Olympus. 
In  Homer  the  word  is  used  in  both  senses. 

*'  And  if  thou  wiahest  now  to  uk  of  me, 
No  dream  I  am,  bat  level j  and  diTine : 
Whereof  let  this  be  onto  thee  a  aign, 
That  when  then  wak'st,  the  manj-oolored  bow 
AcroBB  the  world  the  morning  Bnn  shall  throw. 
But  me  indeed  thine  ejes  shall  not  behold. 
Then  he,  awaking  in  the  morning  oold, 
A  sprinkle  of  fine  rain  felt  on  his  face, 
And  leaping  to  his  feet,  in  that  wild  place, 

*  So  Professor  Milligan,  who  thinks  that  the  whole  scene  is  founded  on 
Isa.  yi.,  which,  he  remarks,  is  alwajs  jnstlj  regarded  as  one  of  the  greatest 
Adombrations  of  the  Trinitj  contained  in  the  Old  Testament 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


REVELATION  OP  JOHK.  477 

Looked  round,  tad  law  the  morning  sunllghi  throw 
AoroBB  the  world  the  manj-oolored  bow ; 
And  trembling  knew  that  the  high  gods  indeed 
Had  lent  the  messenger  nnto  their  need." 

William  Morris,  "Jason,"  zi.,  19O-900. 

In  classical  Oreek  the  word  is  used  of  any  bright  halo  snr* 
ronnding  another  body ;  of  the  circle  round  the  ejos  of  a  pea- 
cock's tail,  and  of  the  ins  of  the  eye. 

**  And  I  beheld  the  flamelets  onward  go, 
Leayiog  behind  themselves  the  air  depicted, 
And  thej  of  trailing  pennons  had  the  semblanosv 
80  that  it  overhead  remained  distinct 
With  sevenfold  lists,  all  of  them  of  the  oolors 
Whence  the  son's  bow  is  made,  and  Delia's  girdle.**  * 

Dante,  '*Pargatorio,"  zxix.,  78-78. 

*'  Within  the  deep  and  lominons  snbsistenoe 
Of  the  High  Light  appeared  to  me  three  oiroleit 
Of  threefold  color  and  of  one  dimension. 
And  hj  the  second  seemed  the  first  reflected 
As  Iris  is  bj  Iris,  and  the  third 
Seemed  fire  that  equally  from  both  is  breathed." 

"  Paradise,-  xxxiil,  115-190. 

On  this  passage,  which  belongs  to  the  description  of  Dante's 
vision  of  the  Eternal  Trinity,  Dean  Plamptre  remarks:  ^^One 
notes,  not  without  satisfaction,  that  Dante  shrinks  from  the 
anthropomorphism  of  Byzantine  and  early  Western  art,  in 
which  the  Ancient  of  Days  was  represented  in  the  form  of 
venerable  age.  For  him,  as  for  the  more  primitive  artists,  tlie, 
rainbow  reflecting  rainbow  is  the  only  adequate  symbol  of 
the  "  God  of  Gk)d,  Light  of  Light '^  of  the  Nicene  Creed,  while 
the  fire  of  love  that  breathes  from  both  is  that  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  "  proceeding  from  the  Father  and  the  Son.** 

Round  about  the  throne.    Compare  Ezek.  i.  26,  28. 

Ennerald  {c/Mpaf^uf^),     The  stone  is  first  mentioned  by 
Herodotus,  who  describes  a  temple  of  Hercules  which  he  visited 

.  *Le,t  the  halo  ronnd  the  moon. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


178  WOBD  8TUDIBS  Bf  THB  KBW  TKTAMERT. 

at  Tjre.  He  says :  ^  I  f oand  it  richly  adorned  with  a  nnmher 
of  offerings,  among  which  were  two  pillars,  one  of  pore  gold, 
the  other  of  emerald  {afAopir^ficv  X^Sov),  shining  with»great 
brHIiancy  at  night"  (iLy44).  Also  in  his  story  of  Polycrates  of 
Samoa,  the  signet-ring  which  Polycrates  cast  into  the  sea,  was 
an  emerald  set  in  gold  (iii.,  41).  It  is  claimed,  however,  that 
tiie  real  emerald  was  unknown  to  the  ancients.  Rawlinson 
thinks  that  the  pillar  in  the  Tyrian  temple  was  of  glass.  The 
bow  was  not  wanting  in  the  other  colors,  but  the  emerald  was 
predominant. 

4.  Throne  {^pivov).  A  eeat  or  chair.  In  Homer,  an  arm- 
chair with  high  back  and  footstooL  Cushions  were  laid  upon 
the  seat,  and  over  both  seat  and  back  carpets  were  spread.  A 
royal  throne.  Used  of  the  oracular  seat  of  the  priestess  of 
Apollo.  Apollo,  in  the  ^^ Eamenides ''  of  ^schylos,  says: 
<<  Never,  when  InsX  in  the  diviner^s  seat  {juxmucoiaip  iv  ^povov:) 
did  I  speak  anght  else  than  Zens  the  father  of  the  Olympians 
bade  me"  (616-618).  Plato  uses  it  of  a  teacher^s  seat,  '^  I  saw 
Hippias  the  Elean  sitting  in  the  opposite  portico  in  a  chair 
{(hS^pSvf).  Others  were  seated  round  him  on  benches  (Arl 
/3aSp»py^  questioning  him,  ^'and  he  ex  cathedrd  (ip  ^p6vff 
KaSiiftevo^,  lit.,  sitting  in  the  chair)  was  determining  their 
several  questions  to  them,  and  discoursing  of  them "  (^'  Pro- 
tagoras," 315).  Also  used  of  ajvdg^s  bench,  and  a  bishqp^s  seat. 

Seats  {^povoC).  Bev.,  rightly,  thrones.  The  word  is  the 
same  as  the  last. 

I  saw.    Omit 

Elders  {'irpeafivripov^).  See  on  Acts  xiv.  23.  The  twenty- 
four  elders  are  usually  taken  to  represent  the  one  Church  of 
Christ,  as  at  once  the  Church  of  the  old  and  of  the  new  Cove- 
nant, figured  by  the  twelve  patriarchs  and  the  twelve  apostles. 

**  Then  saw  I  people,  as  behind  their  leaden, 
Coming  behind  them,  garmented  in  white, 
And  Buoh  a  whiteness  never  was  on  earth. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


RBYELATION  OF  JOHN.  479 

Under  so  fair  a  heaven  as  I  deseribe 
The  f onr  and  twentj-eiders,  two  bj  two, 
Came  on  incoronate  with  flower-de-lnoe.** 

Bante,  '<  Purgatorio,"  ttjt.,  64-64. 

Clothed  {mp^fiefiXof/jthfov^).  Bev.,  arrayed.  Better,  as  in- 
dicating a  more  solemn  investiture.    See  on  ch.  iii.  5. 

They  had.    Omit 

Crowns  (<rre^ayou9).  See  on  1  Pet  v.  4 ;  Jas.  i.  12.  XrlJHJom^ 
with  the  epithet  golden  is  fonnd  only  in  the  Apocalypse.  Oom- 
pare  ch.  ix.  7 ;  xiv.  14.  The  natural  inference  from  this  epithet 
and  from  the  fact  that  the  symbolism  of  the  Apocalypse  is  He- 
brew, and  that  the  Jews  had  the  greatest  detestation  of  the 
Oreek  games,  would  be  that  <rr^^avo9  is  here  used  of  the  royal 
crown,  especially  since  the  Church  is  here  represented  as  tri- 
umphant— a  kingdom  and  priests.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the 
three  passages  of  the  Apocalypse  where  John  evidently  refers 
to  the  kingly  crown,  he  uses  SuSSrifia  (ch.  xii.  3 ;  xiii.  1 ;  com- 
pare xvii.  9, 10  ;  xix.  12).  Trench  ("  Synonyms  of  the  New 
Testament")  claims  that  the  crown  in  this  passage  is  the  crown, 
not  of  kinghood,  but  of  glory  and  immortality.  The  golden 
crown  {ari<l>avos:)  of  the  Son  of  Man  (ch.  xiv.  14)  is  the  con- 
queror's crown. 

It  must  be  frankly  admitted,  however,  that  the  somewhat 
doubtful  meaning  here,  and  such  passages  of  the  Septuagint  as 
2  Sam.  xii.  30 ;  1  Chron.  xx.  2 ;  Ps.  xx.  3 ;  Ezek.  xxi.  26 ;  Zech. 
vi.  11, 14,  give  some  warrant  for  the  remark  of  Professor  Thayer 
(« l^ew  Testament  Lexicon ")  that  it  is  doubtful  whether  the 
distinction  between  ari^uuH^  and  BuiSfffia  (the  victor's  wreatl^ 
and  the  kingly  crown)  was  strictly  observed  in  Hellenistic  Greet 
The  crown  of  thorns  {<n'i^)aifo^)  placed  on  our  Lord's  head,  was 
indeed  woven^  but  it  was  the  caricature  of  a  royal  crown. 

5.  Proceeded  (^/inro/)€iWrai).  'Rev.y proceed.  The  tense  is 
graphically  changed  to  the  present 

Lightnings  and  thunderings  and  voices.  Compare  Exod. 
xix.  16.    Variously  interpreted  of  God's  might.  His  judgment^ 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


480  WOBD  BTUDDRB  DT  THB  HBW  TB8TAMENT. 

His  payMT  aver  naturej  and  His  indignation  against   the 
wicked. 

Lamps  (KofivtrdSi^).  The  origin  of  oar  lamp^  bat,  properij, 
a  torch;  the  word  for  lamp  being  Xvxjifa^,  a  hand-lamp  filled 
with  oil  (Matt.  v.  15 ;  Luke  viiL  16  ;  John  v.  35).  See  on  Matt 
xxT.  1.  Trench  sajs :  ^^  The  true  Hindoo  waj  of  lighting  ap«  is 
bjr  torches,  held  by  men  who  feed  tlie  flame  with  oil  from  a  sort 
of  bottle  constructed  for  the  purpose.'' 

Seven  Spirits  of  God.    See  on  ch.  i.  4. 

6.  Of  glass  {vaXivri).  Bev.,  glassy^  which  describes  the 
apjtearanoe  not  the  material.  The  adjective,  and  the  kindred 
noun  £aVo9  glass  occur  only  in  the  Apocalypse.  The  etymology 
is  uncertain ;  some  maintaining  an  Egyptian  origin,  and  others 
referring  it  to  the  Greek  iw  to  rain,  with  the  original  significa- 
tion of  rain-^rap.  Originally,  some  kind  of  clear,  transparent 
stone.  Herodotus  says  that  the  Ethiopians  place  their  dead 
bodies  ^4n  a  crystal  pillar  which  has  been  hollowed  out  to  receive 
them,  crystal  being  dug  up  in  great  abundance  in  their  country, 
and  of  a  kind  very  easy  to  work.  You  may  see  the  corpse 
through  the  pillar  within  which  it  lies ;  and  it  neither  gives  out 
any  unpleasant  odor,  nor  is  it  in  any  respect  unseemly:  yet 
there  is  no  part  that  is  not  as  plainly  visible  as  if  the  body  were 
bare"  (iii.,  24).  Glass  is  known  to  have  been  made  in  Egypt 
at  least  3,800  years  ago.  The  monuments  show  that  the 
same  glass  bottles  were  used  then  as  in  later  times ;  and  glass- 
blowing  is  represented  in  the  paintings  in  the  tombs.  The 
Egyptians  possessed  the  art  of  coloring  it,  and  of  introducing 
gold  between  two  layers  of  glass.  The  ruins  of  glass-furnaces 
are  still  to  be  seen  at  the  Natron  Lakes.  The  glass  of  Egypt 
was  long  famous.  It  was  much  used  at  Some  for  ornamental 
purposes,  and  a  glass  window  has  been  discovered  at  Pompeii. 
Pliny  speaks  of  glass  being  malleable. 

Crystal.  Compare  Ezek.  i.  22 ;  Job  xxxvii.  18 ;  Exod.  xxiv. 
10.  The  word  is  used  in  classical  Greek  for  ice.  Thucydides, 
describing  the  attempt  of  the  Platseans  to  break  out  from  their 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BEVJSLATION  OF  JOHN.  481 

oitj  when  besi^ed  bj  the  Peloponnesians  and  Boeotians,  relates 
their  climbing  over  the  wall  and  crossing  the  ditch,  bat  oulj 
after  a  hard  struggle ;  ^^  for  the  toe  (icpiaTdXXo^)  in  it  was  not 
frozen  hard  enough  to  bear"  (iii.,  S3).  Crystal,  regarded  as  a 
mineral,  was  originallj  held  to  be  only  pure  water  congealed, 
bj  great  length  of  time,  into  ice  harder  than  common.  Hence 
it  was  believed  that  it  could  be  produced  oulj  in  regions  of  per- 
petual ice. 

In  the  midst  of— round  about.  Commoi^lj  explained  as 
one  in  the  midst  of  each  of  the  four  sides  of  the  throne.  ^^  At 
the  extremities  of  two  diameters  passing  through  the  centre  of 
the  round  throne  "  (Milligan). 

Beasts  (i&a)'  Bev.,  living  oreatttres.  Alford  aptlj  remarks 
that  beasts  is  the  most  unfortunate  word  that  could  be  imagined. 
£e(Z8t  is  Sffpiov.  Z&ov  emphasizes  the  vital  dement^  Srfpiop  the 
bestial. 

Full  of  eyes  before  and  behind.  The  four  living  beings 
are  mainlj  identical  with  the  cherubim  of  Ezek.  i.  5-10 ;  x.  5- 
SO ;  Isa.  vi.  3,  3 ;  though  with  some  differences  of  detail.  For 
instance,  EzekiePs  cherubim  have  four  wings,  while  the  six 
described  here  belong  to  the  seraphim  of  Isaiah.  So  also  the 
Thieagion  {thrice  hdy)  is  from  Isaiah.  In  EzekiePs  vision 
each  living  being  has  all  four  faces,  whereas  here,  each  of  the 
four  has  one. 

**  There  came  oloee  tfter  fhem  four  animala, 
Inooronate  each  one  with  verdant  leaf, 
Plomed  with  six  wings  was  everjr  one  of  thein« 
The  plumage  full  of  eyes;  the  eyes  of  Argns 
If  thejr  were  living  wonld  he  such  as  these. 
Beader  1  to  trace  their  forms  no  more  I  waste 
My  rhymes ;  for  other  spendings  press  me  so. 
That  I  in  this  cannot  he  prodigaL 
But  read  Esekiel  who  depioteth  them 
As  he  heheld  them  from  the  region  oold 
Coming  with  cloud,  with  whirlwind,  and  with  fire ; 
And  such  as  thou  shalt  find  them  in  his  pages, 
Such  were  they  here ;  saving  that  in  their  plumage 
John  is  with  me,  and  differeth  from  him.** 

Dante,  **  Purgatorio,"  ttIt.,  Od-lOS. 
Vol.  H— 81 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


482  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

7.  Lion,  calf,  man,  eagle.  From  this  passage  is  derived 
the  familiar  symbolism  of  the  four  Evangelists ;  Mark  seated 
on  a  lion,  Lake  on  a  steer,  Matthew  on  a  man,  and  John  on  an 
eagle.  These  are  varied  however.  Irensus  attributes  the  lion 
to  John,  and  the  eagle  to  Mark.  Aogostine  the  lion  to  Mat- 
thew, the  man  to  Mark. 

Lion.    See  on  1  Pet.  v.  8. 

Calf  OMtrxv)-  Compare  Lake  xv.  23.  In  the  Septaagint  for 
an  ox  or  steer.    £xod.  xxii.  1 ;  Ezek.  i.  10. 

Eagle  (oer^).     See  on  Matt  xxiv.  28.    . 

8.  Had  (elxov)'  The  best  texts  read  Sxiop  having^  the  parti- 
ciple in  the  singular  number  agreeing  with  each  one. 

Each  of  them  (&  fccjy  iavrb).  Lit,  one  hy  himedf.  The 
best  texts  read  hf  koS  tv  one  by  one  or  every  one.  Compare 
Mark  xiv.  19. 

Six  wings.  Compare  lea.  vi.  2.  Dante  pictures  his  Lucifer, 
who  is  the  incarnation  of  demoniac  animalism,  with  three  heads 
and  six  wings. 

'*  Uudemeatli  each  came  forth  two  might j  wings, 
Saoh  as  bofitting  were  W}  great  a  bird  ; 
Sails  of  the  sea  I  nerer  saw  so  large. 
Ko  feathers  had  thej,  but  as  of  a  bat 
Their  fashion  was ;  and  he  was  waving  them, 
8o  that  three  winds  proceeded  forth  therefrom. 
Thereby  CSocjtns  whoUy  was  congealed." 

**  Infomo,»'  xndT.,  46-^3. 

Dean  Plumptre  remarks  that  the  six  wings  seem  the  only 
survival  of  the  higher  than  angelic  state  from  which  Lucifer 
had  fallen. 

About  him  {kvkK6^\  The  best  texts  place  the  comma 
after  S^  six  instead  of  after  KvtcKdBep  around,  and  connect  tcv- 
K\j6deif  with  the  succeeding  clause,  rendering,  are  full  of  eyes 
round  about  and  withvn.    So  Eev.  * 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BBVELATION  OF  JOHN.  483 

They  were  full  (yifiovTa).     Bead  yifiova-^v  arefuU, 

Round  about  and  within.  Around  and  inside  each  wing, 
and  on  tlie  part  of  the  body  beneath  it. 

They  rest  not  {avdirawTiv  ov/e  Ix^^vciv).  Lit.,  they  h(we  no 
rest.  So  Eev.  See  on  gwe  resty  Matt.  xi.  28 ;  and  reeteth,  1 
Pet.  iv.  14. 

Holyt  etc  Compare  Isa.  vi.  3,  which  is  the  original  of  the 
formula  known  as  the  Trisagiofi  (thrice  holy),  used  in  the  an- 
cient litnrgies.  In  the  Apostolic  Constitutions  it  runs :  ^^  Holy, 
holy,  holy  Lord  God  of  Hosts  1  Heaven  and  earth  are  full  of 
Thy  glory,  who  art  blessed  forever.  Amen."  Afterwards  it  was 
sung  in  the  form  "  Holy  Gk)d,  holy  Mighty,  holy  Immortal, 
have  mercy  upon  us."  So  in  the  Alexandrian  liturgy,  or  lit- 
urgy of  St.  Mark.  Priest.  "  To  Thee  we  send  up  glory  and 
giving  of  thanks,  and  the  hymn  of  the  Trisagion,  Father,  Son, 
and  Holy  Ghost,  now  and  ever  and  to  ages  of  ages.  People. 
Amen!  Holy  God,  holy  Mighty,  Holy  and  Immortal,  have 
mercy  upon  us."  In  the  liturgy  of  Chrysostom  the  choir  sing 
the  Trisagion  five  times,  and  in  the  meantime  the  priest  says 
secretly  the  prayer  of  the  Trisagion.  "God  which  art  holy 
and  restest  in  the  holies,  who  art  hymned  with  tlie  voice  of  the 
Trisagion  by  the  Seraphim,  and  glorified  by  the  Cherubim,  and 
adored  by  all  the  heavenly  powers!  Thou  who  didst  from 
nothing  call  all  things  into  being ;  who  didst  make  man  after 
Thine  image  and  likeness,  and  didst  adorn  him  with  all  Thy 
graces;  who  givest  to  him  that  seeketh  wisdom  and  under- 
standing, and  passest  not  by  the  sinner,  but  dost  give  repent- 
ance unto  salvation  ;  who  has  vouchsafed  that  we,  Thy  humble 
and  unworthy  servants,  should  stand,  even  at  this  time,  before 
the  glory  of  Thy  holy  altar,  and  should  pay  to  Thee  the  wor- 
ship and  praise  that  is  meet ; — receive,  Lord,  out  of  the  mouth 
of  sinners,  the  hymn  of  the  Trisagion,  and  visit  us  in  Thy  good- 
ness. Forgive  us  every  offence,  volmitary  and  involuntary. 
Sanctify  our  souls  and  bodies,  and  grant  that  we  may  serve 
Thee  in  holiness  all  the  days  of  our  life ;  through  the  interces- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


484  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  IfBW  TESTAMENT. 

Bion  of  the  holy  Mother  of  God,  and  all  the  saints  who  have 
pleased  Thee  since  the  beginning  of  the  world.  (Aloud.)  For 
holy  art  Thon,  one  God  and  to  Thee." 

According  to  an  anreliable  tradition  this  formula  was  received 
during  an  earthquake  at  Constantinople,  in  the  reign  of  Theo- 
dosius  II.,  through  a  boy  who  was  caught  up  into  the  sky  and 
heard  it  from  the  angels.  The  earliest  testimonies  to  the  exist- 
ence of  the  Trisagion  date  from  the  fifth  century  or  the  httter 
part  of  the  fourth.  Later,  the  words  were  added,  ^^  that  was 
crucified  for  us,"  in  order  to  oppose  the  heresy  of  the  Theo- 
paschites  {Oeo^  Oodj  irdayfo  to  suffer)  who  held  that  GK)d  had 
suffered  and  been  crucified.  To  this  was  added  later  tlie  words 
"Christ  our  king:"  the  whole  reading,  "Holy  God,  holy 
Mighty,  holy  Immortal,  Christ  our  king  that  was  crucified  for 
us,  have  mercy  on  us."  The  formula  thus  entered  into  the 
controversy  with  the  Monophysites,  who  claimed  that  Christ 
had  but  one  composite  nature.  Dante  introduces  it  into  his 
"  Paradise." 

**  The  One  Mid  Two  Mid  Three  who  ever  liveth 
And  reigneth  ever  in  Three  and  Two  and  One, 
Not  oircumaoribed  and  aU  things  oircumacribing, 
Three  several  times  was  chanted  by  each  one 
Among  those  spirits,  with  such  melodj 
That  for  aU  merit  it  were  just  reward.** 

•«  Paradise,**  xIt.,  28-88. 

**  When  I  was  silent,  sweetest  song  did  flow 
Through  all  the  heaven,  and  my  lady  too 
With  them  cried  holy,  holy,  holy  I  *' 

"  Paradiso,**  xxvi.,  67-(». 

The  interpretations  of  the  symbols  of  the  four  living  creatures 
are,  of  course,  numerous  and  varied.  Some  of  them  are :  the 
four  Evangelists  or  Gospels ;  the  four  elements ;  the  four  car- 
dinal virtues ;  the  four  faculties  or  powers  of  the  human  soul ; 
the  Lord  in  the  fourfold  great  events  of  redemption ;  the  fonr 
patriarchal  churches ;  the  four  great  apostles,  the  doctors  of  the 
Church ;  the  four  principal  angels,  etc.  Tlie  best  modem  in- 
terpreters explain  the  four  forms  as  representing  animated 
nature — ^  man  with  his  train  of  dependent  beings  brought  near 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BBVELATION  OF  JOHN.  485 

to  Grod,  and  made  partakers  of  redemption,  tbns  fnlfilling  the 
language  of  St.  Paul,  that  ^  the  creation  itself  also  shall  be  de- 
livered from  the  bondage  of  corruption  into  the  liberty  of  the 
glory  of  the  children  of  God'"  (Rom.  viii.  21 ;  Milligan).  Diis- 
terdieck  says :  ^^  The  essential  idea  which  is  symbolized  in  the 
fignres  of  the  fonr  living  creatures  may  be  expressed  in  such 
words  as  those  of  Ps.  ciiL  22."  Full  of  eyes,  they  ai-e  ever  on 
the  alert  to  perceive  the  manifestations  of  divine  glory.  Cover- 
ing their  faces  and  feet  with  their  wings  (Isa.  vi.  2),  they  mani- 
fest their  revei*ence  and  humility.  Flying,  they  are  pi-ompt  for 
ministry.  "  We  thus  have  tlie  throne  of  God  suiTOunded  by 
His  Church  and  His  animated  world ;  the  former  represented 
by  the  twenty-four  elders,  the  latter  by  the  four  living  beings" 
(Alford), 

Which  is  to  come  (o  ipxif^^cpo^).  Lit,  which  cometh  or  ia 
coming. 

9.  When  (irap).  TFA^n^o^t^dr,  implying,  with  the  future  tense, 
the  etei*nal  repetition  of  the  act  of  praise. 

Give  {idHrova-iv).    Lit.,  as  Bev.,  shall  give. 

10.  Cast  (fi£KKovaw).  Bead  fioKowrtP  shall  case.  The  cast- 
ing of  the  crowns  is  an  act  of  submission  and  homage.  Cicero 
relates  that  when  Tigranes  the  king  of  the  Armenians  was 
brought  to  Pompey's  camp  as  a  captive,  prostrating  himself 
abjectly,  Pompey  ^^  raised  him  up,  and  replaced  on  his  head  the 
diadem  which  he  had  thrown  down "  (Oration  "  Pro  Sestio," 
xxvii.).  Tacitus  gives  an  account  of  the  public  homage  paid  by 
the  Parthian  Tiridates  to  the  statue  of  Nero.  ^^A  ti*ibunal 
placed  in  the  centre,  supported  a  chair  of  state  on  which  the 
statue  of  Nero  rested.  Tiridates  approached,  and  having  im- 
molated the  victims  in  due  form,  he  lifted  the  diadem  from  his 
head  and  laid  it  at  the  feet  of  the  statue,  while  every  heart 
throbbed  with  intense  emotion"  (^^ Annals,"  xv.,  29). 

11.  O  Lord  {tcvpie).  Bead  o  Kvpu>^  icaX  6  Bei^  ijfi&v  ov/t  Lard 
and  our  God.    So  Bev.    See  on  Matt.  xxL  3. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


486  WORD  BTUDIBS  IN  THE  KBW  TBBTAMENT. 

To  receive  {Xaficiv).  Or  perhaps,  better,  to  take,  since  tlie 
glory,  honor,  and  power  are  the  absolate  possession  of  the 
Ahnighty.     See  on  Jolin  iii.  32. 

Power.  Instead  of  the  thanks  in  the  ascription  of  the  living 
creatures.  In  the  excess  of  gratitade,  self  is  forgotten.  Their 
thanksgiving  is  a  tribute  to  the  creative  power  whicli  called 
them  into  being.  Note  the  articles,  "  the  glory,*'  etc.  (so  Rev.), 
expressing  the  absoluteness  and  universality  of  these  attributes. 
See  on  ch.  i.  6. 

All  things  (t^  irdtrra).  With  the  article  signifying  the 
universe. 

For  thy  pleasure  (£4^  to  BiKrffJM  aov).  Lit,  because  of  thy 
unll.  So  Rev.  Alford  justly  remarks:  ^^For  thy  pleasure  of 
the  A.  Y.  introduces  an  element  entirely  strange  to  the  context, 
and,  however  true  in  fact,  most  inappropriate  here,  where  the 
irk  for  renders  a  reason  for  the  worthiness  to  take  honor  and 
glory  and  power." 

They  are  {eialv\  Bead  fiaav  they  were.  One  of  the  great 
MSS.,  B,  reads  ovk  fjcav  they  were  not;  i.e.,  they  were  created 
out  of  nothing.  The  were  is  not  came  into  beinffy  but  simply 
they  existed.  See  on  John  i.  3 ;  vii.  34 ;  viii.  58.  Some  explain, 
they  existed  in  contrast  with  their  previous  non-existence ;  in 
which  case  it  would  seem  that  the  order  of  the  two  clauses 
should  have  been  reversed ;  besides  which  it  is  not  John's 
habit  to  apply  this  verb  to  temporary  and  passing  objects. 
Professor  Milligan  refers  it  to  the  eternal  type  existing  in  the 
divine  mind  before  anything  was  created,  and  in  conformity 
with  which  it  was  made  when  the  moment  of  creation  arrived. 
Compare  Heb.  viii.  5.  "  Was  the  heaven  then  or  the  world, 
whether  called  by  this  or  any  other  more  acceptable  name — as- 
suming the  name,  I  am  asking  a  question  which  has  to  be  asked 
at  the  beginning  of  every  inquiry — was  the  world,  I  say,  always 
in  existence  and  without  beginning,  or  created  and  having  a 
beginning  ?  Created,  I  reply,  being  visible  and  tangible  and 
having  a  body,  and  therefore  sensible ;  and  all  sensible  things 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BEVBLATION  OP  JOHN.  487 

which  are  apprehended  by  opinion  and  sense  are  in  a  process  of 
creation  and  created.  Now  that  which  is  created  must  of  neces- 
sity be  created  by  a  cause.  But  how  can  we  find  out  the  father 
and  maker  of  all  this  universe  ?  And  when  we  have  found  him, 
to  speak  of  his  nature  to  all  men  is  impossible.  Yet  one  more 
question  has  to  be  asked  about  him,  which  of  the  patterns  had 
the  artificer  in  view  when  he  made  the  world  ? — the  pattern 
which  is  unchangeable,  or  that  which  is  created  ?  If  the  world 
be  indeed  fair  and  the  artificer  good,  then,  as  is  plain,  he  must 
have  looked  to  that  which  is  eternal.  But  if  what  cannot  be 
said  without  blasphemy  is  true,  then  he  looked  to  the  created 
pattern.  Every  one  will  see  that  he  must  have  looked  to  the 
eternal,  for  tlie  world  is  the  fairest  of  creations  and  he  is  the 
best  of  causes"  (Plato,  "  TimsBus,*'  28,  29). 


CHAPTER  r. 

1.  In  (jhrt).  Lit.,  an.  The  book  or  roll  Jay  tfpon  the  open 
hand. 

A  Book  ifiipXJov).  See  on  Matt.  xix.  7 ;  Mark  x.  4 ;  Luke 
iv.  17.    Compare  Ezek.  iL  9 ;  Jer.  xxxvL  2 ;  Zech.  v.  1,  2. 

Within  and  on  the  back  side  (lawSep  leal  ihrur^ep).  Com- 
pare Ezek.  ii.  10.  Indicating  the  completeness  of  the  divine 
counsels  contained  in  the  book.  Kolls  written  on  both  sides 
were  called  Cfpistographi.  Pliny  the  younger  says  that  his 
uncle,  the  elder  Pliny,  left  him  an  hundred  and  sixty  conmient- 
aries,  most  minutely  written,  and  written  on  the  back,  by  which 
this  number  is  multiplied.  Juvenal,  inveighing  against  the 
poet-asters  who  are  declaiming  their  rubbish  on  all  sides,  says: 
^^  Shall  that  one  then  have  recited  to  me  his  comedies,  and  this 
his  elegies  with  impunity!  Shall  huge  ^Telephus'  with  im- 
punity have  consumed  a  whole  day ;  or — with  the  mai^in  to 
the  end  of  the  book  already  fiUed — ^Orestes,'  written  on  the 
very  back,  and  yet  not  concluded  f  (i,  3-6), 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


488  WOHD  8TX7DIES  IN  THB  HBW  TBSTAMBNT. 

Sealed  (jcaTec^parfurpivov).  Onljr  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment The  preposition  Kara  denotes  sealed  davm.  So  Bev., 
olaae  sealed.  The  roU  is  wound  round  a  staff  and  fastened  down 
to  it  with  the  seven  seals.  The  unrolling  of  the  parchment  is 
nowhere  indicated  in  the  vision.  Commentators  have  pazzled 
themselves  to  explain  the  arrangement  of  the  seals,  so  as  to  ad- 
mit of  the  uni*olling  of  a  portion  with  the  opening  of  each  seal. 
DcLsterdieck  remarks  that,  with  an  incomparably  more  beanti- 
ful  and  powerful  representation,  the  contents  of  the  roll  are 
successively  symbolized  by  the  vision  which  follows  upon  the 
opening  of  each  seal.  ^^  The  contents  of  the  book  leap  forth 
in  plastic  symbols  from  the  loosened  seal."  Milligan  explains 
the  seven  seals  as  one  seal,  comparing  the  seven  churches  and 
the  seven  spirits  as  signifying  one  church  and  one  sphnt,  and 
doubts  if  the  number  seven  has  liere  any  mystical  meaning. 
Others,  as  Alford,  claim  that  the  completeness  of  the  divine 
purposes  is  indicated  by  the  perfect  number  seven. 

2.  Strong.  Either  as  being  of  higher  rank,  or  with  ref- 
erence to  the  great  voice. 

Worthy  (o^io^).    As  in  John  i.  27.    Morally  entitled. 

3.  Under  the  earth.    In  Hades. 

To  look  ifiKbreiv).  See  on  John  i.  29.  To  take  a  single 
look  at  the  contents. 

4.  I  wept  {Ik\€uov).    Audible  weeping.    See  on  Luke  vL  21. 

5.  Of  the  elders  (&  t&p  irpeafivrip^dv).  Strictly^  from 
among  the  elders. 

The  Lion.    See  Gen.  xlix.  9. 

The  Root  of  David.    See  on  Nazarene^  Matt.  iL  23. 

Hath  prevailed  {iviKriceif).    Or  overcame. 

To  loose.    Omit, 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  489 

6.  Andlol    Omit 

In  the  midst  of.  Not  on  tlie  throne,  but  perhaps  in  the 
space  in  the  centre  of  which  is  the  throne,  and  which  is  sur- 
rounded by  the  tweutj-four  elders. 

A  Lamb  (apviov).  Tlie  diminutive,  very  frequent  in  the 
Apocalypse,  and  once  in  the  Gospel  of  John  (xxi.  15).  No- 
whore  else  in  the  New  Testament.  Compare  Isa.  liii.  7 ;  John 
i.  29,  86.  Christ  had  just  been  spoken  of  as  a  lion.  He  now 
appears  as  a  lamb.  Some  interpreters  emphasize  the  idea  of 
g&ntleneWj  others  that  of  sacrifice. 

Slain  {ia-^yfihov).  Tlie  verb  indicates  violence^  hutchery. 
See  on  1  John  iii.  12.  It  is  also  the  sacrificial  word.  Exod. 
xii.  6. 

Stood  {i<miieofi).  Eev.,  more  correctly,  standing.  Though 
daugktered  the  lamb  stands.  Christy  though  slain,  is  risen  and 
living. 

Seven  horns  and  seven  eyes.  See  remarks  on  the  Apo- 
calyptic imagery,  ch.  L  16.  The  horn  is  the  emblem  of  might. 
See  1  Sam.  ii.  10;  1  Kings  xxii.  11 ;  Ps.  cxii.  9;  Dan.*vii.  7, 
20  sqq. ;  Luke  i.  69.  Compare  Matt,  xxviii.  18.  The  eyes  rep- 
resent the  discerning  Spirit  of  God  in  its  operation  upon  all 
created  things. 

Sent  forth  (aTreoroX/A^).     See  on  Mark  iii.  14. 

7.  Toole  {€tKrij>€v).  Lit.,  hath  taken.  The  perfect,  alternat- 
ing with  the  aorist,  is  graphia 

8.  Had  taken  {iKafiev).    lit.,  took.    The  aorist  is  resumed. 

Every  one  of  them  harps  (&a<rro9  tctl^dpas).  Bev.,  less 
clumsily,  having  each  one  a  harp.  Each  one,  that  is,  of  the 
elders.  KiSdpa  karp  signifies  an  instrument  unlike  our  harp 
as  ordinarily  constructed.  Rather  a  lute  or  guitar^  to  which 
latter  word  kithara  is  etymologically  related.    Anciently  of  a 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


490  WORD  8TUDISB  IS  THE  NBW  TB8TAMENT. 

triangular  shape,  with  seven  strings,  afterwards  increased  to 
eleven.  Josephus  says  it  had  ten,  and  was  pUjed  with  t^jplety' 
trum  or  small  piece  of  ivorj. 

Viab  (^MiXo^).  Only  in  the  Apocalypse.  The  word  maly 
used  commonly  of  a  small  bottle,  gives  a  wrong  picture  here. 
The  ^ioXi;  was  a  broad,  flat  vessel,  used  for  boiling  liquids, 
sometimes  as  a  cinerary  urn,  and  for  drinking,  or  pouring  liba- 
tions. Also  of  the  shallow  cup,  usually  without  a  foot,  in  which 
libations  were  drawn  out  of  the  mixer.  Ilerodotus  says  that  at 
PlatSBa  the  Spartan  Helots  were  bidden  by  Pausanias  to  bring 
together  the  booty  of  the  Persian  camp,  and  that  they  found 
^'  many  golden  mixers  and  howls  (^u^Xik),  and  other  i/nnifuiTa 
{drinkinff-vessels)  "  (ix.,  80).  From  its  broad,  flat  shape  ''Apeo^ 
^>uSXff  howl  of  Mars  was  a  comic  metaphor  for  a  shield.  It  was 
also  used  for  sunken  work  in  a  ceiling.  In  the  Septuagint  the 
word  is  frequently  used  for  howls  or  hasons.  See  Num.  viL  13, 
19,  26,  31,  37, 43,  etc. ;  1  Kings  viL  60 ;  Zech.  ix.  16.  Here, 
censerSj  though  several  different  words  of  the  Septuagint  and 
New  Testament  are  rendered  censer  /  as  Svt&tci^,  1  Kings  viL 
50 ;  ^fuanfipiovy  2  Chron.  xxvi.  19 ;  Ezek.  viii.  11 ;  Heb.  ix. 
4 ;  Xifiavanbv,  Apoc.  viii.  3.  Ovt&tcff  however  is  the  golden  in- 
cens&'Cup  or  spoon  to  receive  the  frankincense  which  was  lighted 
with  coals  from  the  brazen  altar,  and  offered  on  the  golden 
altar  before  the  veil.  The  imagery  is  from  the  tabernacle  and 
temple  service. 

Incense  {Sv^uafiaTo^v).  The  directions  for  the  composition 
of  the  incense  for  the  tabernacle-worship,  are  given  Exod.  xxx. 
37,  38. 

Prayers.  For  incense  as  the  symbol  of  prayer,  see  Lev.  xvi. 
12, 13  ;  Ps.  cxli.  2.  See  on  Luke  L  9.  Edersheim,  describing 
the  offering  of  incense  in  the  temple,  says :  ^^  As  the  President 
gave  the  word  of  command  which  marked  that  *  the  time  of 
incense  had  come,'  the  whole  multitude  of  the  people  without 
withdrew  from  the  inner  court  and  fell  down  before  the  Lord, 
spreading  their  hands  in  silent  prayer.    It  is  this  most  solemn 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BEVBLATION  OF  JOHN.  491 

period,  when,  tlirongliout  the  vast  temple-buildings,  deep  silence 
rested  on  the  worshipping  multitude,  while  within  the  sanctuary 
itself  the  priest  laid  the  incense  on  the  golden  altar,  and  the 
cloud  of  odors  rose  up  before  the  Lord,  which  seizes  as  the 
image  of  heavenly  things  in  the  Apocalypse  (viii.  1,  3, 4).  The 
prayers  offered  by  priests  and  people  at  this  part  of  tlie 
service  are  recorded  by  tradition  as  follows :  *  True  it  is  that 
Thou  art  Jehovah,  our  God  and  the  God  of  our  fathers ;  our 
King  and  the  King  of  our  f athei-s ;  our  Saviour  and  the  Bock 
of  our  salvation ;  our  Help  and  our  Deliverer.  Thy  name  is 
from  everlasting,  and  there  is  no  God  beside  Thee.  A  new 
song  did  they  that  were  delivered  sing  to  Thy  name  by  the  sea- 
shore. Together  did  all  praise  and  own  Thee  as  King,  and  say, 
*  Jehovah  shall  i-eign  who  saveth  Israel.'  *'  Compare  "  the  Song 
of  Moses,'*  ch.  xv.  3,  and  "  a  new  song,"  ver.  9. 

9.  They  sing«  Present  tense,  denoting  the  continuous,  un* 
ceasing  worship  of  heaven,  or  possibly,  as  describing  their 
^^  office  generally  rather  than  the  mere  one  particular  case  of 
its  exercise  "  (Alf ord). 

Redeem  {^opaa-of:).  Lit.,  pvrohasej  as  Bev.  See  John  iv. 
8 ;  vi.  5. 

Us.    Omit  vs  and  supply  men^  as  Bev. 

With  Thy  blood  {h  t#  aXiMrC  trov).  Lit., « m  Thy  blood." 
The  preposition  in  is  used  Hebraistically  of  the  price;  the  value 
of  the  thing  purchased  being  contained  in  the  price. 

Kindred  (^vX^).  Bev.,  tribe.  Often  in  the  New  Teste- 
ment  of  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel. 

People,  nation  (Xoot),  eSvov^).    See  on  1  Pet.  ii.  9. 

10.  Us  i^na^).    Bead  avro^  them. 

Kings  (fiaaiKek).  Bead  ficurCKelav  a  kvngdam.  See  on 
ch.  L  6. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


492  WORD  STUDIOS  nr  thb  hbw  trstament. 

We  shall  reign  (fiaaiKiwrofAaf).  Bead  fiaa-^Xevovatw  they 
reign.    Their  reigning  ia  not  f  atore,  but  present 

11.  Ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand  (jivpCaBe:  fivpi- 
oBav).  Lit,  ten  iAouscwids  of  ten  tkoueande.  Compare  Pa. 
Ixviii.  17 ;  Dan.  viii.  10.  Mvpui/9,  whence  the  English  myriady 
means  the  number  ten  thousand.  So,  literally,  Acts  xix.  19, 
apyvplov  /u/pio&K  Trhrre  fifty-tkoueand  jpieoee  of  silver ;  lit, 
jive  ten4housande.  In  the  plural  used  for  an  unlimited  nam- 
ber.    See  Luke  xiL  1 ;  Acts  xxL  20 ;  Ueb.  xiL  22 ;  Jude  14. 

Thousands  (x^Xui5c9).  XCKidq,  a  collective  term  like  fiupw, 
meaning  the  number  one  thousand,  is  almost  invariably  used 
with  men  in  the  Apocalypse.  See  ch.  vii.  4 ;  xL  13.  Only 
once  with  a  material  object  (ch.  xxi.  16).  With  inferior  objects 
x/XM>t  a  thousand  is  used.  See  ch.  xi.  3 ;  xii.  6.  These  words 
are  the  theme  of  Alford's  noble  hymn — 

'*  Ten  thousand  timet  ten  thousand 
In  sparkling  raiment  bright, 
The  armies  of  the  ransomed  salnta 
Throng  up  the  steeps  of  light : 
'Tis  anished,  aU  is  Enished, 
Their  fight  with  death  and  sin  ; 
Fling  open  wide  the  golden  gatei^ 
And  let  the  yiotors  in." 

12.  Power,  etc.  Rev.,  "M^  power."  Ooihpare  tlie  ascrip- 
tion in  ch.  iv.  11,  on  which  see  note,  and  notice  that  each  sep- 
arate particular  there  has  the  article,  while  here  it  is  attached 
only  to  the  first,  the  power,  the  one  article  including  all  the 
particulars,  as  if  they  formed  but  one  word.  On  the  doxolo- 
gies,  see  on  ch.  i.  6. 

Riches  {irXourov).  Not  limited  to  spiritual  riches,  but  de- 
noting the  fulness  of  every  gift  of  God.  Jas.  i.  17 ;  Acts  xviL 
25.    Only  here  in  a  doxology. 

Blessing  (evKoyCcai).  See  on  the  kindred  word  eOXjoytfrb^ 
blessed^  1  Pet  i  3. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  493 

13.  Creature  {/erla/ia).  See  1  Tim.  iv.  4;  Jas.  i.  18.  From 
/rr^Q»  to  found.  A  thing  foimded  or  created.  Bev.,  created 
thing.    See  on  John  L  3. 

In  the  sea  {M 1%  AoXoo-oi^).  More  accurately,  ^^on  the 
sea,"  as  Bev.  !Not  ahipa,  but  creatures  of  the  sea  which  have 
come  up  from  its  depths  to  the  surface. 

Blessing  {fi  eiXoyla).  Ber.  rightly,  ''the  blessing."  All 
the  particulars  of  the  following  ascription  have  the  article. 

Honor  (nfi^)'  Originally  a  valuing  by  which  the  price  is 
fixed,  hence  thejmce  itself y  the  thing  jprized^  and  so,  generally, 
honor.    See  on  Acts  xxviiL  10. 

Power  (to  Kpdrof;).  Bey.,  the  dominion.  For  the  different 
words  for  jHnoer,  see  on  2  Pet.  iL  11. 

14.  Four  and  twenty.    Omit 
Worshipped.    In  silent  adoration. 

Him  that  llveth  forever  and  ever.    Omit 


CHAPTER   VI. 

1.  Of  the  seals.    Add  e€n)en. 

And  see.    Omit 

3.  White  horse.  For  whiU^  see  on  Luke  ix.  29.  HoTse^ 
see  Zech.  i.  7-11 ;  vi.  1-8.  All  the  figures  of  this  verse  are 
those  of  victory.  The  horse  in  the  Old  Testament  is  the  em- 
blem of  war.  See  Job  xxxix.  25 ;  Ps.  Ixxvi.  6 ;  Prov.  xxL  31 ; 
Ezek.  xxvi.  10.    So  Virgil : 

*'  But  I  beheld  upon  the  grMS  four  hones,  snowy  whfte, 
Gnsing  the  meadows  far  and  wide,  first  omen  of  mjr  sight. 
Father  Anohises  seeth,  and  saith  :  *  New  land  and  bear*8t  thou  war  ? 
For  war  are  horses  dight;  so  these  war-threatening  herd-beasts  are.'** 

"-fineld,"  iii.,587. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


404  WORD  STUDIES  IN  TH£  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

So  Turnns,  going  forth  to  battle : 

'*  He  spake,  and  to  the  roofed  pUoe  now  swiftly  wending  home. 
Called  for  his  steeds,  and  merriljr  stood  there  before  their  foam. 
E'en  thoee  that  Orithjria  gave  Pilomnas,  gift  most  fair. 
Whose  wliiteneis  overpassed  the  snow,  whose  speed  the  winged  air.** 

**-fineid,"xii,  81-88. 

Ilomer  pictures  the  horses  of  Bhesas  as  whiter  than  snow,  and 
swift  as  the  winds  (^^  Iliad,''  x.,  436,  437);  and  Herodotus,  de- 
scribing the  battle  of  Platsea  sajs:  ^^The  fight  went  most 
against  the  Greeks  where  Mardonius,  monnted  on  a  white 
Iiorse,  and  snrronnded  by  the  bravest  of  all  the  Persians,  tlie 
thousand  picked  men,  fonght  in  person  ^  (ix.,  63).  The  horses 
of  the  Koman  generals  in  their  triumphs  were  white. 

Bow  (to^ov).  See  Ps.  xlv.  4,  5 ;  Hab.  iii.  8,  9 ;  Isa.  xli.  2  ; 
2jech.  ix.  13,  14,  in  which  last  passage  the  figure  is  that  of  a 
great  bow  which  is  drawn  only  by  a  gi*eat  exertion  of  strengtli, 
and  by  placing  the  foot  upon  it  Compare  Homer's  picture  of 
Telemachus'  attempt  to  draw  Ulysses'  bow : 

'*  And  then  he  took  his  plaee 
Upon  the  threshold,  and  essajred  the  bow ; 
And  tlirice  he  made  the  attempt  and  tlirice  gare  oVr." 

"Odjssejr,"  Ml,  124-25. 

The  suitors  propose  to  anoint  the  bow  with  fat  in  order  to 
soften  it 

**  Bring  ns  from  within 
An  ample  roll  of  fat,  that  we  jonng  men 
Bjr  warming  and  anointing  maj  make  soft 
The  bovf,  and  draw  the  oord  and  end  the  strife." 

"Odjrssejr.-xxL,  178-8a 

A  crown  (or^^w)?).    See  on  ch.  iv.  4. 

3.  And  see.    Omit 

Had  opened  {Ijvoi^).    Ber.,  rendering  the  aorist  more 
literally,  opened. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BEVELATIOK  OF  JOHN.  495 

4.  Red  {wvppos:).  From  irvpfi/re.  Flame-colored.  Compare 
2  Kings  iii.  22 ;  Zech.  L  8.    Only  here  and  ch.  xii.  3. 

To  take  peace  from  the  earth.  Compare  Matt  x.  84; 
xxiv.  7. 

Kill  (a-iJHi^ciHnv).    See  on  ch.  y.  6. 

Sword  Quix^P^)'  Compare  Matt  x.  34.  In  Homer,  a  large 
knife  or  dirk,  worn  next  the  sword-sheath,  and  nsed  to  slanghter 
animals  for  sacrifice.  Thus,  ^^The  son  of  Atreas,  having  drawn 
with  his  hands  the  knife  (judyfupav)  which  hung  ever  by  the 
great  sheath  of  his  sword,  cut  the  hair  from  the  heads  of 
the  lambs.  .  .  .  lie  spake,  and  cut  the  lambs'  throats 
with  the  pitiless  brass"  ("  Iliad," iii,  271-292).  It  is  used  by 
the  surgeon  Machaon  to  cut  out  an  arrow  (^  Iliad,"  xi.,  844). 
Herodotus,  Aristophanes,  and  Euripides  use  the  word  in  the 
sense  of  a  knife  for  cutting  up  meat.  Plato,  of  a  knife  for 
pruning  trees.  As  a  weapon  it  appears  first  in  Herodotus : 
"  Here  they  (the  Greeks)  defended  themselves  to  the  last,  such 
as  still  had  swords^  using  them  (vii.,  225).  Later  of  the  sabre 
or  bent  sword,  contrasted  with  the  {^<^  or  straight  sword. 
Aristophanes  uses  it  with  the  adjective  /of  single^  for  a  razor^ 
contrasted  with  iJid^fupa  hiirXri,  the  double  knife  or  scissors. 
This  and  {>ofij>ala  (see  on  Luke  ii.  35)  are  the  only  words  used 
in  the  New  Testament  for  sword.  Bi^o9  (see  above)  does  not 
occur.  In  Septuagint  fidxaipa  of  the  knife  of  sacrifice  used  by 
Abraham  (Gten.  xxii.  6, 10). 

6.  Come  and  see.    Omit  and  see. 

Black.  The  color  of  mourning  and  famine.  See  Jer.  iv. 
28 ;  viii.  21 ;  MaL  iii.  14,  where  m^ournftUly  is,  literally,  in 
black. 

Pair  of  balances  {&fyov).  Rev.,  a  balance.  Properly,  any- 
thing which  joins  two  bodies ;  hence  a  yoke  (Matt.  xi.  29 ;  Acts 
XV.  10).  The  cross-beam  of  the  loom,  to  which  the  warp  was 
fixed;  the  thwarts  joining  the  opposite  sides  of  a  ship;  the 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


496  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  KEW  TESTAMENT. 

beam  of  tlie  balance,  and  hence  the  balance  itself.  The  judg- 
ment of  this  seal  is  scarcitj/j  of  which  the  balance  h  a  sjmbol, 
representing  the  time  when  food  is  doled  oat  by  weight.  See 
Lev.  xxvi.  26;  Ezek.  iv.  16. 

6.  Measure  (;^oti/t^.  Choenix.  Only  here  in  the  New  Teeta- 
raent.  A  dry  measure,  according  to  some,  a  quart;  to  others 
a  pint  and  a  half.  Herodotus,  speaking  of  the  provisions  for 
Xerxes'  army,  assigns  a  choenix  of  com  for  a  man's  daily  supply, 
evidently  meaning  a  minimum  allowance  (vii.,  187) ;  and  Thucyd- 
ides,  speaking  of  the  terms  of  truce  between  the  Lacedeemoni- 
ans  and  the  Athenians,  mentions  the  following  as  one  of  the 
provisions  :  ^^  The  Athenians  shall  permit  the  Lacedaemonians 
on  the  mainland  to  send  to  those  on  the  island  a  fixed  qnanti^ 
of  kneaded  flour,  viz.,  two  Attic  quarts  {xolvtica^)  of  barley- 
meal  for  each  man"  (iv.,  16).  Jowett  ("Thucydides")  says  that 
the  choenix  was  about  two  pints  dry  measure.  So  Arnold 
("Thucydides"),  who  adds  that  the  allowance  of  two  choenixes 
of  barley-meal  daily  to  a  man  was  the  ordinary  allowance  of 
a  Spartan  at  the  public  table.     See  Herodotus,  vi.,  57. 

For  a  penny  {Sijvapiov).    See  on  Matt.  xx.  2. 

8.  Pale  (xX<»po9).  Only  in  the  Apocalypse,  except  Mark 
vi.  39.  Properly,  greenish^eUow^  like  young  grass  or  unripe 
wheat.  Homer  applies  it  to  Aoney^  and  Sophocles  to  the  sand. 
Generally,  j?a&,^>aZKrf.  Used  of  a  mist,  of  sea- water,  of  a  pale 
or  bilious  complexion.  Thucydides  uses  it  of  the  appearance 
of  persons  stricken  with  the  plague  (ii.,  49).  In  Homer  it  is 
used  of  the  paleness  of  the  face  from  fear,  and  so  as  directly 
descriptive  of  fear  ("  Iliad,"  x.,  376 ;  xv.,  4).  Of  olive  wood 
("Odyssey,"  ix.,  320,  379)  of  which  the  bark  is  gray.  Glad- 
stone says  that  in  Homer  it  indicates  rather  the  absence  thaa 
the  presence  of  definite  color.  In  the  New  Testament,  always 
rendered  ffreerij  except  here.  See  Mark  vi.  39 ;  Apoc.  viiL  7 ; 
ix.  14. 

Hell.  Properly,  Hades.  The  realm  of  the  dead  personified. 
See  on  Matt.  xvi.  18. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


REVBLATION  OF  JOHN.  497 

Power  (i^va-la).  See  on  Mark  ii  10 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  11.  Rev., 
better,  (nUhoriiy. 

With  the  sword  {h  f>ofMl)al^).  Another  word  for  sword. 
Compare  ver.  4,  and  see  on  Luke  ii.  36. 

With  death  {h  ^avirtp).  Or  pestilence.  The  Hebrew  iMer^ 
pestUenoej  is  rendered  bj  the  Greek  word  for  death  in  the 
Septnagint.  See  Jer.  xiv.  12 ;  xxi.  7.  Compare  the  term 
Uachde(Uh  applied  to  an  Oriental  plague  which  raged  in  the 
fourteenth  century. 

With  the  beasts  {inrh  r&v  BfipUav).  Ber.,Sy.  The  prepos- 
ition inro  hy  is  used  here  instead  of  ivi/nov  vnth^  indicating 
more  definitely  the  actual  agent  of  destruction;  while  iv  de- 
notes the  element  in  which  the  destruction  takes  place,  and 
gives  a  general  indication  of  the  manner  in  which  it  was 
wrought    With  these  four  judgments  compare  Ezek.  xiv.  21. 

9.  Altar  {dvauumiplov).  See  on  Acts  xvii.  28.  The  aUa/t 
ofeacvjficej  as  is  indicated  by  dai/n;  not  the  altar  oftnoenee. 
The  imagery  is  from  the  tabernacle.    Exod.  zzziz.  39 ;  zl.  29. 

Souls  (V^^)-  Or  lives.  See  on  8  John  2.  He  saw  only 
Uood^  but  blood  and  life  were  equivalent  terms  to  the  Hebrew. 

Slain  {ic^arfiiiwov).  See  on  ch.  v.  6.  The  law  commanded 
that  the  blood  of  sacrificed  animals  should  be  poured  out  at  the 
bottom  of  the  altar  of  burnt-offering  (Lev.  iv.  7). 

They  held  {^lyp^y  Not  hddfast^  but  here  the  testimony 
which  was  committed  to  them. 

10.  They  cried  (itcpal^ov).    See  on  Mark  v.  6. 

How  long  (^9  irM).  lit,  until  when.  Compare  Zech.  L 
12. 

O  Lord  (o  B€tnr6rrri^).    See  on  2  Pet.  ii  1.    Only  here  in  the 
Apocalypse.     Addressed  to  God  rather  than  to  Chrietf  and 
Vol.  n.— as 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


498  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

breathing,  as  Professor  Milligan  remarks,  '^  the  feeling  of  Old 
Testament  rather  than  of  New  Testament  relation."  Compare 
Acts  iv.  24 ;  Jade  4. 

True  {a\flf)Sivb<;).    See  on  John  1.  9;  Apoc.  iiL  7. 

Judge  (fcplveK;).  Originally  the  verb  means  to  separate; 
thence  the  idea  of  selection:  tojpick  outy  and  so  to  discriminaU 
or  judge. 

Avenge  {iic^uceU).    Compare  Luke  xviii  3;  Bom.  xiL  19. 

On  the  earth  {hfi  i%  7^).  Earthy  in  the  ApocalTpae,  is 
generally  to  be  understood  of  the  imgodly  earth. 

11.  White  robes  were  given  unto  every  one  of  them 

(itto^iTav  i/caoToi^  crroXal  XeuKcu).  The  best  texts  read  iB63ff 
axnoh  ixdoTtp  aroXif  Xev/ci]  there  was  given  them  to  each  one  a 
white  Tohe.  So  Rev.  SroXif  is  properly  a  hng^  flowing  robe  ; 
a  feetvve  garment.  Compare  Mark  xvi.  5 ;  Luke  xv.  22 ;  xx. 
46. 

Should  rest  {avairavo'tovTai).  See  on  Matt.  xi.  28;  1  Pet. 
V.  14;  compare  ch.  xiv.  13  ;  Dan.  xii.  13.  Not  merely  rest 
from  their  crying  for  vengeance,  but  rest  in  peace. 

Fellow-servanta.    See  Master  in  ver.  10. 

Should  be  fulfilled  {ifKjqp<iuTovTat).  Completed  in  number. 
See  Col.  ii.  10.  Some  texts  read  irKripwrtuHnv  shall  home  ftjUr- 
filed  their  course. 

12.  The  sixth  seal.  ^^The  Apocalypse  is  moulded  by  the 
great  discourse  of  our  Lord  upon  *the  last  things'  which  has 
been  preserved  for  us  in  the  first  three  Gospels  (Matt.  xxiv.  4- 
XXV. ;  Mark  xiii.  6-37 ;  Luke  xxi.  8-36  ;  compare  xvii.  20-37). 
The  parallelism  between  the  two  is,  to  a  certain  extent,  ac- 
knowledged by  all  inquirers,  and  is  indeed,  in  many  respects, 
so  obvious,  that  it  can  hardly  escape  the  notice  of  even  the  ord- 
inary reader.    Let  any  one  compare,  for  example,  the  aoooont 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BBVBLATIOK  OF  JOHN.  499 

oi  the  opening  of  the  sixth  seal  with  the  description  of  the  end 
(Matt.  xxiv.  29,  30),  and  he  will  see  that  the  one  is  almost  a 
transcript  of  the  other.  It  is  remarkable  that  we  find  no  ac- 
count of  this  discourse  in  the  Gospel  of  St.  John;  nor  does  it 
seem  as  sufficient  explanation  of  the  omission  that  the  later 
Evangelist  was  satisfied  with  the  records  of  the  discourse  al- 
ready given  by  his  predecessors  "  (MiUigan). 

Earthquake  {aeurfio^).  Lit.,  shaMng.  Used  also  of  a  tem- 
pest. See  on  Matt.  viii.  24,  and  compare  Matt.  xxiv.  7.  The 
word  here  is  not  necessarily  confined  to  shaking  the  earth.  In 
Matt  xxiv.  29,  it  is  predicted  that  the  powers  of  the  heavens 
shall  be  shaken  {aaXevl^iTovTcu,  see  on  Luke  xxi.  26).  Here 
also  the  heaven  is  removed  (ver.  14).  Compare  Heb.  xii.  26, 
where  the  verb  trelo)  to  shake  (kindred  with  ceurfihsi)  is  used. 

Black  as  sackcloth  of  hair  (ji^Kcv;  e&9  a-dK/co^:  rpCxtvo^). 
Compare  Matt  xxiv.  29 ;  Isa.  1.  3 ;  xiii.  10 ;  Jer.  iv.  23 ;  Ezek. 
xxxii.  7,  8  ;  Joel  ii.  31 ;  iii.  16 ;  Amos  viii.  9,  10 ;  Mic.  iii.  6. 
For  sackdothy  see  on  Luke  x.  13. 

The  moon  {fi  a-eXi^vrj).  Add  SKrf  whole.  Eev.,  the  whole 
moon. 

13.  Untimely  figs  {oKvpdov^).  Better,  as  Bey.,  unripe. 
Compare  Matt.  xxiv.  32;  Isa.  xxxiv.  4.  Only  here  in  the 
New  Testament. 

14.  Departed  {inrex^pla-Sff).  The  verb  means  to  separate^ 
sever.    Rev.,  was  rem>oved. 

Scroll  (fiipKiov).   See  on  Luke  iv.  17.   Compare  Isa.  xxxiv.  4. 
Mountain  and  island.  Compare  Matt.  xxiv.  35;  Nahumi.  5. 

15.  Of  the  earth.    See  on  ver.  10. 

Great  men  (jieyaTrapesi).  Eev.,  princes.  See  on  Mgh 
cqptainSy  Mark  vi.  21. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


600  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TB8TAKENT. 

Chief  captains  (x'^^^^^'VXP^)'  ^^  ^^  Mark  vi.  21,  and  <m 
o&niitriony  Luke  viL  2. 

The  mighty  {oi  Svparol).  The  best  texts  read  ot  UrxupoL 
Bev.,  the  strong.  For  the  difference  in  meaning,  see  on  the 
kindred  words  StW/iw  and  layyi  might  and  pcwtr^  2  Pet  iL  11. 

Every  free  man.  Omit  tn>wyy  and  read  as  Bey.,  0owy  hand- 
man  (md/ree  man. 

In  the  dens  {ek  rh  air/lKaui).  Bey.,  cofoea.  The  preposi- 
tion ek  into  implies  mnning  for  shelter  into. 

Rocks  (irirpa^).    See  on  Matt  xvL  18. 

16.  Said  {Tiiyova-of).    lit,  gay.     So  Bey. 

Fall  on  us.    Compare  Hosea  x.  8 ;  Lnke  xxiiL  80. 

Wrath  ippyfy:).  Denoting  a  deepseaied  wrath.  See  on  John 
iii.  36. 

17.  The  great  day  {^  ^Mp^  ^  A^^X  I^^  ^  ^y>  tAe 
great  {day).    For  the  oonstraction,  see  on  1  John  iy.  9. 

Is  come  (^X9€v).    Lit,  came. 

Shall  be  able  to  stand  (StWrcu  vraBfjimu).  Bey.,  rigliilyy 
is  dtle.    Compare  Nahnm  L  6 ;  Mai.  iiL  2. 


CHAPTER  VIL 
1.  These  things  (rodra).    Bead  tovto  this. 

Holding  {fcparovvTOi).    Holding  fast  or  Jirmly.     See  on 
Mark  yii  8 ;  Acts  iiL  11. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BEVELATION  OF  JOHK.  601 

2.  East  {ioHtroXSj^  ijiXlov),  Bey.,  more  literally,  the  sunria- 
ing.    See  on  Matt  ii  2 ;  Luke  L  78.    Compare  Ezek.  xliii.  2. 

The  four  angels.    Compare  Matt.  xxiv.  31'. 

8.  In  their  foreheads.  Compare  Exod.  xzviiL  36-38; 
Ezek.  ix.  4. 

4.  An  hundred  and  forty  and  four  thousand.  Not  liter- 
ally, but  the  number  symbolical  of  fixedness  and  full  comple- 
tion (12  X 12).  The  interpretations,  as  usual,  vary  greatly,  di- 
viding generally  into  two  great  classes :  one  holding  that  only 
Jews  are  meant,  the  other  including  the  whole  number  of  the 
elect  both  Jew  and  Oentile.  Of  the  former  class  some  regard 
the  sealed  as  representing  Jewish  believers  chosen  out  of  the 
literal  Israel.  Others  add  to  this  the  idea  of  these  as  forming 
the  nucleus  of  glorified  humanity  to  which  the  Gentiles  are 
joined.  Others  again  regard  them  as  Jews  reserved  by  Gk>d 
until  Antichrist  comes,  to  maintain  in  the  bosom  of  their  nation 
a  true  belief  in  Jehovah  and  His  law,  like  the  seven  thousand 
in  the  days  of  Elijah. 

The  interpretation  of  the  latter  dass  seems  entitled  to  the 
greater  weight  According  to  the  Apocalyptic  usage,  Jewish 
terms  are  ^^  christianized  and  heightened  in  their  meaning,  and 
the  word  ^^  Israel"  is  to  be  understood  of  all  Christians,  the 
blessed  company  of  all  faithful  people,  the  true  Israel  of  Gh)d." 
See  Eom.  ii  28,  29 ;  ix.  6, 7 ;  GaL  vi.  16 ;  Philip.  iiL  3.  The  city 
of  God,  which  includes  all  believers,  is  designated  by  the  Jewish 
name.  New  Jerusalem.  In  ver.  3,  the  sealed  are  designated 
generally  as  the  servofUs  of  Ood.  In  ch.  xiv.  the  one  hundred 
and  forty-four  thousand  sealed  are  mentioned  after  the  descrip- 
tion of  Uie  enemies  of  Christ,  who  have  reference  to  the  whole 
Church  of  Christ ;  and  the  mention  of  the  sealed  is  followed 
by  the  world-wide  harvest  and  vintage  of  the  earth.  The  one 
hundred  and  forty-four  thousand  in  ch.  xiv.,  have  the  Father's 
name  written  in  their  foreheads ;  and  in  ch.  xxii.  4,  cJl  the  in- 
habitants of  the  New  Jerusalem  are  so  marked.  In  ch.  xxi.  12, 
the  twelve  tribes  include  all  believers.    The  mark  of  Satan 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


502  WORD  STUDIBB  Df  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

which  is  in  the  forehead,  is  set  upon  all  his  eenrants  withoat 
distinction  of  race.  8ee  ch.  xiii.  16, 17 ;  xiv.  9 ;  xvi  2  ;  xix. 
20 ;  xz.  4.  The  plagues  threaten  both  Jews  and  G^tiles,  as 
the  sealing  protects  all. 

9.  I  taw.    This  vision  belongs  to  heav^  while  the  sealing 
took  place  on  earth. 

Arrayed  (irepi^c^X^/i^t).    See  on  ch.  iiL  6. 

Robes.    See  on  ch.  tL  11. 

'*  The  inoient  scriptures  and  the  new 
The  mark  establish,  and  this  shows  it  me, 
Of  all  the  souls  whom  God  hath  made  His  friends. 
Isaiah  saith  that  each  one  garmented 
In  His  own  land  shall  be  with  twofold  garments,* 
And  his  own  land  is  this  delightfnl  life. 
Thj  brother,  too,f  far  more  ezplioitlj, 
There  where  he  treateth  of  the  robes  of  white, 
This  revelation  manifests  to  as.** 

Dftnte,  **  Paradiso,**  zxr.,  88-9S. 

Palms  (^Vmc€?).  "PropeTljy  palm-ireesy  but  used  here  of 
p^lm-h'cmohes.  Kot  a  heathen  but  a  Jewish  image  drawn 
probably  from  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.     See  on  John  vii.  2. 

10.  Cried.  The  correct  reading  is  /epa^aa^  they  cry.  So 
Eev. 

Salvation.  The  praise  of  salvation,  ascribing  salvation  to 
God. 

11.  Stood  {ear^icea'ap).  Rev.,  more  correctly,  were  standing. 
The  tense  is  the  pluperfect,  used  in  this  verb  ae  an  imperfect. 

12.  Blessing,  etc.    On  the  doxologies,  see  on  du  i.  6. 

*  Dante's  reference  is  to  Isa.  Izi.  7,  where,  howeyer,  there  is  no  reference 
to  garments,  but  mereljr  to  a  doable  compensation. 
I  John. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BBVBLATION  OF  JOHN.  603 

13.  AnswiBred.  In  the  sense  of  taking  np  speech  in  con- 
nection with  some  given  occasion,  as  Matt.  xi.  25.  See  also  on 
John  ii.  18. 

What  are  thesSf  etc  The  Bev.,  properly,  follows  the  Greek 
order,  which  places  first  "  These  which  are  arrayed  in  the  white 
robes,  who  are  they?"  emphatic  and  indicating  the  natnral  order 
of  the  thought  as  it  presents  itself  to  the  inquirer.  For  whoA^ 
render  whoy  as  Rev. 

14.  I  said  (etpffKa).  Lit,  I  have  said.  Eev.,  renders  by  the 
present,  I  say.    See  on  cried.    John  i.  15. 

Sir  {/evpU).  Add  fiov  my^  and  render,  as  Eev.,  my  Lord. 
An  address  of  reverence  as  to  a  heavenly  being.  See  on  Matt, 
xxi.  3. 

Which  came  {pi  ifyxpfievoC).  The  present  participle.  Hence, 
as  Eev.,  which  come. 

Out  of  great  tribulation  {ifc  t^  S^yU-^tut^  t%  fieydXrj^). 
Lit.,  out  of  the  tribidationy  the  great  (tribulation).  Eev.,  prop- 
erly, gives  the  force  of  the  article,  "  the  great."  See  on  Matt. 
xiiL21. 

Have  washed  (hrXwav).  The  aorist  tense.  Eev.,  correctly, 
they  washed.  Only  here  and  Luke  v.  2,  on  which  see  note. 
For  the  New  Testament  words  for  washing,  see  on  Acts  xvi.  33. 

Made  them  white.  Compare  Isa.  i.  18;  Ps.  li.  7;  Mark 
ix.  3.  Milligan  remarks  that  rohes  are  the  expression  of  cha^- 
acterj  and  compares  the  word  habit  used  of  dress. 

15.  Therefore.    Because  of  this  washing. 

Before  the  throne.    Compare  £ph.  v.  27. 

Serve  (}uirp€vovaiv).  See  on  Luke  i.  74.  In  scripture  the 
verb  never  expresses  any  other  service  but  that  of  the  true  God, 
or  of  the  gods  of  heathenism. 


'Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


501  WORD  8TUDIHB  Of  THB  RBW  TESTAMENT. 

Tompio  (pof).    Or  Bonchtary.    See  on  Matt  ir.  6. 

Dwell  {atctpfiau).  From  o-inyi^  a  tent  or  tabernacle.  Hence 
better,  as  Rev.,  shall  spread  Hie  tabernacle*  See  on  John  L  14, 
and  compare  Ler.  xzvi  11 ;  Iia.  iy.  6,  6 ;  Ezek.  zxxviL  27. 

16.  They  shall  hunger  no  moret  etc.  Compare  Isa.  zlix. 
10. 

Heat  {tcavfui).  In  Isa.  xlix.  10,  the  word  icavamf  the  eoarch- 
inf  wind  or  sirocco  is  used.    See  on  Matt  xx.  12 ;  Jas.  L  IL 

17.  In  the  midst  (ovi  fuaw).    See  on  ch.  v.  6. 

Shall  feed  (^roi/ioyei).  See  on  shall  he  shepherd  ofy  Matt  iL 
6 ;  Acts  zx.  28 ;  1  Pet.  y.  2.    Compare  Ps.  xxiiL  1. 

Shall  lead  (oSi^Tif^i).    See  on  Lnke  yL  39. 

Living  fountains  of  waters  {Jjinaafi  ihty^  v^nev).  For 
the  participle  limngy  read  fyef^  of  life^  and  render  as  Bey., 
fintntains  of  waters  of  life.  Compare  Ps.  xxiii.  2.  In  the 
Oreek  order,  of  life  stands  first  as  emphatic 

All  tears  {irw  Sdxpvov).  Bey.,  correctly,  every  tear.  Com- 
pare Isa.  xxy.  8. 


CHAPTER  VIIL 

1.  When  (^e).  *  Bead  Jroy,  the  indefinite  particle  with  the 
indicatiye  mood.  For  a  similar  construction,  see  Mark  xi.  19 
(correct  reading).  Alford  obseryes  that  it  occurs  in  the  open- 
ing of  this  seal  only,  giying  it  an  indefiniteness  which  does  not 
belong  to  any  of  the  rest 

There  was  {iyhero).  More  literally,  came  to  pass.  Bey., 
iherefoUowed. 

About  (c09).  A  usual  form  of  expression  with  John.  See 
John  i  39 ;  yi.  19 ;  xi.  18. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BBVSLATION  OF  JOHN.  505 

2.  Stood  {i<rniKaa'w).    Bev.,  correctlj,  stand. 

Trumpets  {cdkirvfye^).    See  on  ch.  i  10. 

8.  At  the  altar  {M  rb  dwricum/ipiov).  The  best  texts  read 
Svauumjplov,  which  justifies  the  Kev.,  **  over  the  altar."  For 
altary  see  on  ch.  vi.  9.  Interpreters  differ  as  to  whether  the 
altar  meant  is  the  irazen  altar,  as  in  ch.  vi.  9,  or  the  altar  of 
inoenaey  as  in  ch.  ix.  13.  There  seems  to  be  no  reason  for 
changing  the  reference  from  the  brazen  altar  (see  on  ch.  vi.  9), 
especially  as  both  altars  are  mentioned  in  this  verse.  The  offic- 
iating priest  in  the  tabernacle  or  temple  took  the  fire  for  his 
censer  from  the  brazen  altar,  and  then  offei*ed  the  incense  upon 
the  golden  altar. 

Center.    See  on  ch.  v.  8. 

Incense.    See  on  ch.  v.  8. 

Offer  it  with  the  prayers  (Somti;  tok  irpoceuxok)*  Lit, 
should  ffim  it  tmto  the  prayers.  Rev.,  add  it  tmto  the  prayers. 
So  that  the  prayers  and  the  incense  might  ascend  together. 
Upocevy^i  is  always  nsed  of  prayer  to  Ood. 

Golden  altar.  The  altar  of  incense.  Exod.  zxx.  1-6 ;  xxxix. 
88. 

4.  Which  came  with  the  prayers.  An  awkward  render- 
ing, followed  by  Rev.,  though  with  the  omission  of  the  italicized 
v)huih  came.  The  construction  is  ivifiri  went  upj  with  the  dative 
case,  to  the  prayers.  ^^  The  ascending  smoke  had  reference  to 
the  prayers,  was  designed  to  accompany  them  and  render  them 
more  acceptable"  (Winer). 

Of  the  saints  {r&v  arflwv).    See  on  Acts  xxvi.  10. 

5.  Toole  {etKjq^).    Lit,  Juxth  taken.    So  Rev.,  in  margin. 

With  the  fire  {itc  roO  wvp6^).  Lit,  «/rom  or  out  of  the  fire," 
i.e.y  the  coals  or  hot  ashes.    For  etc  out  o/^  see  on  ch.  ii.  7. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


506  WORD  STUDIBS  IN  THE  NBW  TBSTAKEirr. 

Cast  it  into  the  earth.    See  EzeL  x.  2;  Luke  xii.  49. 

6.  To  sound  (&a  au\irlaw<rai).  Lit,  that  they  should  blow 
the  trumpeU.  Raified  their  trumpets  to  their  mouths  in  act  to 
blow. 

7.  The  first  angel.    Omit  wngd. 

Hail  and  fire  mingled  with  blood  (%<iXa^  icol  ^p /A£/uy- 
yJkiHi  aXiiarC).  Insert  h  in  before  aX^jtan  Mood.  Instead  of 
^^with  blood''  as  A.  v.,  and  Rev.,  we  should  render  "in  blood." 
The  hailstones  and  fire-balls  fell  in  a  shower  of  blood.  Ck)iu- 
pare  the  account  of  the  plague  of  fire  and  hail  in  Egypt  (Exod. 
ix.  24)  to  which  the  reference  is  here,  where  the  Septuagint 
reads  and  there  was  hail  a/nd  theji/rejUmmyg  in  the  haiL  Com- 
pare Joel  iL  30. 

And  the  third  part  of  the  earth  was  burnt  up.    This  is 

added  by  the  best  texts. 

Green  (x^P^)*    See  on  j>aley  ch.  yL  8. 

8.  As  it  were  (<o9).  Not  a  mountain,  but  a  fiery  mass  eo 
large  as  to  resemble  one. 

Blood.  Reminding  of  the  first  plague  in  Egypt  (Exod.  viL 
20,  21). 

9.  Life  (^t/x^?).    See  on  3  John  2. 
Ships  (7rXo&>i').    See  on  Luke  v.  2. 

10.  Lamp  (Xofiiriisi).    Rey.,  torch.    See  on  ch.  iy.  5. 

11.  Wormwood  (A^ufSosl).  Used  metaphorically  in  the  Old 
Testament  of  the  idolatry  of  Israel  (Deut.  xxix.  18) ;  of  ocUani' 
ity  am,d  sorrow  (Jer.  ix.  15  ;  xxiii.  15 ;  Lam.  iiL  15, 19)  ;  of 
false  judgment  (Amos  v.  7). 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BEVELATION  OF  JOHN.  607 

18.  An  angel  (ii^  offyikou).  For  cmgd  read  derov  eagle. 
Lit,  ons  eagle.  The  eagle  is  a  symbol  of  yengeance  in  Deat 
xxviiL  49 ;  Hos.  viiL  1;  Hab.  i.  8. 

Mid  heaven  (jJLe<TovpavfjfiaTi).  Only  in  the  Apocalypse, 
here,  xiv.  6 ;  xix.  17.  It  means,  properly,  the  meridian^  the 
highest  point  in  the  heavens  which  the  son  occupies  at  noon: 
not  the  space  between  heaven  and  earth. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

1.  Fall  {ireirrtaicoTa).  Lit,  fallen.  The  star  had  fallen 
before  and  is  seen  as  fallen.  Be  v.,  properly,  construes  star 
YriihfTom  heaven  instead  of  with  faUen.  Compare  Isa.  id  v.  12 ; 
Luke  X.  18. 

Of  the  bottomless  pit  (toO  ^piara*;  rfj^  hfivaaov).  Eev., 
of  the  pit  of  the  cibyse.  See  on  John  iv.  6,  and  compare  Luke 
ziv.  5.  It  is  not  however  a  pit  that  is  locked,  but  the  long  shaft 
leading  to  the  abyss,  like  a  well-shaft,  which,  in  the  East,  is 
of tener  covered  and  locked. 

2.  Smoke  of  a  great  furnace-  Compare  Gen.  zix.  28; 
Exod.  xix.  18 ;  Matt.  xiiL  42,  50. 

8.  Locusts  (cucplbe^).  The  idea  of  this  plague  is  from  the 
eighth  plague  in  Egypt  (Exod.  x.  14, 15).  Compare  the  de- 
scription of  a  visitation  of  locusts  in  Joel  ii.  There  are  three 
Hebrew  words  in  the  Old  Testament  which  appear  to  mean 
looust,  probably  signifying  different  species.  Only  this  word 
is  employed  in  the  New  Testament.  Compare  Matt.  iii.  4 ; 
Mark  i.  6. 

Scorpions.  See  Ezek.  ii  6 ;  Luke  x.  19 ;  xi.  12.  Shaped 
like  a  lobster,  living  in  damp  places,  under  stones,  in  clefts  of 
walls,  cellars,  etc.  The  sting  is  in  the  extremity  of  the  tail. 
The  sting  of  the  Syrian  scorpion  is  not  fatal,  though  very  pain- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


508  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  KBW  TBSTAHHNT. 

f  nL  The  same  is  true  of  the  West  Indian  scorpion.  Thomson 
says  that  those  of  North  Africa  are  said  to  be  larger,  and  that 
their  poison  frequently  caoses  death.  The  wilderness  of  Sinai 
is  especially  alluded  to  as  being  inhabited  by  scorpions  at  the 
time  of  the  Exodus  (Dent  viiL  15) ;  and  to  this  very  day  they 
are  common  in  the  same  district  A  part  of  the  mountains 
bordering  on  Palestine  in  the  south  was  named  from  these 
Ahrabbimj  Akrdb  being  the  Hebrew  for  scorpion. 

4.  Green.    See  on  ch.  vi.  8. 

Men  which  {iv^pmrov^  oXrwesiy  The  double  relative  denotes 
the  class.    Bev.,  «uoA  men  as  ha/oe^  etc 

5.  They  should  be  tormented  (JSaaaviaB&a'ui).  See  on 
tormetvt8y  Matt  iv.  24. 

Striketh  (iralajf).  Dr.  Thomson  says  that  the  scorpion  can- 
not strike  sideways.  All  accounts  agree  as  to  the  fearful  pain 
from  its  sting. 

6.  Men.    Bather,  the  men:  those  tormented. 

Shall  desire  {(h^^SvfuiaxnHrw).    *Evl  has  the  force  of  vehe-^ 

fnendyf  eameetly. 

Shall  flee  (^^oi).  Read  ^diyei  Jheth.  uEschylus  says : 
**  Not  justly  do  mortals  hate  death,  since  it  is  the  greatest  de- 
liverance from  their  many  woes*'  ("Fragment").  Herodotus 
relates  the  address  of  Artabanus  to  Xerxes,  when  the  latter 
wept  on  beholding  his  vast  armament  "There  is  no  man, 
whether  it  be  here  among  this  multitude  or  elsewhere,  who  is 
so  happy  as  not  to  have  felt  the  wish — ^I  will  not  say  once,  but 
f nU  many  a  time— that  he  were  dead  rather  than  alive.  Ca- 
lamities fall  upon  us,  sicknesses  vex  and  harass  us,  and  make 
life,  short  though  it  be,  to  appear  long.  So  death,  through  the 
wretchedness  of  our  life,  is  a  most  sweet  refuge  to  our  raoe'' 
(vii,  46). 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BEVELATION  OF  JOHN.  609 

7.  Shapes  (o/iOM&/uira).    lit,  Ukenessea. 

Horses,  Compare  Joel  ii.  4.  The  likeness  of  a  locust  to  a 
horse,  especially  to  a  horse  equipped  with  armor,  is  so  striking 
that  the  insect  is  named  in  German  JBeupferd  hay-horsey  and 
in  Italian  canxdetta  UtUe  horse. 

Crowns,  Kot  actnal  crowns,  but  as  crowns.  Milligan  re- 
marks that  anj  yellow  brilliancy  about  the  head  of  the  insect 
is  a  sufficient  foundation  for  the  figure. 

As  the  faces  of  men.  There  is  a  distant  resemblance  to 
the  human  countenance  in  the  face  of  the  locust  Men  {auSpA- 
wwv)  is  to  be  taken  not  as  distinguishing  sex,  but  in  the  generic 
sense:  Ataman  faces. 

8.  Hair  of  women.  The  antennsB  of  the  locust  There  is 
said  to  be  an  Arabic  proverb  in  which  the  antennsB  of  locusts 
are  compared  to  girls'  hair. 

Teeth  of  lions.    Compare  Joel.  1.  6. 

9.  Breastplates.  The  breast  of  the  locust  resembles  the 
plates  of  a  horse's  armor. 

Sound  of  their  wings.  Olivier,  a  French  writer,  says:  "It 
in  difficult  to  express  the  effect  produced  on  us  by  the  sight  of 
the  whole  atmosphere  filled  on  all  sides  and  to  a  great  height 
by  an  innumerable  quantity  of  these  insects,  whose  flight  was 
slow  and  uniform,  and  whose  noise  resembled  that  of  lain." 
For  a  graphic  description  of  their  numbers  and  ravages,  see 
Thomson,  "  Land  and  Book,  Central  Palestine  and  Phoenicia," 
29fr-802. 

Of  chariots  of  many  horses.  That  is,  of  mam/'horsed 
chariots.  The  Bev.,  by  the  insertion  of  a  comma,  apparently 
takes  the  two  clauses  as  parallel :  the  sound  of  chariotSy  (the 
sound)  of  many  horses. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


510  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NBW  TBSTAMENT. 

Tails  like  unto  scorpions.  The  oomparifion  with  the  in- 
sect as  it  exists  in  nature  fails  here,  though  Smith's  ^'  Bible  Dio- 
tionarj  ^  gives  a  picture  of  a  species  of  locust,  the  Acridinm 
ZineolOj  a  species  commonly  sold  for  food  in  the  markets  of 
Bagdad,  which  has  a  sting  in  the  taiL 

Stings  {tchnpa).  Originallj  (my  sharp poirU.  A  goad.  See 
on  pricksj  Acts zxvi.  14.  Plato  uses  it  aiihe  peg  of  aicp 
(^'  Eepublic,"  436).  Herodotus  of  an  wttrumeni  of  torture. 
Democedes,  the  Crotoniat  physician,  having  denied  his  koowl- 
edge  of  medicine  to  Darius,  Darius  bade  his  attendants  "bring 
the  scourges  and  pricking-irons  xivrpa,^^  (Ui.,  30).  Sophoclee 
of  the  btickle-tongues  with  which  (Edipus  put  out  his  eyes. 

"  Woe,  woe,  and  woe  again ! 
How  throogh  me  darts  the  throb  these  dagpi  (ie4rrpw)  hare  caused." 

**  (Edipns  Tjrannns,'*  1818. 

Of  the  epur  of  a  cocky  the  quiU  of  a  porcupine^  and  the  dings 
of  insects. 

For  the  A.  V.,  there  were  stings  in  their  tailSy  read  as  Eev., 
cmd  stings;  cmd  in  their  tails  is  iheir power  to  hurt. 

11.  They  had  a  king  over  them  i^xxrw  i^  airr&v  /9«<^ 
CKea).  Render,  as  Eev.,  they  home  over  iKem  as  king.  Compare 
Prov.  XXX.  27.     Hence  distinguished  from  the  natural  locustfi. 

In  Hebrew  (EfipaUrrl).  Used  only  by  John.  Compare 
John  V.  2 ;  xix.  13,  17,  20 ;  Apoc^  xvi.  16. 

Abaddon.  Meaning  destruction.  Compare  Job  xxvi.  6; 
xxviii.  22 ;  Prov.  xv.  11.  Here  the  Destroy er^  as  is  evident 
from  the  Greek  equivalent  ^AirohXwv  ApoUyon  destroyer. 
Perdition  is  personified.  It  is  after  John's  manner  to  give  the 
Hebrew  with  the  Greek  equivalent.  Compare  John  i.  38, 42; 
iv.  25  ;  ix.  7 ;  xi.  16,  etc. 

12.  The  first  woe  (i^  oval  ^  fUa).    Lit,  the  one  woe. 

13.  A  voice  (^v)fv  fiiav).    Lit.,  one  voice. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  611 

Altar.    See  on  ch.  viii.  3. 

14.  In  the  great  river  (iwl).    Eev.,  more  correctly,  €b6. 

Euphrates.  The  Euphrates  was  known  as  the  great  Hwer^ 
the  HweTy  the  Flood.  It  rises  in  the  mountains  of  Armenia, 
breaks  throagh  the  Tanrns  range,  and  runs  south  and  southeast 
until  it  joins  the  Tigris  in  lower  Babylonia.  Its  total  length 
is  from  1,600  to  1,800  miles,  and  it  is  navigable  for  small  craft 
twelve  hundred  miles  from  its  mouth.  It  was  the  boundary- 
line  of  Israel  on  the  northeast  (Gen.  xv.  18 ;  Deut.  i.  7 ;  Josh, 
i.  4.  Compare  2  Sam.  viii.  3-8 ;  1  Kings  iv.  21).  It  thus 
formed  the  natural  defence  of  the  chosen  people  against  the 
armies  of  Assyria.  The  melting  of  the  mountain  snows  causes 
an  annual  flood,  beginning  in  March  and  increasing*  until  May. 
These  floods  became  an  emblem  of  the  judgments  inflicted  by 
God  upon  Israel  by  means  of  Babylon  and  Assyria.  The  brook 
of  Shiloah  which  flowed  past  Zion  and  Moriah  was  a  type  of 
the  temple  and  of  its  mighty  and  gracious  Lord ;  and  the  re- 
fusal of  allegiance  to  God  by  the  chosen  people  is  represented 
as  their  rejection  of  the  waters  of  Shiloah  which  flow  softly, 
and  their  punishment  therefor  by  the  bringing  in  of  the  waters 
of  the  mighty  and  great  river  (Isa.  viii  5-8;  compare  Jer. 
xvii.  13).  To  the  prophets  the  Euphrates  was  the  symbol  of 
all  that  was  disastrous  in  the  divine  judgments. 

15.  For  an  hour  and  a  day  and  a  month  and  a  year. 

This  rendering  is  wrong,  since  it  conveys  the  idea  that  the  four 
periods  mentioned  are  to  be  combined  as  representing  the 
length  of  the  preparation  or  of  the  continuance  of  the  plague. 
But  it  is  to  be  noted  that  neither  the  article  nor  the  preposition 
are  repeated  before  da/y  and  month  and  year.  The  meaning  is 
that  the  angels  are  prepared  unto  the  hour  appointed  by  God, 
and  that  this  hour  shall  fall  in  its  appointed  day  and  month 
and  year. 

16.  Of  the  horsemen  (rod  hnrueoS).  Singular  number,  like 
the  English  the  horee  or  the  camlay. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


512  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THK  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Two  hundred  thousand  thousand  {Svo  fwpui:^  fwpt6Bw). 
Lit.,  two  tenrthovsanda  of  tenrthausands.  See  on  ch.  v.  IL 
Bev.,  tioice  ten-thousand  times  ten-thousand.  Compare  Fb. 
IxviiL  17;  Dan.  vii.  10;  Heb.  ariL  22;  Jude  14. 

17.  Thus  {oirtosi).    After  this  manner. 

In  the  vision  {iv  r§  opdtnt).  Or  "in  my  vision."  See  on 
Acts  ii.  17.  The  reference  to  sight  may  be  inserted  becaose  of 
I  hea/rd  in  ver.  16. 

Of  fire  (irvplvav^).    Eev.,  "  as  of  fire.**    Fiery  red. 

Of  jacinth  {vcucivl^lpot^y  *Tcucuf9o^  hyacinth  is  the  name  of 
a  flower  and  also  of  a  precions  stone.  The  nonn  occnrs  only 
Apoc.  xxi.  *20y  and  the  adjective  only  here.  According  to 
classical  my thology,  the  flower  sprang  up  from  the  blood  of  Hy- 
acinthns,  a  beantif  ol  Spartan  youth,  who  was  accidentally  killed 
during  a  game  of  quoits.  It  was  thought  by  some  that  the  let- 
ters AI,  AI,  the  exclamation  of  woe,  could  be  traced  on  the 
petals,  while  others  discovered  the  letter  T,  the  initial  letter  of 
^ToKwSoif.  The  stoiy  of  the  slaying  of  Hyacinthue  is  told  by 
Ovid. 

"Lo,  the  blood 
Which,  on  the  gronnd  ontponred,  had  stained  the  sod^ 
Is  blood  no  more.    Brighter  than  Tjrian  dje, 
Like  to  the  lily's  shape  a  flower  appears, 
Purple  in  hue  as  that  is  silrerj  white. 
Kor  jet  does  such  memorial  content 
PhcBbns  ApoUo  at  whose  word  it  rose. 
Upon  its  leaves  he  writes  his  own  lamentSy 
And  on  the  flower  forever  stands  inscribed 
Al,  AI.'» 

"  Metamorphoses,"  x,  175  iqq* 

As  a  stone,  it  is  identified  by  some  with  the  sapphire.  As  to 
color,  the  hyacinth  of  the  Greeks  seems  to  have  comprehended 
the  iris,  gladiolus,  and  larkspur.  Hence  the  different  accounts 
of  its  color  in  classical  writings,  varying  from  red  to  blacL  A 
dull,  dark  blue  seems  to  be  meant  here. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  513 

Of  brimstone  ('^M&Se^).  Ferhaps  light  yeUoWy  such  a  color 
as  would  be  produced  by  the  settling  fumes  of  brimstone. 

Of  the  horses.  In  the  Bible  the  horse  is  always  referred  to 
in  connection  with  war,  except  Isa.  xxviii.  28,  where  it  is  men- 
tioned as  employed  in  threshing,  the  horses  being  turned  loose 
in  the  grain  as  in  the  Italian  triglia.  The  magnificent  descrip- 
tion in  Job  xxxix.  19-25  applies  to  the  wa/r-hor9e.  He  is  dis- 
tinguished, not  so  much  for  his  speed  and  utility  as  for  his 
strength  (see  Ps.  xxxiii.  17 ;  cxlvii.  10),  and  the  word  (Mir 
strong  is  used  as  an  equivalent  for  a  horse  (Jer.  viiL  16  ;  xlvii. 
3).  The  Hebrews,  as  a  pastoral  race,  did  not  need  the  horse; 
and,  for  a  long  time  after  their  settlement  in  Canaan,  dispensed 
with  it,  partly  because  of  the  hilly  nature  of  the  country,  which 
allowed  the  use  of  chariots  only  in  certain  places  (Judges  i.  19), 
and  partly  because  of  the  prohibition  in  Deut.  xvii.  16.  Accord- 
ingly they  hamstrung  the  horses  of  the  Canaanites  (Josh.  xi.  6, 9). 
The  great  supply  of  horses  was  effected  by  Solomon  through  his 
connection  with  Egypt    See  1  Eings  iy.  26. 

Proceedeth  fire  and  smoke.    Compare  YirgiL 

**  Then,  if  the  Bonnd  of  amis  he  hear  from  far. 
Quiet  he  cannot  stand,  bat  pricks  his  ears. 
Trembles  in  everj  limb,  and  snorting,  rolls 
The  gathered  fire  beneath  his  nostrils  wide." 

«*Georgios,-iii,  88-88. 

Also  Job  xxxix.  20 :  "  the  glory  of  his  nostrils  is  terrible.^ 

18.  These  three.  Add  irKrjy&p  j>laguesj  on  which  see  on 
Mark  iiL  10 ;  Luke  x.  30. 

19.  Their  power  {i^ovcAu  avr&v).  Read  i^ovala  r&v  tmrmp 
the  power  of  the  horeee. 

Like  unto  serpents.  ^^Long,  smooth,  subtle,  clasping  their 

victim  in  an  embrace  from  which  he  cannot  escape"  (Milligan). 

As  one  of  the  innumerable  fantasies  of  Apocalyptic  expoeition 

may  be  cited  that  of  Elliott  (^^Hor»  Apocalyptic®'^  who  finds 

Vol.  n.— 88 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


514  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

a  reference  to  the  horse  tails,  the  symbols  of  anthoritj  of  the 
Turkish  pashas. 

20.  Repented  not  of  the  works  {o6t€  fiereudtfcap  he  t&p 
ipy»v).  Lit.,  "  otU  of  the  works."  The  preposition  he  out  qf 
with  repent^  denotes  a  moral  change  involving  an  abandonment 
of  evil  works.    See  on  Matt  iiL  2 ;  xxL  29. 

Works  of  their  hands.  Not  their  conrse  of  life,  but  the 
idols  which  their  hands  had  made.  Compare  Dent  iv.  28 ;  Pb. 
cxxxiv.  16  ;  Acts  viL  4. 

Devils  {S{UfjL6vut).  More  properly,  demons.  See  on  Mark 
i.  34.    Compare  1  Cor.  x.  20 ;  1  Tun.  iv.  1. 

See,  hear,  walk.    Compare  Dan.  v.  23. 

21.  Sorceries  {ifnipfuyeeUiv).  Only  here,  ch.  xviii.  23 ;  and 
Gal.  V.  20,  where  ^pfuuceia  aorcerieSj  A.  V.,  wiichcraft  is  enum- 
erated among  the  "  works  of  the  flesh."  Used  in  the  Septaagint 
of  the  Egyptian  sorceries  (Exod.  vii.  22.  Of  Babylon,  Isa.  xlvii. 
9, 12).  From  <f>dpfiaKov  a  drug^  and  thence  a  poison,  an  en-- 
chantment.  Plato  says :  ^^  There  are  two  kinds  of  poisons  need 
among  men  which  cannot  clearly  be  distinguished.  Tliere  is 
one  kind  of  poison  which  injures  bodies  by  the  use  of  other 
bodies  according  to  a  natural  law  .  .  .  but  there  is  an- 
other kind  which  injures  by  sorceries  and  incantations  and 
magic  bonds,  as  they  are  termed,  and  induces  one  class  of  men 
to  injure  another  as  far  as  they  can,  and  persuades  others  that 
they,  above  all  persons,  are  liable  to  be  injured  by  the  powers 
of  the  magicians.  Now  it  is  not  easy  to  know  the  nature  of 
all  these  things ;  nor  if  a  man  do  know  can  he  readily  persnade 
others  of  his  belief.  And  when  men  are  disturbed  at  the  sight 
of  waxen  images,  fixed  either  at  the  doors,  or  in  a  place  where 
three  ways  meet,  or  in  the  sepulchres  of  parents,  there  is  no  use 
of  trying  to  persuade  them  that  they  should  despise  all  such 
things,  because  they  have  no  certain  knowledge  about  them. 
But  we  must  have  a  law  in  two  parts  concerning  poisoning,  in 
whichever  of  the  two  ways  the  attempt  is  made ;  and  we  must 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


REVELATION  OP  JOHN.  616 

entreat  and  exhort  and  advise  men  not  to  have  recourse  to  snch 
practices,  by  which  they  scare  the  multitude  out  of  their  wits, 
as  if  they  were  children,  compelling  the  legislator  and  the  judge 
to  heal  the  fears  which  the  sorcerer  arouses,  and  to  tell  them, 
in  the  first  place,  that  he  who  attempts  to  poison  or  enchant 
others  knows  not  what  he  is  doing,  either  as  regards  the  body 
(unless  he  have  a  knowledge  of  medicine)  or  as  regards  his 
enchantments,  unless  he  happens  to  be  a  prophet  or  diviner" 
("  Laws,"  xi.,  933). 


CHAPTER  X. 

1.  A  cloud.  The  expression  occurs  seven  times  in  the 
Apocalypse,  and  in  all  of  them  is  connected  with  the  Son  of 
Man. 

Rainbow.    See  on  ch.  iv.  3. 
Pillars  of  fire.    Compare  ch.  i.  16. 

2.  In  his  hand  [^\  The  roU  of  Ch.  v.  was  on  the  hand 
(Art  see  ch.  v.  1),  being  too  large  to  be  grasped  within  it.  The 
roll  was  on  the  right  hand;  the  little  book  is  in  the  left.  See 
on  ver.  6. 

3.  Cried  {hcpa^ev).    See  on  Mark  v.  6. 

As  when.    The  when  of  A.  Y.  is  unnecessary. 

Roareth  (/Av/caroi).  Onlyhere  in  the  Kew  Testament  Peter 
uses  mpvofia^  for  the  voice  of  the  lion.  See  on  1  Pet  v.  8.  The 
verb  here  is  originally  applied  to  the  lowing  of  cattle,  expressing 
the  sound,  moo-ka-OTnai.  Both  Aristophanes  and  Theocritus  use 
it  of  the  roar  of  the  lion,  and  the  former  of  thunder.  Homer, 
of  the  ring  of  the  shield  and  the  hissing  of  meat  on  the  spit. 

Seven  thunders.  The  Jews  were  accustomed  to  speak  of 
thunder  as  "  the  seven  voices."  Compare  the  sevenfold  "  voice 
of  the  Lord,"  Ps.  xxix. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


510  WORD  8TUDIB8  Df  THB  NBW  TB8TAJCENT. 

As  usual,  interpretation  has  nm  wild  as  to  the  seven  thimden. 
As  a  few  illustrations  may  be  cited  Yitringa,  the  seven  crusades; 
Daubuz,  the  seven  kingdoms  which  received  the  Iteformation; 
Elliott,  the  bull  fulminated  against  Lather  from  the  6e?en*hilled 
city,  etc. 

4.  To  write.    Aooordiog  to  the  injunction  in  ch.  L  11. 

6.  His  hand.  Add  ripf  he^ihv  the  rights  and  see  on  ver.  2. 
On  lifting  the  hand  in  swearing,  see  Gen.  xiv.  22 ;  Ezod  yi'8 
(margin) ;  Dent  xxxiL  40. 

6.  8 ware  by  {Afuxrep  iv).  Lit,  ^^  sware  tn^"  a  Hebrew 
idiom. 

Should  be  time  no  longer  (xP^vo^  ovtc  iarcu  iri).  Ber., 
con'ectly,  shall  bey  etc.  The  meaning  is  not,  as  popularly  un- 
derstood, that  time  shall  cease  to  exist,  but  that  there  shall  be 
no  more  delay  (so  Rev.,  in  margin)  before  the  fulfilment  of  the 
divine  purposes  respecting  the  Church  on  earth.  Possibly  with 
allusion  to  the  cry  how  long  (ch.  vi.  10). 

7.  Shall  begin  to  aound  (jUXXp  ^oXir^Jeiy).  Wrong.  Ber^ 
correctly,  when  he  is  about  to  sound. 

The  mystery  {rh  fiwmipiov).    See  on  Matt  xiiL  11. 

Declared  {evr/yyiXKrev).  The  word  used  of  declaring  the 
good  news  of  salvation.  Here  of  declaring  the  mystery  of  the 
kingdom. 

8.  Spake  unto  me.  Bender,  as  Bev.,  ^'I  heard  it  again 
speaking.^* 

9.  I  went  {ainji\3cp).  The  preposition  airS  has  the  force  of 
avHiy.    I  went  away  from  the  place  where  I  was  standing. 

Eat  it  up.    Compare  Ezek.  iiL  1-3 ;  Jer.  xv.  16. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


EBYBLATIOir  OF  JOHK.  517 


CHAPTER  XL 

1.  A  rod.    See  on  ch.  iL  27. 

And  the  angel  stood.  Omit  The  inBertion  of  tliese  worde 
funiishes  a  subject  for  the  agreement  of  the  participle  yJ^pn^^ 
which  is  irregolar  in  construction.  Literally  the  correct  text 
reads,  ^^  there  was  given  me  a  reed,  aaymg,^^  Accordingly 
Wordsworth  refers  the  speech  to  the  reed  as  an  inspired  med- 
ium of  speech.    Bey.,  better,  amd  one  9aid. 

The  temple  {rhv  vahv).    See  on  Matt  iv.  5. 

The  altar.  Of  incense,  as  that  alone  stood  in  the  sacred 
place. 

Them  that  worship.  Kote  the  peculiar  expression,  meas- 
uring the  worshippers  with  a  reed. 

2.  The  court  which  is  without  the  temple.  Kot  merely 
the  outer  court,  or  Court  of  the  Gentiles,  but  including  all  that 
is  not  within  the  va6^,  the  Holy  and  Most  Holy  places. 

Leave  out  {iKficCKe  jf|w).  lit,  throw  at$^  i.e.,  of  the  meas- 
urement 

Unto  the  Gentiles  {rdk  i^veaiv).  See  on  Luke  iL  82. 
Bey.,  nations. 

Forty  and  two  months.  A  period  which  appears  in  three 
forms  in  the  Apocalypse :  forty4wo  montha  (ch.  xiiL  5) ;  Ucdve- 
hundred  and  sixty  days  (yen  3,  ch.  xiL  6) ;  a  ttmSy  times  cmd 
half  a  time^  or  three  years  and  a  half  (xii.,  14,  compare  Dan. 
yii.  25 ;  xii.  7). 

3.  Power.    Omit 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


518  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Two  witnesses.  The  reader  may  profitably  consult  on  this 
point  the  lectures  of  Professor  Milligan  on  the  Kevelation  of 
St  John.  He  maintainfl  that  the  conception  of  the  Apocalypse 
is  powerfully  moulded  by  John's  recollections  of  the  life  of 
Jesos;  that  there  is  a  close  parallelism  between  the  Apocalypse 
and  the  delineation  of  the  life  of  Christ  contained  in  the  f onrth 
Gospel ;  and  that  the  Apocalypse  is,  in  the  deeper  coDceptions 
which  pervade  it,  a  repetition  of  the  GospeL    See  pp.  59-69. 

They  shall  prophesy  {irpo^/fffrewTovaiv).  See  on  jpraphdj 
Luke  viL  26.  Commonly  explained  of  preaching  repentance, 
thoogh  some  take  it  in  the  later  sense  of  foretelling  future 
events. 

Clothed  in  sackcloth.  The  garb  of  preachers  of  repent- 
ance. Compare  Isa.  xxii.  12 ;  Jer.  iv.  8 ;  Jonah  iii.  5 ;  Matt 
iiL  4.    For  sctckdoth  see  on  Luke  x.  13. 

4.  Two  olivs  trees.    See  Zech.  iv. 
Candlesticks.    See  Zech.  iv.,  and  note  on  Matt.  v.  15. 
The  God.    Bead  Kvplov  the  Lord .    Compare  Zech.  iv.  14. 

5.  Fire  proceedeth.    Compare  2  Kings  i.  10;  Jer.  v.  14. 

6.  To  shut  up  the  heaven.  As  Elijah,  1  Kings  xvii.  1; 
Luke  iv.  25 ;  Jas.  v.  17. 

That  it  rain  not  (Iva  iiii  fipixD  vero^).  Lit.,  that  the  rain 
may  not  wet. 

To  turn  them  into  blood.    Compare  Exod.  viL  19. 

To  smite  (vard^cu).  Used  by  John  only  in  the  Apocalypse, 
here  and  xix.  15.  Compare  Matt,  xxvi  31;  Mark  xiv.  27; 
Luke  xxii.  49,  50 ;  Acts  xii.  7,  23. 

With  all  plagues  {'irdaTj  ^rXiryg).  Singular  number.  Rev., 
correctly,  toith  every  plague.  See  on  Mark  iii.  10.  Not  merely 
with  the  plagues  with  which  Moses  smote  Egypt 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  519 

7.  The  beast  {Svpiov).  Wild  beast.  See  on  ch.  iv.  6.  A 
different  word  from  that  wrongly  translated  beasty  ch.  iv.  6,  7 ; 
v.  6,  etc    Compare  ch.  xiii.  1 ;  xviL  8,  and  see  Dan.  viL 

Bottomless  pit  {afivaaov).    See  on  ch.  ix.  1. 

8.  Dead  bodies  (imifiaTa).  Bead  wr&fM  carcase.  See  on 
Matt  xxiy.  28 ;  Mark  xv.  45. 

In  the  street  (Arl  1%  irXareUvi).  Lit,  ^^t^pon  the  street 
See  on  Luke  xiv.  21. 

The  great  city.  Jemsalem  is  never  called  by  this  name. 
Different  expositors  refer  it  to  Bome  or  Babylon.  Milligan 
to  Jerusalem. 

Spiritually  {wvevfiaTucwy  Typically  or  allegorically.  Com- 
pare 1  Cor.  X.  3,  4. 

Our  Lord.    Bead  aur&v  their  for  ^fi&v  our. 

9.  Shall  see  (JSkh^vaui).  Bead  ffKbrauo'tv  do  men  look 
(Rev.)j  and  see  on  John  L  29. 

Shall  not  suffer  {ovk  a/^iriaownv).  Bead  a^lovaw  do  not 
suffer. 

To  be  put  in  graves  {j^^m  sk  fii^fAara).  Bead  /iy^/ia 
a  tomby  as  Bev.    Compare  Gen.  xxiiL  4 ;  Isa.  xiv.  19,  20. 

10.  Shall  rejoice  (xo^va-M^).  Bead  %a//x)va'^i',  present  tense, 
refoioe. 

Shall  make  merry  {eb^pavBricovrai).  Bead  eb^poJvovrM^ 
present  tense,  make  merry;  and  for  the  word  see  note  on  feared 
9wmptuou8lyj  Luke  xvL  19. 

Shall  send  gifts.  As  on  a  day  of  festival  See  Keh.  viii 
10, 12. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


620  WORD  8TUDIR8  IN  THB  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

Tormented  {ifiaaduiow).  See  on  vexedj  2  Pet  ii.  8,  and 
on  Matt  iv.  23,  24. 

11.  Spirit  of  life  {wpeOfM  C«^)-  'Rev.y  breath.  See  on  John 
lu.  8. 

Entered  into  them.    Compare  Ezek.  xxxviL  1-10. 

Saw  {SetopovvTo^y    See  on  John  L  18. 

13.  Earthquake.    See  on  ch.  vi.  12. 

Of  men  {pvofuara  iw^pdyir^v).  Lit,  nameM  of  men.  See  on 
ch.  ill.  4:. 

Gave  glory  to  the  God  of  heaven.  The  phrase  signifieB 
not  conversion,  nor  repentance,  nor  thanksgiving,  but  recogni- 
tiouj  which  is  its  usual  sense  in  scripture.  Compare  Josh.  viL 
19  (Sept.).    John  ix.  24;  Acts  xiL  23 ;  Rom.  iv.  20. 

15.  The  kingdoms— are  become  {iyhfwro  al  fioffOsJuai). 
Read  iyepero  i}  fiacriKeia,  t/ie  kingdom — is  becorne. 

Of  our  Lord,  etc.    Compare  Ps.  ii.  2-9, 

17.  O  Lord  God,  etc.     See  on  ch.  iv.  8. 
And  art  to  come.    Omit 

Hast  taken  to  Thee.    Omit  to  Thee. 

18.  Were  angry  {offflaBficav).  See  on  v>rathy  John  iii.  36. 
Compare  Ps.  ii.  1. 

The  time  (o  iccuposi).    See  on  Matt  xii.  1. 

Reward  {luaBhv).    See  on  2  Pet  ii.  13. 

Destroy  (8ia^^i/>at).    Also  to  corrupt. 

Which  destroy  (to^  Suuf>S€lpovT(v;).    Or,  the  destroj/ere. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQL^- 


EBVBLATION  OF  JOHN.  521 

19.  The  temple  (o  mo9).  The  sanctuary.  Compare  ver.  1, 
and  see  on  Matt  iv.  5. 

In  heaven.  Join  with  temple  of  Gody  as  Bev.,  instead  of 
with  opened,  as  A.  Y. 

The  ark  of  His  covenant  (ij  Kifiomb^  T179  BuiJ^/evf<;  avrov). 
KxpoDTo^  arhy  meaning  generally  any  wooden  box  or  chest. 
Used  of  the  ark  in  the  tabernacle  only  here  and  Heb.  ix.  4. 
Elsewhere  of  Noah's  ark.  See  Matt.  xxiv.  38 ;  Luke  xviL  27 ; 
Ileb.  xi.  7 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  20.  For  covenant,  see  note  on  testa- 
menty  Matt.  xxvL  28.  This  is  the  last  mention  in  scripture  of 
the  ark  of  the  covenant.  It  was  lost  when  the  temple  was  de- 
stroyed by  the  Chaldseans  (2  Kings  xxv.  10),  and  was  wanting 
in  the  second  temple.  Tacitus  says  that  Pompey  **  by  right  of 
conquest  entered  the  temple.  Thenceforward  it  became  gen- 
erally known  that  the  habitation  was  empty  and  the  sanctuary 
unoccupied,  no  representation  of  the  deity  being  found  within 
it "  ("  History,'*  v.,  9).  According  to  Jewish  tradition  Jeremiah 
had  taken  the  ark  and  all  that  the  Most  Holy  Place  contained, 
and  concealed  them,  before  the  destruction  of  the  temple,  in  a 
cave  at  Mount  Sinai,  whence  they  are  to  be  restored  to  the 
temple  in  the  days  of  Messiah. 

Lightnings  and  voices,  etc.  <^The  solemn  salvoe,^  to 
speak,  of  the  artillery  of  heaven,  with  which  each  series  of 
visions  is  concluded." 


CHAPTER  XII. 

1.  Wonder  {(nffieiov).    Better,  as  Eev.,  siffn.    See  on  Matt, 
xxiv.  24. 

Clothed  {mpifiepKfffUinji).    Eev.,  better,  arrayed.    See  on 
ch.  iii.  5. 

The  moon  under  her  feet.    See  Cant  vi  10.    The  symbol 
is  usually  taken  to  represent  the  Church. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


522  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

2.  Travailing  in  birth  {iBivowra).  See  on  sorrowsy  Mark 
xiiL  9,  and  jHiinSy  Acts  ii.  24. 

In  pain  (JSaaavi^ofAhnf).  Lit.,  being  tormented.  See  on  cli. 
xi.  10,  and  references.  For  the  imagery  compare  Isa.  IxvL  7,  8 ; 
John  xvi  21. 

3.  Red  (irvjiftbs).     See  on  ch.  vi.  4. 

Dragon  {hpdicfav).  Satan.  See  ver.  9.  The  word  is  found 
only  in  the  Apocalypse.  In  the  Septaagint,  of  the  serpent  into 
which  Moses'  rod  was  changed.  In  Isa.  xxvii.  1 ;  Ezek.  xxix.  3, 
of  the  crocodile  or  leviathan  of  Job  idi  1.  In  Jer.  IL  34,  of  a 
di*agon. 

Crowns  (SioSi^/uira).  The  kmgly  crcwn^  not  the  chapUt 
{ariifMPo^).    See  on  ch.  ii.  10. 

4.  Of  the  stars  of  heaven.  Some  expositors  find  an  allus- 
ion to  the  fallen  angels  (Jude  6). 

Did  cast  them  to  the  earth.    Compare  Dan.  viil.  10. 

To  devour  her  child  as  soon  as  it  was  born  (Zm  Srav 
ri/crj  rb  ri/cuov  avrrjf;  KaTa^>6rf^).  Eev.,  more  literally,  that 
when  ehe  was  delivered  he  might  devour  her  child.  Professor 
Milligan  says :  ^^In  these  words  we  have  the  dragon  doing  what 
Pharaoh  did  to  Israel  (Exod.  L  15-22),  and  again  and  again,  in 
the  Psalms  and  the  Prophets,  Pharaoh  is  spoken  of  slb  the 
dragon  (Ps.  Ixxiv.  13 ;  Isa.  xxvii.  1 ;  Ii.  9 ;  Ezek.  xxix.  3).  Nor 
is  it  withoat  interest  to  remember  tliat  Pharaoh's  crown  was 
wreathed  with  a  dragon  (the  asp  or  serpent  of  Egypt),  and  that 
just  as  the  eagle  was  the  ensign  of  Bome,  so  the  dragon  was 
that  of  Egypt.  Hence  the  significance  of  Moses'  rod  being 
turned  into  a  serpent." 

6.  A  man-child  {vibv  Appeva).  Lit,  a  son^  a  male.  The 
correct  reading  is  apaevt  the  neuter,  not  agreeing  with  the  mas- 
culine individual  {ylhv  eon)  but  with  the  neuter  of  the  genna. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BBVELATION  OF  JOHN.  523 

The  object  is  to  emphasize,  not  ihe  seXy  but  thej>e(ndiar  qtudi- 
ties  of  masculinity — power  and  vigor.  Kev.,  a  son^  a  man- 
child.     Compare  John  xvi.  21 ;  Jer.  xx.  IS. 

To  rule  (iro^fiaivew).  Lit,  to  shepherd  or  tetid.  See  on 
Matt.  iL  6. 

A  rod  of  iron.    Compare  Ps.  iL  9,  and  see  on  ch.  ii.  27. 

Was  caught  up  {^pirdo'Sfj).  See  on  Matt  xii.  12.  Compare 
Acts  xxiii.  10 ;  Jade  23. 

6.  Of  God  {avb  Tov  Beov).  Lit.,  from  God,  the  preposition 
marking  the  source  from  which  the  preparation  came.  For  a 
similar  nse,  see  Jas.  i.  13,  ^^  tempted  ^  God." 

7.  There  was  (iyepero).    Lit.,  there  arose. 

War  in  heaven.  Compare  1  Kings  xxii.;  Job  i.,  ii.;  Zech. 
iii. ;  Lnke  x.  18. 

Michael.    See  Dan.  x.  13,  21 ;  xiL  1 ;  and  on  Jnde  9. 

Fought  {hroXifji/rfa'av).  The  correct  reading  is  rev  woXefifjcrai 
to  fight.  So  Rev., "  going  forth  to  war  against  the  dragon  {jcariL 
TOV  hpdKovTO^).    The  correct  reading  is  fJLeri  with. 

8.  Prevailed  (Ztr^^uo-ai/).  See  on  Lake  xiv.  30 ;  xvL  3 ;  Jas. 
V.  16. 

9.  The  great  dragon  (o  Bpdxow  6  fjUyasi).  Lit,  the  dragon^ 
the  great  (dragon). 

That  old  serpent  (o  j^i9  6  apxaio^)*  Lit.,  the  serpent^  the 
old  (serpent).  For  this  habitual  construction  in  John,  see  on 
1  John  iv.  9.  For  apxoio^  old,  see  on  1  John  ii.  7,  and  com- 
pare "  he  was  a  marderer  &ir  apr^from  the  hegvnnvng^^  John 
viii.  44 ;  ifxfl  beginning  being  etymologically  akin  to  apx^Ms 
old. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


524  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

The  Devil.    See  on  Matt  iv.  1. 

Satan.    See  on  Luke  x.  18. 

The  deceiver  (6  irXavw).    Lit,  he  that  deoeweth.    See  on 
1  John  L  8. 

World  {oUovfUmiv).    See  on  Lake  iL  1.    The  world  witii  all 

its  inhabitants. 

Down  to  (€w).    Lit,  into. 

10.  Saying  in  heaven  OsAyavaav  iv  r^  oifpav^).  The  cor- 
rect reading  joins  m  heamen  with  great  voice.  So  Bey.  / 
heard  a  great  voice  in  he(wen. 

Now  {ofyri).    See  on  John  xiii.  33. 

Is  come  {iyh/€To).  Lit,  came  to  pass.  Alford  says :  '<  It  is 
impossible  in  English  to  join  to  a  particle  of  present  time,  such 
as  apri  now^  a  verb  in  aoristic  time.  We  are  driven  to  the  per- 
fect in  such  cases. 

Salvation,  power,  the  kingdom.  All  have  the  article :  the 
salvation,  etc.  So  Bev.  The  phrase,  now  is  come  the  salvaitonj 
etc.,  means  that  these  are  realized  and  established.  Some,  less 
correctly^  render,  now  is  the  salvation^  eta,  become  our  OodPs. 
Compare  Luke  iiL  6. 

Power  {i^ovaia).    See  on  Mark  ii.  10.    Bev.,  a^Uhorify, 

The  accuser  of  our  brethren  (o  tcaniyopo^  r&v  aSeXjp&p 
flli&v).  The  correct  form  of  the  Greek  for  accuser  is  a  tran- 
script of  the  Babbinical  Hebrew,  xan^yoDp.  The  Babbins  had 
a  corresponding  term  awijya^p  for  Michael,  as  the  advoccAe  of 
Ood's  people.  The  phrase  is  applied  to  Satan  nowhere  else  in 
the  New  Testament 

Is  cast  down  (tearefikiiSri).  The  aorist  tense.  Once  and  for 
all.    Compare  John  idi.  31 ;  xvi.  8, 11. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


REVELATION  OP  JOHN.  625 

Which  accuseth  (o  Kavrryop&v).  Lit.,  the  one  ctoousing.  The 
article  with  the  present  participle  expresses  what  is  habitual. 

11.  Overcame  {ivl/crfa-caf).    See  on  1  John  iL  13. 

By  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  {Sik  t6  atfia  rov  apvCov).  The 
preposition  Sk£  with  the  accasative  signifies  on  account  of. 
Hence  Bev.,  correctly,  hecaitae  of:  in  virtue  of  the  shedding  of 
that  blood.  Similarly  in  the  succeeding  clause,  '^hecoMseofHii^ 
word  of  their  testimony."    For  Icmib^  see  on  ch.  v.  6. 

Testimony  (juifyrvpCas).    See  on  John  i.  7. 

They  loved  not  their  life  even  unto  death.  Alford,  cor- 
rectly, "they  carried  their  not-love  of  their  life  even  unto 
death." 

12.  Dwell  {o-9effvovvT€si).  See  on  John  i.  14.  Compare  ch.  viL 
IS ;  xiii.  6  ;  xxi.  3. 

To  the  inhabiters  (roU  tcaroucowriv).  Omit.  Bead,  as  Bev., 
woe  for  the  earth  and  for  the  sea. 

Wrath  {Svfiov).    See  on  John  iii  36. 

Time  (KOipov).    See  on  Matt.  xii.  1 ;  Mark  L 15 ;  Acts  i.  7. 

14.  Two  wings.  The  definite  article  ai  tJie  should  be  ad- 
ded :  "  the  two  wings.''  Compare  Exod.  xix.  4 ;  Deut  xxxii. 
11 ;  Ps.  xxxvi.  7. 

The  great  eagle.  The  article  does  not  point  to  the  eagle  of 
ch.  viiL  13,  but  is  generic. 

A  time  and  times  and  half  a  time.  Three  years  and  a 
hall    See  on  ch.  xi.  2. 

15.  Cause  her  to  be  carried  away  of  the  flood  {ravrrfv 
irorafAO<f)6pifTov  iroiiiaif).    lit.,  mdffht  make  her  one  carried  away 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


526  WORD  STUDIBS  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

hy  the  stream  :  a  river-home  one.    The  word  occars  onl j  hfere 
in  the  New  Testament. 

17.  Jesus  Christ.    Omit  Christ 

Tlie  best  texts  add  to  tliis  chapter  the  opening  words  of  ch. 
xiii.  (A.  v.),  "  And  I  stood  upon  the  sand  of  the  sea."  Some, 
iiowever,  change  i^rraSfjv  latoody  to  iardSif  he  sioodj  referring 
to  the  dragon.    So  Kev. 


CHAPTER  XIIL 

1.  Beast  {Sf}plov).  Properlj  rendered.  See  remarks  on  ^ia 
living  creatures,  ch.  iv.  6. 

Rise  up  {avafidlvov).  Rev.,  better,  coming  ujp,  thns  giving 
the  force  of  the  participle. 

Ten  horns.    Compare  Dan.  vii.  7. 

Crowns  {SiaBijfiaTa).    Compare  ch.  xii.  3.    See  on  ch.  ii.  10. 

The  name  {Svofia).  Read  ovofuira  nemiea.  On  each  head  a 
name. 

2.  A  leopard  {irapBdKei).  The  ancients  do  not  seem  to 
have  distinguished  between  the  leopard,  the  panther,  and  the 
ounce.  The  word  stands  for  either.  Leopard  is  leo-pard^  the 
lion-pardy  which  was  supposed  to  be  a  mongrel  between  a 
panther  and  a  lioness.     Compare  Dan.  vii.  6. 

Bear.    Compare  Dan.  viL  5. 

Lion.    Compare  Dan.  vii.  4. 

3.  I  saw  (eZSov).    Omitted  in  the  best  texts. 

Wounded  (^0-^07/^6^).    Lit.,  slain.    See  on  ch.  v.  6.    The 
Rev.  smitten  is  questionable.     The  word  occurs  eight  times  in 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


REVBLATION  OF  JOHN.  527 

the  Apocalypse,  and  in  seven  of  these  it  must  be  rendered  slain 
or  slaughtered.  Professor  Milligan  rightly  observes  that  the 
statement  is  the  counterpart  of  that  in  ver.  6,  where  we  read  of 
the  Zarnb  as  though  it  had  been  slaughtered.  In  both  cases 
there  had  been  actual  death,  and  in  both  revival.  The  one  is  a 
mocking  counterpart  of  the  other. 

Deadly  wound  (^'^v^  '^^v  ^avdrov).  Lit,  stroke  ofdeaih. 
Kev.,  deathrstroke. 

After  the  beast  (yirlatD  rov  Sr)p(ov).  A  pregnant  construct- 
ion for  wondered  at  aaid  followed  after. 

4.  Which  gave  (09  iSa^/eev).  The  correct  reading  is  ft-*  "S^ 
catcse  he  gave." 

Who  is  like  unto  the  beast?  A  parody  on  a  similar 
ascription  to  God.  See  Isa.  xl.  18,  25 ;  xlvi.  5 ;  Ps.  cxiii.  S ; 
Micah  vii.  18 ;  Jer.  xlix.  19.     Compare  ch.  xviii.  18. 

5.  To  continue  forty  and  two  months  {iro^rjaai,  fifjva^ 
reaa^pdKovra  Bvo).  Lit.,  to  make  forty  and  two  months.  Sim- 
ilarly, Acts  XV.  33,  ^oiiJ<rain-€9  xpwoy  having  tarried  a  space; 
lit.,  hamng  m>ade  a  time.  See  on  continue  there  a  year^  Jas. 
iv.  13.  The  best  expositors,  however,  render  7roii7<r<u  absolutely, 
to  workj  and  the  following  accusative  as  the  accusative  of  dura- 
tion, ^^dtiring  forty  and  two  months."  Rev.,  margin,^  do  his 
works  during^  etc.    See  Dan.  xi.  28. 

6.  In  blasphemy  {ek  pKaa^idcaf).  Bead  fiXaaffyrjfiCa^ 
blasphemies.  JJev.,  giving  the  force  of  ek  more  correctly,  "/br 
blasphemies." 

And  them  that  dwell  in  heaven  (#cal  Toi>^  iv  r^  ovpav^ 
atcrjvovvTa^).  The  best  texts  omit  koX  and^  making  the  following 
words  in  apposition  with  Spofui  and  <nerjv)fv  name  and  taber- 
nacle. Thus  the  literal  sense  would  be  to  blasphem^e  the  name 
and  tabernacle  which  dwell  in  hea/oen.  "  The  meaning  is  to  en- 
hance the  enormity  of  the  blasphemy  by  bringing  out  the  lofty 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


528  WORD  STCJDIKS  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

nature  of  God's  holy  name  and  dwelling-place  "  ( Alford).    The 
word  dweU  is,  literally,  tabernacle.     See  on  ck  xiL  12. 

7.  The  saints  {r&v  arflxav).    See  on  Acts  xxri.  10. 

All  kindreds  {ircLaav  4>vX^p).  Rev.,  more  literally  and  cor- 
rectly, everi/  tribe.  See  on  ch.  i.  7 ;  v.  9.  After  tribe  insert 
KoX  Xaov  and  people.     See  on  1  Pet.  iL  9. 

Nation  {l^vo<;).    See  on  1  Pet.  ii.  9. 

8.  From  the  foundation  of  the  world.  These  words  may 
be  construed  with  slain  or  with  written.  In  favor  of  the  latter 
is  ch.  xviii.  8 ;  of  the  former,  1  Pet  i.  19,  20.  Alford,  pertin- 
ently as  I  think,  nrges  the  position  of  the  words  in  favor  of 
the  connection  with  dain^  and  says  that  had  it  not  been  for  the 
apparent  difficulty  of  the  sense  thus  conveyed,  no  one  would 
have  thought  of  going  so  far  back  as  to  hath  been  written  for  a 
connection.  Kender,  as  Rev.,  the  Lamh  that  ha;th  been  dain 
from  the  foundation  of  the  world.  KarafioX^  foundation  is 
literally  a  throwing  or  laying  dovm,  from  KarafidKku  to  throw 
down;  hence  a  laying  down  of  a  foundation. 

10.  He  that  leadeth  into  captivity  shall  go  into  cap- 
tivity {el  Ti9  alx/JuiKooaiav  aw6rfe^,  eh  alxf^aKMa-lav  \nr6rf€i^ 
Lit,  if  any  one  assemble  captvvity  (i.e.,  bring  together  captives) 
into  captivity  he  goeth  away.  The  best  texts  insert  e^  into  be- 
fore the  first  captivity  J  and  omit  assemble^  thus  reading  if  any 
man  is  for  captivity  into  captivity  he  goeth.  So  Rev.  See  on 
di»persion^  John  vii.  35.  Compare  Jer.  xv.  2 ;  xliii.  11.  The 
persecutors  of  the  Church  shall  suffer  that  which  they  inflict 
on  the  saints. 

Sword  (juixalpii).     See  on  ch.  vi.  4. 

Here.    In  the  thought  that  GkKi  judgeth  in  the  eardi. 

14.  An  image  to  the  beast  (eUova  t&  Svph)-  EUuip  is  a 
figure  or  likeness.  Thus  Matt.  xxiL  20,  of  the  likeness  of  Geasar 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  63* 

on  the  coin.  Horn.  i.  24,  an  image  of  men,  birds,  beasts,  etc 
Col.  iu.  10,  ^Hbe  image  of  Him  that  created  him;"  i,e.,  the 
moral  likeness  of  renewed  men  to  God.  Christ  is  called  tiie 
image  of  Ood  (Col.  i.  15 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  4).  Besides  the  idea  of 
likeneeSy  the  word  involves  the  idea  of  representation^  though 
not  of  perfect  representation.  Thus,  man  is  said  to  be  M^ 
image  of  God  (1  Cor.  xL  7).  In  this  it  resembles  x^atpcucrrip 
image  in  Heb.  i.  3.  Csasar's  image  on  the  coin,  the  reflection 
of  the  sun  in  the  water  (Plato,  "  PhsBdo,"  99) ;  and  the  statue 
or  image  of  the  beast  in  this  passage,  are  eucoov. 

The  word  also  involves  the  idea  of  manifestation.  Thus, 
CoL  i.  15,  where,  in  the  image  there  is  an  implied  contrast 
with  the  invisible  God.  Hence  Philo  applied  the  term  to  the 
Logos.    See  on  John  i.  1. 

The  word  played  an  important  part  in  the  Arian  controversy, 
in  which  the  distinction  wad  sharply  emphasized  between  ehcmv 
image  as  assuming  a  prototype,  and  therefore  as  properly  rep- 
resenting the  relation  of  the  Son  to  the  Father,  and  ofiowfka 
likenessy  as  implying  mere  similitude,  and  not  embodying  the 
essential  verity  of  the  prototype.  The  image  involves  the  Uke- 
ness,  but  the  likeness  does  not  involve  the  image.  The  latter 
may  imply  only  an  accidental  resemblance,  while  the  former  is 
a  veritable  representation.   Christ  is  therefore  the  euednf  of  God. 

2^  image  of  ike  heaet  occurs  ten  times  in  the  Apocalypse; 
four  times  in  this  chapter,  and  in  xiv.  9, 11 ;  xv.  2 ;  xvL  2 ;  xiz. 
20 ;  xz.  4. 

15.  Speak.  This  is  supposed  by  some  to  refer  to  the  tricks  of 
pagan  priests  in  making  pictures  and  statues  appear  to  speak. 

16.  A  mark  {xiiparyjia).  The  word  occurs  frequently  in  the 
Apocalypse,  and  only  once  elsewhere  (Acts  xvii.  29)  on  which 
see  note.  Commentators  find  illustrations  in  the  brand  set 
upon  slaves  by  their  masters,  or  upon  soldiers  by  their  mon- 
archs,  and  in  the  branding  of  slaves  attached  to  certain  temples. 
Herodotus  describes  a  temple  to  Hercules  at  the  Canopic  mouth 
of  the  Nile,  and  says :  ^^  If  ^  slave  runs  away  from  his  master, 
and  taking  sanctuary  at  this  shrine  gives  himself  up  to  the  god^ 

Vol.  n.— 84 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


S30  WOKD  STUDIES  IK  TH£  KEW  TESTAMENT. 

and  receives  certain  sacred  marks  npon  his  person,  whosoever  his 
master  may  be,  be  cannot  lay  hand  on  him  "  (ii.,  113).  In  the 
treatise  ^^  concerning  the  Syrian  goddess"  falsely  attributed  to 
Lncian,  it  is  said  of  the  slaves  of  the  temple,  ^'  all  are  branded, 
some  npon  the  wrist  and  some  npon  the  neck."  Paul,  in  Gal. 
vi.  17,  applies  the  word  for  these  brands,  oT^^Aora,  to  the  marks 
of  Christ's  service  which  he  bears  in  his  body.  In  3  Maccabees 
ii.  29,  we  read  that  Ptolemy  Philopator  required  all  tlie  Jews 
of  Alexandria  to  be  registered  among  the  common  people ;  and 
that  those  who  were  thus  registered  were  to  be  marked  {^ipoff- 
aea^ai)  on  their  persons  by  the  ivy-leaf  symbol  of  Dionysus 
(Bacchus).  In  Lev.  xix.  28,  the  Israelites  are  forbidden  to 
make  cuttings  in  their  flesh  for  the  dead  and  to  piint  marh 
{ypdfjkfuiTa  oTi/cT^)  upon  themselves. 

17.  The  number.  The  method  of  mystic  numbering  ob- 
tained alike  among  pagan  Greeks,  Gnostics,  Christian  Fathers, 
and  Jewish  Cabbalists.  Jupiter  was  invoked  under  the  number 
717  contained  in  the  letters  'H  *APXH  the  heginnmg.  The 
Gnostics  affixed  to  their  gems  and  amulets  the  mystic  word 
afipaaa^  or  afipa^tv;,  under  the  idea  of  some  virtue  attaching  to 
its  number,  365,  as  being  that  of  the  days  of  the  solar  cycle. 
Barnabas  and  Clement  of  Alexandria  speak  of  the  virtue  of  the 
number  318  as  being  that  of  IHT,  the  common  abbreviation  for 
Jesus  crucified.  In  the  pseudo-Sybilline  verses,  written  by 
Christians,  about  the  end  probably  of  the  second  century,  are 
found  versified  enigmas  giving  the  number  and  requiring  the 
name.  The  translation  of  one  of  these  on  the  word  Jesus  is  as 
follows:  "He  will  come  upon  earth  clothed  with  flesh  like 
mortal  men.  His  name  contains  four  vowels  and  two  conso- 
nants :  two  of  the  former  being  sounded  together.  And  I  will 
declare  the  entire  number.  For  the  name  will  exhibit  to  in- 
credulous men  eight  units,  eight  tens,  and  eight  hundreds.'^ 

18.  Here  is  wisdom.  Directing  attention  to  the  challenge 
which  follows. 

Count  {y^ffif>uTdT<o).    See  on  Luke  xiv.  28. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  531 

The  number  of  a  man.  It  is  coanted  as  men  usually  count. 
Compare  ch.  xxi.  17,  and  a  man^apen^  Isa.  viii.  1.  Some  explain, 
a  symbolical  number  denoting  a  person. 

Six  hundred  threescore  and  six  (x-  ?•  ?')•  Each  letter 
represents  a  component  of  the  whole  number:  x  —  600.;  f  =  60; 
9  =  6.  In  the  earlier  MSS.  it  is  written  in  full,  e^oKoaioi, 
i^/covra  i^.  The  method  of  reading  generally  adopted  is  that 
known  as  the  Ohematria  of  the  Kabbins,  or  in  Greek,  lao^j>la 
numerical  equality^  which  assigns  each  letter  of  a  name  its 
usual  numerical  value,  and  gives  the  sum  of  such  numbers  as 
the  equivalent  of  the  name.  Thus,  in  the  Epistle  of  Barnabas, 
we  are  told  that  the  name  'Ii7<rot)9  Jeaibs  is  expressed  by  the 
number  888.  1  =  10;  17  =  8;  <r=200;  o  =  70;  i;  =  400; 
a  =  200.  The  majority  of  the  commentators  use  the  Greek 
alphabet  in  computation ;  others,  however,  employ  the  Hebrew ; 
while  a  third  class  employ  the  Roman  numerals. 

The  interpretations  of  this  number  form  a  jungle  from  which 
escape  is  apparently  hopeless.  Keuss  says :  ^'This  famous  num- 
ber has  been  made  to  yield  almost  all  the  historical  names  of 
the  past  eighteen  centuries :  Titus,  Yespasian,  and  Simon  Gioras ; 
Julian  the  Apostate  and  Genseric;  Mahomet  and  Luther;  Ben- 
edict IX.  and  Louis  XV. ;  Napoleon  I.  and  the  Duke  of  Eeich- 
stadt ;  and  it  would  not  be  difficult,  on  the  same  principles,  to 
read  in  it  one  another's  names."  Some  of  the  favorite  names 
are  Aareivo^,  Latinua^  describing  the  common  character  of  the 
rulers  of  the  former  pagan  Roman  Empire :  Nero  Ceesar ;  Dio- 
cletian ;  x;;  the  name  of  Christ  abridged,  and  f  the  emblem  of 
the  serpent,  so  that  the  sublimated  sense  is  the  Meeaiah  of  Satan. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

1.  A  lamb.    Read  'Hhe  lamb."    See  ch.  v.  6. 

Stood  (€(m7ico9).     The  participle,  stwndmg^  as  Rev. 

His  Father's  name.    Add  axnov  kcIX  to  Svo/ui  Tlis  and  the 
naine^  and  render  as  Rev. ,  His  name  and  the  name  of  Hie  Father. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


532  WORD  STUDIBB  IN  THB  NBW  TB8TAMENT. 

The  Adoration  of  the  Lamb  is  the  sabject  of  the  great  altar- 
piece  in  the  church  of  St.  fiavon  at  Ghent,  bj  Jolm  and 
Hubert  Yan  Eyck.  The  scene  is  laid  in  a  landscape.  The 
background  is  formed  bj  a  Flemish  city,  probably  intended  to 
represent  Jerusalem,  and  by  charches  and  monasteries  in  the 
early  Ketherland  style.  The  middle  ground  is  occupied  by 
trees,  meadows,  and  green  slopes.  In  the  very  centre  of  the 
picture  a  square  altar  is  hung  with  red  damask  and  covered  with 
a  white  clotli.  Here  stands  a  lamb,  from  whose  breast  a  stream 
of  blood  issues  into  a  crystal  glass.  Angels  kneel  round  the  altar 
with  parti-colored  wings  and  variegated  dresses,  many  of  them 
praying  with  joined  hands,  others  holding  aloft  the  emblems  of 
the  passion,  two  in  front  waving  censers.  From  the  right,  be- 
hind the  altar,  issues  a  numerous  band  of  female  saints,  all  in 
rich  and  varied  costumes,  fair  hair  floating  over  their  shoul- 
ders, and  palms  in  their  hands.  Foremost  may  be  noticed  Sta. 
Barbara  and  Sta.  Agnes.  From  the  left  advance  popes,  card- 
inals, bishops,  monks,  and  minor  clergy,  with  crosiers,  croeees, 
and  palms.  In  the  centre,  near  the  base,  a  small  octagonal 
fountain  of  stone  projects  a  stream  into  a  clear  rill.  Two 
groups  are  in  adoration  on  each  side  of  the  fountain,— on  the 
right,  the  twelve  apostles  kneeling  barefoot,  and  an  array  of 
popes,  cardinals,  and  bishops,  with  a  miscellaneous  crowd  of 
church-people;  on  the  left,  kings  and  princes  in  various  cos- 
tumes. They  are  surrounded  by  a  wilderness  of  flowering 
shrubs,  lilies,  and  other  plants.  On  the  wings  of  the  picture 
numerous  worshippers  move  toward  the  place  of  worship, — 
crusaders,  knights,  kings,  and  princes,  including  the  figures  of 
the  two  artists  on  horseback.  "Here,  approaching  from  all 
sides,  are  seen  that  ^  great  multitude  of  all  nations  and  kindreds 
and  people  and  tongues ' — the  holy  warriors  and  the  holy  pil- 
grims, coming  in  solemn  processions  from  afar — with  other 
throngs  already  arrived  in  the  celestial  plain,  clothed  in  white 
robes,  and  holding  palms  in  their  hands.  Their  forms  are  like 
unto  ours ;  the  landscape  around  them  is  a  mere  transcript  of  the 
sweet  face  of  our  outer  nature ;  the  graceful  wrought-iron  foun- 
tain in  the  midst  is  such  an  one  as  still  sends  forth  its  streams 
in  an  ancient  Flemish  city ;  yet  we  feel  these  creatures  to  be 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


EBVELATION  OF  JOHN.  538 

beings  from  whose  eyes  God  has  wiped  away  all  tears — ^who  will 
banger  and  thirst  no  more;  our  imagination  invests  these  flow- 
ery meads  with  the  peace  and  radiance  of  celestial  precincts, 
while  the  streams  of  the  fountain  are  converted  into  living 
waters,  to  which  the  Lamb  Himself  will  lead  His  redeemed. 
Here,  in  short,  where  all  is  human  and  natural  in  form,  the 
spiritual  depths  of  our  nature  are  stirred"  (Mrs.  Jameson, 
"History  of  Our  Lord,'^  ii.,  839). 

2.  And  I  heard  the  voice  of  harpers  {ictu  ^vfjv  fixovaa 
Ki!^ap<pS&v).  The  correct  reading  is,  xaX  ij  ^i^  tjv  ij/eovaa  w 
iuSap^fS&v  amd  the  voice  which  Ihea^rd  (was)  ae  (the  voice)  qf  ' 
harpers.  KiSap^Ba^  is  from  KiBdpa  a  Karp  (see  on  ch.  v.  8)  and 
flJS69  a  singer ,  Properly,  one  who  sings,  accompanying  himself 
on  the  harp. 

3.  Beasts  ((TcMvy).    Bev.,  Uving  creatures.    See  on  ch.  iv.  6. 
Redeemed  {qyopac/jkipoi).    Bev.,  correctijj purchased. 

4.  Were  not  defiled  {oif/c  ifioXvySfja-av).  The  verb  means 
properly  to  besmear  or  besmirch^  and  is  never  used  in  a  good 
sense,  as  fualveiv  (John  xviii.  28 ;  Jude  8),  which  in  classical 
Greek  is  sometimes  applied  to  staining  with  color.  See  on  1 
Pet.  i.  4. 

Virgins  {'rrapShfoi).  Either  celibate  or  living  in  chastity 
whether  in  married  or  single  life.  See  1  Cor.  viL  1-7,  29 ;  2 
Cor.  xL  2. 

First-fruits  (i-n-ap^^).    See  on  Jas.  i.  18, 

5.  Guile  (&>Xo9).    Bead  '^^^eO&y:  He. 

Without  feult  (ofjwfioi).    Bev.,  blemish.    See  on  1  Pet  i.  19. 
Before  the  throne  of  God.    Omit. 

6.  In  the  midst  of  heaven  {h  fica-ovpaviifMTi).  Bev.,  in 
mid-hea/ven.    See  on  ch.  viii.  13. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


534  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

The  everlasting  Gospel  {ewvffiKiov  auoviov).  Xo  article. 
Hence  Bev.,  an  eternal  OospeL  Milligan  thinks  this  is  to  be 
understood  in  the  same  sense  as  prophesying  (ch.  x.  11).  Aliih 
vu)v  includes  more  than  mere  dnration  in  time.  It  is  applied  to 
that  of  which  time  is  not  a  measare.  As  applied  to  the  Gospel 
it  marks  its  likeness  to  Him  whose  being  is  not  bounded  by 
time. 

To  preach  unto  {evaffyeXla-ai  hrl).  'Rev., prodaim,  which  is 
better,  because  more  general  and  wider  in  meaning.  '£^/  which 
is  omitted  from  the  Kec.  Tex.  is  aver,  throughout  the  extent  of. 
Compare  Matt.  xxi7. 14. 

That  dwell  (icaroiivodifra?).  Bead  tcaSrjfUvov^  thai  sit.  So 
Re7.,  in  margin.     Compare  Matt  iv.  16 ;  Luke  i.  79. 

8.  Another.    Add  Bevrepty:  a  second. 

Is  fallen  {eireaep).  Lit^fell.  The  prophetic  aorist  express- 
ing the  certainty  of  the  falL     Compare  Isa.  xxi.  9 ;  Jer.  li  7,  8. 

9.  The  third  angel  (rpiro^  ^£776X09).  Add  aXA.09  another. 
Rev.,  another  angely  a  third. 

10.  Poured  out  without  mixture  {leeKepacfUvov  axpirov). 
Lit.,  which  is  mingled  unmixed.  From  the  universal  custom 
of  mixing  wine  with  water  for  drinking,  the  word  mingle  came 
to  be  used  in  the  general  sense  of  ^/repare  by  jpuUvng  into  the 
cup.    Hence,  tojpour  out. 

Cup  of  His  anger.    Compare  Ps.  Ixxv.  8. 

Brimstone  (^e/^).  Commonly  taken  as  the  neuter  of  BfSo^ 
divine;  that  is,  divine  incense,  since  burning  brimstone  was 
regarded  as  having  power  to  purifj  and  to  avert  contagion.  By 
others  it  is  referred  to  ^xho  to  hwmy  and  hence  to  saorifioe. 

11.  Torment  (fiaaavuriMv).  See  on  Matt  iv.  23,  24;  see 
vexedy  2  Pet.  ii.  8. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  535 

Goeth  up.    See  Isa.  xxxiv.  9, 10 ;  Gren.  xiz.  28. 

Rest  {avdirawTiv).  See  on  give  rest^  Matt.  xL  28,  and  restethj 
1  Pet  iv.  14. 

12.  Here  are  they.  Omit  here  cMre,  and  read,  as  Bev.,  the 
jxUienoe  ofihe  sainis^  they  that  keep. 

The  faith  of  Jesus.    Which  has  Jesus  for  its  object. 

13.  Blessed  (juuedpioi).    See  on  Matt.  v.  3. 

From  henceforth  {iv  &fnC).  See  on  John  xiiL  33.  To  be 
joined  as  in  A.  Y.  and  Bev.,  with  die  in  the  preceding  clause, 
and  not  with  hleseedj  nor  with  the  following  clanse.  Not  /ram 
henc^orth  saith  the  Sjpirit.  The  meaning  is  variouslj  explained. 
Some,  f  i*om  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  age  and  onward  to 
the  end ;  others,  from  the  moment  of  death,  connecting  hence- 
forth  with  blessed;  others  from  the  time  when  the  harvest  of 
the  earth  is  about  to  be  reaped.  Sophocles  says :  ^^  Show  all 
religious  reverence  to  the  gods,  for  all  other  things  Father 
Zeus  counts  secondary ;  for  the  reward  of  pietj  follows  men 
in  death.  Whether  thej  live  or  die  it  passeth  not  away" 
("Philoctetes,"  1441-1444). 

That  they  may  rest  (&a  cawrrawmPTM).  See  on  Matt.  xL 
28.    The  ha  that  gives  tiie  ground  of  the  blessed. 

Labors  {ic&Trtov).  From  tcowro^  to  strike.  Hence  to  beat  the 
breast  in  griefs  Koirtyi  is,  therefore,  primarily,  a  smitmg  as  a 
sign  of  sorrow,  and  then  sorrow  itscdf.  As  laboTy  it  is  labor 
which  involves  weariness  and  sorrow. 

Follow  them  {iueoKov^t  fier  ain&v).  Bather,  aooompamy. 
Bev.,  foUow  with  them.  Compare  Matt  iv.  25  *.  Mark  iiL  7, 
etc.    See  on  John  i.  43. 

16.  Thrust  in  (wifi^v).    Lit,  send.    Bev.,  send  forth. 

Harvest  (Sep^/i^).    See  on  Luke  x.  2. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


686  WOKD  BTUDIBB  IN  THB  HBW  TESTAMENT. 

Is  ripe  (iffppdtfSfi).  Lit,  vhu  dried.  Compare  Mark  xL  20 ; 
John  XV.  6.    Rev.,  is  over-rij>e. 

16.  Thrust  in  {ifidksv).    Lit,  cast. 

17.  Temple  (yoou).  Properlj,  sanctuary.  See  on  Matt 
iv.  6. 

18.  Altar  (Bvauumiplov).    See  on  Acts  xvii.  23. 

Which  has  power  (^^v  i^ovalav).  Lit,  hamng  jpawer. 
Some  texts  add  the  article  o.     So  Bev.,  ^^  he  that  hath  power." 

Fire.    In  the  Greek  with  the  article,  iht  fire. 

Cry  {iepauySy    '^  ^^  Luke  L  42. 

Thy  sharp  sickle.    Lit,  thy  sicHej  the  sharp. 

Gather  (rpvyrffrov).  From  rpvyff  dryness,  incladed  in  the 
notion  of  ripenessy  and  hence  the  vintagej  harvest.  The  verb 
means  therefore  to  gather  ripe  fruit.  It  occors  only  in  this 
chapter  and  in  Lake  vi.  44. 

Grapes  (oto^vXoI).  The  noon  in  the  singular  means  also  a 
hmch  of  grapes. 

Are  fully  ripe  (iiKfuurav).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 
From  axfi^,  transcribed  in  acmej  the  highest  point.  Hence  the 
verb  means  to  reach  the  height  of  growth,  to  he  ripe. 

19.  The  great  wine-press  (t^v  Xip^y  rhv  iJi^av).  The 
Greek  student  will  note  the  masculine  adjective  with  the 
feminine  noun,  possibly  because  the  gender  of  the  nonn 
is  doubtful.  The  Rev.,  in  rendering  more  literally,  is  more 
forcible:  the  vyine-press,  the  great  wine-press.  See  on  Matt, 
xxi.  33. 

20.  Furlongs  {<rraZlfov).  The  furlong  or  stadium  was  606| 
English  feet 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  5S7 


CHAPTER  XT. 

!•  The  seven  last  plagues  (^XiyyA?  hirrh,  tA?  iarxa^a^)* 
Lit.,  seven plagitea  tlie  last.  Rev.,  "  which  are  the  last."  See 
on  Mark  liL  10  ;  Luke  x.  30. 

Is  filled  up  {h-ekAa^y  More  correctly,  Irougld  to  an  end 
(tI\o9).  Rev.,  finished.  Lit,  woe  fimiehed^  tlie  prophetic  ao- 
rist,  which  speaks  of  a  thing  foreseen  and  decided  as  if  already 
done. 

2.  A  sea  of  glass  {^oKaaaav  vaTdvrfv).  Rev.,  better,  a 
glassy  sea.    See  on  ch.  iv.  6. 

Had  gotten  the  victory  over  the  beast  {vueAvra^  i/e  rod 
Srfplov).  The  expression  is  peculiar.  Lit,  conquered  out  of. 
Tlie  construction  is  unique  in  the  New  Testament  Tlie  phrase 
signifies,  not  as  A.  V.,  victory  over^  but  coming  triwnvphant  out 
of  (Jk).    So  Rev.,  tha^  come  victorious  from  the  beast. 

Over  his  mark.    Omit 

Standing  on  {M).  Better,  as  Rev.,  h/:  on  the  shore  of  as 
did  the  Israelites  when  they  sang  the  song  alluded  to  in  ver.  3. 

The  harps  of  God.  Omit  the.  Instniments  devoted  wholly 
to  His  praise.    Compare  ch.  v.  8 ;  xiv.  2. 

3.  The  song  of  Moses.  See  Exod.  xv.  Compare  Deut 
xxxiL ;  to  which  some  refer  this  allusion. 

The  servant  of  God.  See  Exod.  xiv.  31 ;  Num.  xii.  7 ; 
Ps.  cv.  26 ;  Heb.  iu.  5. 

The  song  of  the  Lamb.  There  are  not  two  distinct  songs. 
The  song  of  Moses  is  the  song  of  the  Lamb.  The  Old  and 
the  New  Testament  churches  are  one. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


638  WORD  STUDIES  IS  THE  NEW  TBSTAMKirr. 

Great  and  marvellous  are  Thy  works.  Pb.  cxi.  2; 
cxzxix.  14 ;  1  Chron.  xvi.  9. 

Just  and  true  are  Thy  ways.  Kev.,  righteous  for  jusL 
See  Deut.  xxxii.  4. 

King  of  saints  (ficurCKcb^  r&v  arfUpeii).  The  readings  differ. 
Some  read  for  sairUSy  i^v&v  of  the  nations;  others  aimwv  of 
tlie  ogee.    So  Rev.    Compare  Jer.  x.  7. 

4.  Who  shall  not  fear  Thee  9    See  Jer.  z.  7.    Omit  ihe^i. 

Holy  (oo-iov).  See  on  Luke  i.  75.  The  term  is  applied  to 
Christ  in  Acts  ii.  27,  35 ;  Heb.  vii.  26.  To  God  only  here 
and  ch.  xvi.  5,  where  the  correct  reading  is  o  wrw^i  thou  holy 
oney  instead  of  o  iaofievo^:  which  ehaU  be. 

All  nations  shall  come.  Compare  Ps.  Ixxxvi  9;  Isa.  iL 
2-4 ;  Ixvi.  23  ;  Mic.  iv.  2. 

Judgments  {SiK€ua>fiaTa).  Not  merely  divine  decisions^  but 
righteous  acts  generally.  So  Eev.  Primarily,  the  word  signi- 
fies that  which  has  been  deemed  right  so  as  to  have  the  force 
of  law.  Hence  an  ordinance  (Luke  i  6 ;  Heb.  ix.  1 ;  Bonu  i. 
32).  K  judicial  decision  for  or  against  (Bom.  v.  16).  A  right- 
eous deed.     See  ch.  xix.  8. 

5.  Behold.    Omit 

The  temple  of  the  tabernacle  (o  vai^  1%  aicqvrgf;).  The 
sanctuary  of  the  tabernacle.    See  on  Matt.  iv.  5. 

Of  the  testimony.  See  Acts  vii.  44.  The  tabernacle  was 
called  "the  Tabernacle  of  the  Testimony"  becanse  it  contained 
the  ark  with  the  law  of  God  which  testifies  against  sin.  See 
Exod.  XXV.  16,  21 ;  xxx.  36 ;  xxxiv.  29 ;  xxxviiL  21.  Com- 
pare ch.  xi.  19. 

6.  Linen  (X^i^).  The  Bev.  follows  the  reading  \S!^v  eCone^ 
after  the  analogy  of  Ezek.  zxviii.  13,  ^^  Every  precious  stone 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BEVBLATION  OF  JOHN.  539 

was  tlij  covering."    The  idea  is  that  of  raiment  studded  with 
precious  stones.    See  on  ch.  iL  17. 

White  {Tsxifiirpov).  Mostly  applied  in  the  New  Testament  to 
dothinffj  as  Luke  xxiii.  11 ;  Acts  x.  30 ;  Jas.  ii.  2.  Also  to  the 
water  of  life  (ch.  xxii.  1),  and  the  moming-star  (ch.  xxii  16). 
Eev.,  hrigkt. 

Girt  round  their  breasts.  As  the  Lord  in  the  vision  of 
i.  13  ;  where,  however,  /jLoaroi^  j^a{p%  is  used  instead  of  <m/Si; 
JyteasU. 

7.  Vials  (^w£X^9).    Eev.,  howls.    See  on  ch.  v.  8. 

8.  Smoke.  Compare  Exod.  xl.  34 ;  1  Kings  viiL  10 ;  Ps. 
xviii.  8 ;  Isa.  vL  4 ;  Ezek.  x.  2-4. 

None  was  able  to  enter.  ^^God  cannot  be  approached  at 
the  moment  when  He  is  revealing  Himself  in  all  the  terrors  of 
His  indignation"  (Milligan).    See  Exod.  xix.  21. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

1.  The  vials.    Add  seven. 

2.  And  the  first  went.  Each  angel,  as  his  turn  comes,  with- 
draws {inrdrf€T€,  see  on  John  vi.  21 ;  viii.  21)  from  the  heavenly 
scene. 

There  fell  (iyhero).  Lit,  there  came  to  jpass.  Rev.,  it 
became.    Elliott,  verj  aptly,  there  broke  oiU. 

Noisome  and  grievous  {icaxop  icaX  irovripov).  Similarly  the 
two  cognate  nouns  Ka,tUa  and  irovffpla  malice  and  toickedneea 
occur  together  in  1  Cor.  v.  8.  Ilovrfpi^  emphasizes  the  activity 
of  evil    See  on  Luke  iiL  19. 

Sore  (iXjcosi).  See  on  Luke  xvi.  20.  Compare  the  sixth 
Egyptian  plague,  Exod.  ix.  8-12,  where  the  Septuagint  uses 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


540  WOBD  STUDIES  Df  THB  HBW  TBSTAMENT. 

this  word  fXxo^  haU.  Also  of  the  hail  or  9cab  of  leprosy,  Levit. 
xiii.  18 ;  king  Hezekiah's  hoily  2  Kings  xx.  7 ;  ths  botch  cf 
Egypt^  Dent  xxviii.  27,  35.  In  Job  ii  7  (Sept)  the  boils  are 
described  as  here  by  wovtfpi^  sore. 

3.  It  became  {i^fhero).    Or  there  came. 
Blood.    Compare  Exod.  viL  19. 

As  of  a  dead  man.    Thick,  cormpt,  and  noisome. 

Living  soul  (^^i/^^  ^/ShtcC).    The  best  texts  read  ^fvx^  £a^ 

soidofUfe. 

4.  The  third  angel.    Omit  a/ngd. 

They  became  {eyhero).  There  is  no  necessity  for  rendering 
the  singular  verb  in  the  plnraL  We  may  say  either  U  became 
or  there  came. 

5.  The  angel  of  the  waters.  Set  over  the  waters  as  other 
angels  over  the  winds  (ch.  viL  1)  and  over  the  fire  (ch.  xiv.  18). 

O  Lord.    Omit 

And  shalt  be.  Following  the  reading  o  eaoiievo^.  Read 
6  00-409  Thou  Holy  One. 

Thou  didst  thus  judge  {ravra  iKpwwi).  Lit,  TTiou  didet 
judge  these  things. 

6.  For  they  are  worthy.    Omit /or. 

7.  Another  out  of  the  altar.  Omit  another  out  of,  and 
read,  as  Kev.,  /  heard  the  altar.  The  altar  personified.  CJom- 
pare  ch.  vi.  9,  where  the  souls  of  the  martyrs  are  seen  under 
the  altar  and  cry  how  long. 

Almighty.    Add  the  article :  ^  Ahnighty. 

8.  The  fourth  angel.    Omit  angeL 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


REVELATION  OP  JOHN.  541 

Power  was  given  (^80^17).    Bev.,  it  was  given. 

With  fire  {h  irvpi).    Lit, "  in  fire."    The  element  in  which 
the  scorching  takes  place. 

9.  Repent  to  give  Him  glory.  Glorify  Him  by  repentance. 

His  kingdom  was  darlcened.    Compare  Exod.  x.  21,  22. 

They  gnawed  {ifJLoaa&vro).    Only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. 

For  pain  {i/c  rov  ir6vov).    Strictly,,^Y>7»  their  jpavn.    Their^ 
the  force  of  the  article  rov. 

12.  Euphrates.    See  on  ch.  ix.  14. 

Of  the  east  {anrh  r&v  avaroK&v  ^\iov).    lit.,  as  'Rev. ^  from 
the  aunriaing.    See  on  Matt.  ii.  2 ;  and  dayapring^  Luke  i.  78. 

13.  Frogs.     Possibly  with  reference  to  Exod.  viii.  1-14. 

14.  Of  the  earth  and  of  the  whole  world.    Omit  of  the 
emih  and. 

World  {oUovfiAinfi).    See  on  Luke  ii.  1. 

The  battle  {irdKefiov).    Eev.,  more  literally,  war.    Batde  is 

That  great  day  {heeCvri^).    Omit.    Bead,  as  Bev.,  ^^the  great 
day." 

15.  Behold— shame.    These  words  are  parenthetical. 

As  a  thief.    Compare  Matt  xxiv.  43 ;  Luke  xii.  39 ;  1  Thess. 
V.  2,  4;  2  Pet  iii.  10. 

Watcheth  (ypvyop&v).    See  on  Mark  xiii.  35 ;  1  Pet.  v.  8. 

Keepeth  his  garments.    "Daring  the  night  the  captain 
of  the  Temple  made  his  rounds.    On  his  approach  the  guards 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


542  WORD  8TUDIB8  IN  THB  HEW  TESTAMEHT. 

had  to  rise  and  salnte  him  in  a  particular  manner.  Any  gaird 
fonnd  asleep  when  on  datj  was  beaten,  or  his  garments  were  set 
on  fire.  The  confession  of  one  of  the  Rabbins  is  on  record  that, 
on  a  certain  occasion,  his  own  maternal  nnde  had  actaally  un- 
dergone the  pnnishment  of  having  his  clothes  set  on  fire  bj  the 
captain  of  the  Temple  ^  (Edersheim,  "  The  Temple,"  etc). 

Shame  {curxnfioavvfpi).  Only  here  and  Bom.  i.  27.  From 
a  not  and  (rxfjfia  /ashion.  Deformity j  unseemliness;  nearly 
answering  to  the  phrase  not  in  good  form. 

16.  Armageddon.  The  proper  Greek  form  is^Ap  Moff^- 
The  word  is  compounded  of  the  Hebrew  Sdr  mountain,  and 
Megiddon  or  Megiddo  :  the  mountain  of  Megiddo.  On  Megiddo 
standing  alone,  see  Judges  i.  27;  1  Kings  iv.  12;  ix.  15;  ^ 
Kings  ix.  27.  See  also  Judges  v.  19 ;  Zech,  xii.  11 ;  2  Chron. 
XXX7.  22 ;  2  Kings  xxiii.  30.  "  Bounded  as  it  is  by  the  hills  of 
Palestine  on  both  north  and  south,  it  would  natnrally  become 
the  arena  of  war  between  the  lowlanders  who  trusted  in  their 
chariots,  and  the  Israelite  highlanders  of  tlie  neighboring 
heights.  To  this  cause  mainly  it  owes  its  celebrity,  as  the 
battle-field  of  the  world,  which  has,  through  its  adoption  into 
the  language  of  the  Apocalypse,  passed  into  an  universal  prov- 
erb. If  that  mysterious  book  proceeded  from  the  hand  of  a 
Galilean  fisherman,  it  is  the  more  easy  to  understand  why,  with 
the  scene  of  those  many  battles  constantly  before  him,  he  should 
have  drawn  the  figurative  name  of  the  final  conflict  between 
the  hosts  of  good  and  evil,  from  the  *  place  which  is  called  in 
the  Hebrew  tongue  Harmagedon'"  (Stanley,  "  Sinai  and  Palefi- 
tine"). 

Megiddo  was  in  the  plain  of  Esdraelon,  "which  has  been  a 
chosen  place  for  encampment  in  everj'  contest  carried  on  in 
Palestine  from  the  days  of  Nabuchodonozor  king  of  Assyria, 
unto  the  disastrous  march  of  Napoleon  Buonaparte  from  Egyp^ 
into  Syria.  Jews,  Gentiles,  Saracens,  Christian  crusaders,  and 
anti-Christian  Frenchmen;  Egyptians,  Persians,  Druses, Tnrks, 
and  Arabs,  warriors  of  every  nation  that  is  under  heaven,  have 
pitched  their  tents  on  the  plain  of  Esdraelon,  and  have  beheld 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  643 

the  banners  of  their  nation  wet  with  the  dews  of  Tabor  and 
Hermon  "  ("  Clarke's  Travels,'*  cit  by  Lee).  See  Tliomson's 
"  Land  and  Book "  (Central  Palestine  and  Phoenicia),  p.  208 
sqq. ;  and  Stanley,  ^^  Sinai  and  Palestine,"  ch.  ix. 

Two  great  slaughters  at  Megiddo  are  mentioned  in  the  Old 
Testament;  the  first  celebrated  in  the  Song  of  Deborah  (Judges 
V.  19),  and  the  second,  that  in  which  king  Josiah  fell  (2  Kings 
xxiii.  29).  Both  these  may  have  been  present  to  the  seer's 
mind ;  but  the  allusion  is  not  to  any  particular  place  or  event. 
^'  The  word,  like  Evphratea^  is  the  expression  of  an  idea ;  the 
idea  that  swift  and  overwhelming  destruction  shall  overtake  all 
who  gather  themselves  together  agamst  the  Lord"  (Milligan). 

17.  Temple  of  heaven.    Omit  ofhewoenr 

21.  Hail.     See  Exod.  ix.  18. 

Every  stone  about  the  weight  of  a  talent  {w  rdKavrUucC). 
The  adjective,  meaning  of  a  talents  weighty  agrees  with  ?iail; 
hail  cf  a  talenCs  weight;  i.e.,  having  each  stone  of  that  weight. 
Eo&ry  stone  is  therefore  explanatory,  and  not  in  the  text.  Hail- 
stones are  a  symbol  of  divine  wrath.  See  Isa.  xxx.  30 ;  Ezek. 
xiii.  11.    Compare  Josh.  x.  11. 


CHAPTER  XVIL 

1.  Sitteth  upon  many  waters.  Said  of  Babylon,  Jer.  li.  13 ; 
the  wealth  of  Babylon  being  caused  both  by  the  Euphrates  and 
by  a  vast  system  of  canals.  The  symbol  is  interpreted  by  some 
commentators  as  signifying  Babylon,  by  others  pagan  Rome, 
Papal  Eome,  Jerusalem.  Dante  alludes  to  this  passage  in  his 
address  to  the  shade  of  Pope  Nicholas  III.,  in  the  Bolgia  of  the 
Simonists. 

*'  The  ETangelist  jon  pastors  had  in  mind, 
When  she  who  sitteth  npon  many  waters 
To  fornicate  with  kings  b/  him  was  seen. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


544  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

The  same  who  with  the  seyen  heada  was  bom. 

And  power  and  strength  from  the  ten  horns  reeeired. 

So  long  as  virtue  to  her  spouse  was  pleasing.'* 

"  Inferno, »»  xix.,  106-110. 

2.  Have  committed  fornication.  The  figure  of  a  harlot 
committing  fornication  with  kings  and  peoples  occurs  frequently 
in  the  prophets,  representing  the  defection  of  God's  Church  and 
its  attachment  to  others.  See  Isa.  i.  21 ;  Jer.  ii.  20;  iii.  1, 6,  8 ; 
Ezek.  xvi.  15, 16, 28,  31, 35, 41 ;  xxiii.  5, 19,  44 ;  Hos.  ii.  5 ;  iii. 
3 ;  iv.  14.  The  word  is  applied  to  heathen  cities  in  three  places 
only:  to  Tyre,  Isa.  xxiiL  15, 16, 17;  to  Nineveh,  Nahum  iiL4; 
and  here. 

8.  Sitting.    To  manage  and  guide  the  beast 

A  scarlet.colored  beast.  The  same  as  in  ch.  xiii.  L  This 
beast  is  ever  after  mentioned  as  to  Briplov  the  least.  For  soarlety 
see  on  Matt,  xxvii.  6. 

4.  Purple  {iropj>vpow).    See  on  Luke  xvi.  19. 

Dec  Iced  {/eexpvcoDfjLhnf).    Lit.,  gilded. 

Precious  stones  (XX9^  r^/jUtp).    lM.yjfreciou8  stone. 

Golden  cup.    Compare  Jer.  Ii.  7. 

Abominations  (fihekuyfidTtov).    See  on  Matt  xxiv.  15. 

6.  Upon  her  forehead  a  name.  As  was  customary  with 
harlots,  who  had  their  names  inscribed  on  a  ticket.  Seneca,  ad- 
dressing a  wanton  priestess,  "  Nomen  tuum  pependit  a  f rente," 
thy  name  hung  from  thy  forehead.  See  Juvenal,  Satire  vL, 
123  sqq.,  of  the  profligate  Messalina,  ^Miaving  falsely  assumed 
the  ticket  of  Lycisca." 

Mystery.  Some  understand  this  as  a  part  of  the  name, 
others  as  implying  that  the  name  is  to  be  interpreted  symboli- 
cally. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


REVBLATION  OP  JOHN.  545 

Babylon.  See  on  1  Pet.  v.  13.  TertnlHan,  IrenaBus,  and 
Jerome  use  Babylon  as  representing  the  Koman  Empire.  In 
the  Middle  Ages  Kome  is  frequently  styled  the  Western  Babylon. 
The  sect  of  the  Fraticelli,  an  eremitical  organization  from  the 
Franciscans  in  the  fourteenth  century,  who  carried  the  vow  of 
poverty  to  the  extreme  and  taught  that  they  were  possessed  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  and  exempt  from  sin — first  familiarized  the 
common  mind  with  the  notion  that  Kome  was  the  Babylon,  the 
great  harlot  of  the  Apocalypse  (see  Milman,  ^^  Latin  Chris- 
tianity," Book  xii.,  ch.  vi.).  On  the  passage  cited  from  Dante 
(ver.  L),  Dean  Plumptre  remarks:  "The  words  have  the  inter- 
est of  being  a  medieval  interpretation  of  Bevelation  xvii.  1-15, 
in  which,  however,  the  harlot  and  the  beast  seem  somewhat 
strangely  blended.  The  harlot  is  the  corrupted  Church  of  Bome ; 
the  seven  heads  are  the  seven  hills  on  which  the  city  is  built ; 
or  perhaps,  with  an  entirely  different  ex^esis,  the  seven  gifts 
of  the  Spirit,  or  the  seven  sacraments  with  which  that  Church 
had,  in  its  outset,  been  endowed :  the  ten  horns  are  the  ten  com- 
mandments. As  long  as  the  Church  was  faithful  to  her  spouse, 
she  had  the  moral  strength  which  came  from  those  gifts,  and 
the  divine  law  which  she  represented.  When  that  failed,  she 
became  as  a  harlot,  and  her  whoredom  with  kings  was  the  sym- 
bol of  her  alliance  with  secular  powers  for  the  oppression  of  the 
nations"  (On  " Inferno,"  xix.,  110). 

6.  Saints— martyrs.  The  saints  include  the  martyrs  or 
witnesses,  but  the  latter  word  emphasizes  the  testimony  of  the 
saints  which  has  been  the  cause  of  their  death.  For  tnartyr^ 
see  on  1  Pet  y.  1. 

8.  To  go  into  perdition  {imAfeaf).  Some  good  texts  read 
fiirorye*  goeth.    For  the  verb,  see  on  John  vi  21 ;  viii  21. 

In  the  book  (Ar/).    Lit.,  vpon. 

From  the  foundation  of  the  world.     In  ordinary  New 
Testament  Greek  these  words  would  belong  to  are  written. 
Construe  with  the  words  immediately  preceding.     Compare 
ch.  ziii.  8,  and  Matt.  toy.  81. 
Vol-  U— 65 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


546  WORD  STUDIES  IH  THE  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

And  yet  is  {xaiirep  iarhi).  Bead  iud  irdpearai,  and  shall 
came.    Lit,  shall  he  present. 

9.  Here  is  (SSe).  Bespeaking  attention  and  spiritnal  dis- 
cernment for  that  which  follows.    See  on  ch.  xiii.  18. 

The  mind  (oiw?).  I.  Noik  ib  ^  orffon  of  Tnental  percep- 
tion and  apprehension — of  conscious  life,  the  mindy  comprising 
the  faculties  of  perceiving  and  understanding,  of  feeling,  judg- 
ing, determining. 

(a)  The  inieUectvoefaouUy  op  understanding  (Luke  xxiv.  45). 
So  here,  according  to  some. 

(>)  ITis  reason^  regarded  as  the  faculty  of  perceiving  divine 
things:  of  recognizing  goodness  and  hating  evil  (Bom.  i.  28; 
vii.  23  ;  Eph.  iv.  17). 

{o)  The  power  qfocdm  amd  impartial  jvdgment  (3  Thees. 
ii.  2). 

II.  Not)9  is  a  particular  mode  of  thinking  arid  judging: 
moral  oonsoioueness  as  a  habit  of  mind  or  opinion.  Hence 
thougktSyfedingSy  purposes  (Bom.  xiv.  6 ;  1  Cor.  i.  10).  Some 
render  here  meaning. 

Seven  mountains.  Many  interpreters  regard  this  as  con- 
clusively defining  the  reference  of  the  woman  to  Bome,  which 
was  built  upon  seven  hills.  Others  deny  tlie  local  reference, 
and  understand  the  principle  of  worldly  greatness  and  ambi- 
tion. Others  again  claim  that  many  cities  besides  Bome  can 
boast  of  their  seven  hills,  as  Constantinople,  Brussels,  and 
especially  Jerusalem. 

Upon  them.  Bedund^t,  the  idea  being  already  ei^reseed 
by  where.    A  Hebraism. 

.  10.  Are  feilen  (^ecroy).  Litj  fell.  Constantly  used  in  the 
Septuagint  of  the  violent  fall  or  overthrow  of  kings  or  king- 
doms. See  Ezek.  zxiz.  5 ;  zxz.  6 ;  Isa.  xxL  9 ;  Jer.  L  15 ; 
li.8. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BEVBIATION  OF  JOHN.  547 

12.  Kings  which  {ohwe^).  The  compound  relative  classify- 
ing :  "  of  M^  kind  which.^ 

13.  Mind  (7M&/M7V).  Meaning  primmlj  the faoiUiy  of  knoto- 
inffj  mindj  reason;  then  that  which  is  thought  or  known; 
opiniouy  jpv/rpose.  See  Acts  xx.  3  ;  1  Cor.  vii  25 ;  FhUenu 
14. 

Shall  give  {J^iaJbiZwrovciv).  Bead  SiBSaatv,  the  present 
tense,  give.    The  force  of  &a  is  over;  give  over. 

Power  and  authority  {BvpafjMf  icaX  i^ova-ka/).  For  the  dis- 
tinction,  see  on  2  Pet.  ii  11. 

15.  The  waters.  The  explanation  of  the  symbol  given  here 
is  in  accordance  with  Isa.  viii,  7 ;  Ps.  xviii  4,  16 ;  cxxiv.  14. 

Peoples  and  multitudes,  etc.  See  on  1  Pet.  ii  9 ;  Mark 
xiL37. 

16.  Upon  the  beast  (l7r/).  Bead  teal  and:  ^^the  ten  horns 
— and  the  beast" 

Desolate  {^prjfiwfUpfpi).  Lit.,  desolated,  the  verb  being  in  the 
perfect  participle. 

Shall  eat  her  flesh.  A  token  of  extreme  hostility.  See 
Ps.  xxvii.  2 ;  Mic.  iiL  3.  Xenophon,  speaking  of  the  hatred 
between  the  pure  Spartans  and  the  Helots,  sajs  that  no  one  of 
the  pure  Spartans  could  conceal  his  readiness  to  eat  the  Helot 
raw.    Notice  the  plural  a-dpKo^Jleshy  and  see  on  Jas.  v.  3. 

Burn  {xarcucaiaawnv).  Rev.,  giving  the  force  of  icard  down, 
hum  utterly.  According  to  some  interpreters  the  figure  is 
changed  from  the  woman  to  a  city ;  but  this  is  unnecessary,  as 
the  language  is  probably  taken  from  the  punishment  of  forni- 
cation on  the  part  of  a  priest's  daughter  (Lev.  xxL  9 ;  com- 
pare Lev.  XX.  14). 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


548  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  KEW  TESTAMENT. 

17.  Hath  put  {iBeoKcv).    Eev.,  with  stricter  rendering  of  the 
aorist,  did  put.    Lit,  did  gim. 

To  fulfil  His  will  {iroifiatu  rifp  yprnfjurfv  airrov).     See  on  ver. 
13.    Eev.,  more  literally,  to  do  his  mind. 

To  agree  {iroirjcai  fiiav  ypmfji^).    lit,  to  make  one  mind. 
Iiev.j  corns  to  one  mind. 

The  words  {rh  f^fiara).    But  read  ol  Xoyoi  the  jyrqphetie 
words.    For  the  distinction,  see  on  Luke  i.  37. 

18.  Reigneth  {Sxcnnra  fiaaCKjeUw).    Lit.,  hath  a  kingdom. 


CHAPTER  XVIIL 

1.  Wae  lightened.    Compare  Ezek.  xliii.  3. 

2.  Mightily  with  a  strong  voice  {hf  Urxyl  ifxovS  fieydKg). 
Lit.,  in  e^enffth  wUh  a  great  voice.  Omit  fiefdKff  greatj  and 
read  uryvpf  ^v^  with  a  mighty  voice.    So  Kev. 

Babylon — is  fallen.  The  Eev.  improves  on  the  A.  V.  by 
placing/a22an  in  the  emphatic  position  of  the  Greek :  ^  Fallen, 
fallen  is  Babylon."    Compare  Isa.  xxL  9. 

Is  become  {irfhero).    Lit,  became. 

Devils  {BaifjLovtifv).  Properly,  demons^  which  Eev.,  strangely 
commits  to  the  margin.  See  on  Mark  i.  34.  See  laa.  xiiL  20- 
22 ;  xxxiv.  13-15.    Also  on  Luke  xL  24. 

Hold  {^nikoucii).  See  on  1  Pet.  iiL  19,  and  Acts  v.  21.  Rev^ 
in  margin,  j?mon. 

Cage  (^vXo^).  The  word  rendered  above  h4>ld.  Eev., 
hold.  Some,  however,  explain  it,  not  as  a  cage  where  they  are 
kept,  but  as  a  place  of  safety  to  which  they  resort. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BEVBLATIOK  OF  JOHN.  549 

Bird  (opveov).  Only  in  the  Apocalypse,  here,  xix.  17>  21. 
Compare  Jer.  L  89. 

3.  Have  drunk  {whno/cev  or  nren-tDKav).  Some,  however, 
read  irhrrc^xav  ha/oe  fallen.    So  Kev. 

Of  the  wine  (^  rot)  olvcv).  Thus  if  we  read  home  drwnk. 
If  we  adopt  ha/m fallen^  Ik  is  instrumental,  ly.    So  Eev. 

Of  the  wrath.  The  wine  of  fornication  has  turned  to 
wrath  against  herself. 

Merchants  {ifLiropoi).  The  word  originally  means  one  on  a 
journey  by  sea  or  land,  especially  for  traffic.  Hence  a  mer- 
cha/nt  as  distinguished  from  tcdiTTiko^  a  retailer  or  huckster. 

The  abundance  of  her  delicacies  (r^  SwdfjLea>^  rod  trrp^- 
pov^  aMjs;)*  lit,  as  Be  v.,  the  power  of  her  Ivaury.  Srp^vo^ 
is  akin  to  arepei^  firniy  hardy  attMom  (see  on  eteadfaaty  1  Pet 
V.  9).  Hence  over-etrengthj  hiomryy  tffontonness.  Only  here  in 
the  New  Testament  The  kindred  verb  orpfivuiM  to  live  de- 
liciotisly  occurs  ch.  xviii.  7,  9. 

4.  Come  out  of  her.  Compare  Jer.  li.  6,  45 ;  Isa.  xlyiii. 
20;  lu.  11;  Num.  xvi.  26. 

Have  fellowship  with  (ovy/co^Moyi^cnrre).  This  compound 
verb  is  not  of  frequent  occurrence  in  the  New  Testament  It 
is  found  only  in  Eph.  v.  11,  Philip,  iv.  14,  and  here.  On  the 
kindred  noun  ovyKOivtovo^  companion^  see  on  ch.  L  9. 

5.  Have  reached  (tjico'KouSriircai).  lit,  followed.  But  the 
best  texts  read  ^/coXXi^i^iray  da/oe.  Compare  Jer.  li.  9.  For 
different  applications  of  the  verb  see  on  Matt  xix.  5 ;  Luke  xy. 
15 ;  Acts  V.  13.  Compare  the  classical  phrase  for  following 
up  closely  a  fleeing  foe,  h4Brere  in  terga  hokiumy  to  cleave  to  the 
hacks  of  the  enemy.  See  also  Zech.  xiv.  5  (Sept),  ^^  The  valley 
of  the  mountains  shall  re<ich  {iytcoXXtfSiia'erai)  unto  Azal." 
The  radical  idea  of  the  metaphor  is  that  of  following  or  reach- 
ing after  so  as  to  be  joined  to. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


550  WORD  STUOIBS  IN  THB  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

6.  Double  (SifrXfli^aTt).  Only  here  in  the  Kew  Testament. 
Compare  Isa.  xl.  2  ;  Jer.  xtL  18 ;  2iech.  ix.  13.  The  Leritieal 
law  insisted  on  the  double  recompense.  See  Exod.  xxii  4, 7,  9. 

7.  Lived  deliciously  {itrrfyqvlourep).     See  on  tw.  3. 

Torment  (fiaaauicfiov).  Only  in  the  Apocalypse.  On  the 
kindred  word  fida-apo*;  tormentj  see  on  Matt.  iv.  23,  34. 

I  sit  a  queen  and  am  no  widow.  See  Isa.  xlviL  8 ;  Zeph. 
ii.  15. 

8.  Therefore  shall  her  plagues  come,  eta  See  Isa. 
xlviL  8,  9. 

Who  judgeth  (o  Kplvwv).    Bead  tcphnv;  judged. 

11.  Merchandise  ^oyyov).  Only  here,  ver.  12,  and  Acts 
xxi.  3.  From  7i/*«  to  hefvU.  Hence,  literally,  lading  or  cargo. 
So  Bev.,  in  margin. 

The  main  features  of  the  following  description  are  taken 
from  that  of  the  destruction  of  Tyre,  Ezek.  xxvi.,  xxviL 

12.  Fine  Linen  (fiwraov).    See  on  Luke  xvL  19. 
Purple  (vop^v/MK).    See  on  Luke  xvL  19. 

Silk  {cripiKoS).  Properly  an  adjective,  meaning  ^>drto{rMn^ 
to  the  Seree.  From  Sripv;  SereSy  a  people  of  India,  perhaps  of 
modem  China. 

Before  the  time  of  Justinian,  when  silkworms  were  first 
brought  to  Constantinople,  it  was  thought  that  the  Seres  gath- 
ered or  combed  the  downy  substance  woven  by  the  worms 
from  the  leaves  of  certain  trees.  Hence  Yirgil  speaks  of  the 
Seres,  how  thejconib  {depeotan£)  the  fine  fieeoes  from  the  leaves 
("Georgics,^iL,  121). 

Silk  was  a  costly  article  of  luxury  among  the  Bomans,  so  that 
Tacitus  relates  that  in  the  reign  of  Tiberius  a  law  was  passed 
against  ^^men  disgracing  themselves  with  silken  garments " 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BEVELATION  OF  JOHN.  551 

("  Annalfl,"  ii.,  83).  "  Two  hundred  years  after  the  age  of 
Pliny/'  says  Gibbon,  "the  use  of  pore  or  even  of  mixed  silks 
was  confined  to  the  -female  sex,  till  the  opulent  citizens  of 
Bome  and  the  provinces  were  insensibly  familiarized  with  the 
example  of  Elagabalus,  the  first  who,  by  this  effeminate  habit, 
had  sullied  the  dignity  of  an  emperor  and  a  man.  Aurelian 
complained  that  a  pound  of  silk  was  sold  at  Bome  for  twelve 
ounces  of  gold  "  ("  Decline  and  Fall,"  ch.  xl.).  At  the  time  of 
Justinian  the  Persians  held  a  monopoly  of  this  trade.  Two 
missionary  monks  residing  in  China  imparted  to  Justinian  the 
project  of  introducing  the  eggs  of  the  silkworm  into  Europe, 
and  returning  to  China  concealed  the  eggs  in  a  hollow  cane  and 
so  transported  them. 

Scarlet.    See  on  Matt  xxvii.  6. 

Thyine  wood  (|tSXov  Bvipov).  Only  here  in  the  New  Ted- 
tament  From  Svia  or  Sva  the  citruSy  a  North-African  tree,  a 
native  of  Barbary,  used  as  incense  and  for  inlaying.  Pliny 
speaks  of  a  mania  among  the  Bomans  for  tables  made  of  this 
wood.  The  most  expensive  of  these  were  called  orbes^  oirdesj 
because  they  were  massive  plates  of  wood  cut  from  the  stem  in 
its  whole  diameter.  Pliny  mentions  plates  four  feet  in  diameter, 
and  nearly  six  inches  thick.  The  most  costly  were  those  taken 
from  near  the  root,  both  because  the  tree  was  broadest  there, 
and  because  the  wood  was  dappled  and  speckled.  Hence  they 
were  described  by  different  epithets  according  as  the  markings 
resembled  those  of  the  tiger,  the  panther,  or  the  peacock. 

Vessel  (a-Kevosi).  See  on  1  Pet.  iii.  7,  and  Acts  ix.  15.  Also 
on  goods.  Matt.  xiL  29 ;  Mark  iii.  27 ;  and  stroke  aaily  Acts 
xxvii  17. 

Of  ivory  (ike^uivTafov).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 
Beferences  to  ivory  are  frequent  in  the  Old  Testament.  The 
navy  of  Tarshish  brought  ivory  to  Solomon  with  apes  and 
peacocks  (1  Kings  x.  22).  His  great  throne  was  made  of  it 
(1  Kings  X.  18).    Ahab's  ivory  palace  (1  Kings  xxiL  39)  was 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


552  WORD  STUDIEB  IH  THB  HBW  TESTAMENT. 

probtbly  a  honae  with  ivory  panda.  ^^  Ivory  palaces  "  are  men- 
tioned in  Pb.  xlv.  8,  and  ^houses  of  ivory ^  in  Amoa  iiL  15. 
The  Aaayriana  carried  on  a  great  trade  in  this  article.  On  the 
obelisk  in  the  British  Mnsenm  the  captives  or  tribnte-bearers 
are  represented  as  carrying  tnsks.  The  Egyptians  early  made 
nse  of  it  in  decoration,  bringing  it  mostly  from  Ethiopia,  where, 
according  to  Pliny,  ivory  was  so  plentiful  that  the  natives  made 
of  it  door-posts  and  fences,  and  stalls  for  their  cattie.  In  the 
early  ages  of  Greece  ivory  was  frequently  employed  for  orna- 
mental purposes,  for  the  trappings  of  horses,  the  handles  of 
k^s,  and  the  bosses  of  shields.  Homer  represents  an  Asiatic 
woman  staining  ivory  with  purple  to  form  trappings  for  horses, 
and  describes  the  reins  of  chariot-horses  as  adorned  with  ivory. 
The  statue  of  Jupiter  by  Phidias  was  of  ivory  and  gold.  In 
the  ^^  Odyssey  ^  of  Homer,  Telemachus  thus  addresses  his  com- 
panion, tiie  son  of  Nestor,  as  they  contemplate  the  splendor  of 
Menelaus'  palace : 

"  See,  son  of  Nestor,  mj  beloved  friend. 
In  all  these  echoing  rooms  the  sheen  of  brass, 
Of  gold,  of  amber  and  of  irorj; 
Such  is  the  palace  of  Oljmpian  Jove." 

"OdjsBe7,"iT.,  71-74 

Marble  (jiap/ulpav).    From  fAop/JuUpa^  to  ttparJcU  or  gligten. 

13.  Cinnamon  {fCipdfA^fiov).  Mentioned  as  one  of  the  in- 
gredients of  the  holy  oil  for  anointing  (Exod.  xxx.  23),  and  as  a 
perfume  for  the  bed  (Prov.  vii.  17). 

And  spice  {koI  &fu»fAop).  These  words  are  added  by  the  best 
texts.  A  fragrant  Indian  plant,  with  seed  in  grape-like  clusters, 
from  which  ointment  was  made.  Preparations  for  the  hair  were 
made  from  it  Yirgil,  describing  the  coming  golden  age,  says : 
"  The  Assyrian  amomicm  shall  spring  up  as  a  common  plant" 
("  Eclogue''  iv.,  25 ;  compare  "  Eclogue"  iii.,  89).  Forbiger, 
(Virgil)  says  that  the  best  was  raised  in  Armenia,  a  poorer 
quality  in  Media  and  Pontus. 

Fine  flour  (aefilSdKiv).    Only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  553 

Cattle  {icTiTVff).    See  on  Luke  x.  34. 

Merchandiee  of  horeee.  Merchandise  is  not  in  the  text. 
It  resumes  the  construction  of  yofjLoif  mercha/ndise  with  the 
genitive  in  ver.  12. 

Chariots  {peS&v).  A  Latin  word  though  of  GhtUic  origin, 
rheda.    It  had  four  wheels. 

14.  The  fruits  (fi  an-a^pa).  Originally,  the  late  stimmer  or 
early  auttmm;  then,  generally,  used  of  the  ripe  fruits  of  trees. 
Only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  Compare  the  compound 
^ivcnrmpivk  autoimn  (trees).  See  on  whose  fruit  withereihy 
Jude  12,  and  compare  sv/rnmerfruitSy  Jer.  xL  10. 

That  thy  soul  lusted  after  (r^  hr^Bvfjkla^  i%  i^^y^  <'^). 
Lit.,  of  the  desire  of  thy  sovl. 

Dainty  OuirapH).  From  \hrofs  grease.  Hence,  literally,  fat. 
Only  here  in  the  Kew  Testament.  Homer  uses  it  once  in  the 
sense  of  oily  or  shiny  with  oily  as  the  skin  anointed  after  a  bath. 
"Their  heads  and  their  fair  faces  shining"  ("Odyssey,"  xv., 
332).  So  Aristophanes  ("  Plutus,"  616),  and  of  oily^  uno^uotis 
dishes  ("  Frogs,"  163).  Of  the  oily  smoothness  of  a  calm  sec^ 
as  by  Theocritus.  The  phrase  Xiirapol  iroSe;  shining  feetj  i.a, 
smooth,  without  wri/nJdej  is  frequent  in  Homer.  Thus,  of  Aga- 
memnon rising  from  his  bed :  "  Beneath  his  shining  feet  he 
bound  the  fair  sandals  "  ("  Iliad,"  ii.,  44).  Also  of  the  condition 
of  life;  richj  comfortable:  so  Homer,  of  a  prosperous  old  age, 
"  Odyssey,"  xL,  136.  Of  things,  bright,  fresh.  Of  soil,/rwi^- 
fid.  The  city  of  Athens  was  called  XvirapaX^  a  favorite  epithet. 
Aristophanes  plays  upon  the  two  senses  bright  and  greasy,  say- 
ing that  if  any  one  flatteringly  calls  Athens  bright,  he  attaches 
to  it  the  honor  of  saadAnes — oiliness  ("  Achamians,"  638,  9). 

Goodly  (Xa/ATT/)^).  A  too  indefinite  rendering.  Better,  Eev., 
Sfwmptu(Ais.  See  on  Luke  xxiii.  11 ;  Jas.  ii.  2.  Mostly  in  the 
New  Testament  of  clothing.    See  on  ch.  xy.  6. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


554  WORD  STUIHBB  IN  THB  NBW  TBTAMENT. 

16.  Decked  {tcexpwrwfAiini).    See  on  ch.  xviL  4. 

17.  Shipmaster  {Kvfi^pvrrnyi).  From  xvfieppdu  to  gawm. 
Strictly,  steersman.    Only  here  and  Acts  xxviL  11. 

All  the  company  in  ehipe  {ir&:  iirl  r&p  wXoUnf  6  J/oXo?). 
Tlie  best  texts  substitute  6  iwi  tottov  wkiuv,  that  satletA  any- 
wAerey  lit.,  saileth  to  ajplaoe.    So  Rev. 

Trade  by  sea  (t^  ^dXauraay  ipydfyvrtu).  lit,  work  the 
sea,  like  the  Latin  mare  exeroerUj  live  by  seafaring.  Bev., 
gem,  their  living  by  sea. 

19.  Cast  dust  on  their  heads.  Compare  Ezek.  zxviL  80. 
See  on  Luke  x.  13. 

20.  Hath  avenged  you  on  her  {bcpum  ro  icpijta  v^a&p  i^ 
avTty;).  Bev.,  more  literally,  hath  judged  your  judgment  on  her^ 
or  from  her.  The  idea  is  that  of  exacting  judgment  yroY7»  (^. 
Compare  the  compound  verb  hc^yew  anyenge^  or  eoMct  vengeance 
from  (ch.  vi.  10).  The  meaning  is  either,  that  judgm^ent  which 
is  your  d/ue^  or  what  she  hath  judged  concerning  you. 

21.  A  mighty  angel  {eU  SyyeXo^  icr^up^).  Lit,  ^^one 
strong  angel." 

A  great  millstone.    See  on  Matt,  xviii.  6. 

With  violence  {opfn^fiart).    Lit,  vnth  an  imjndse  or  rusk. 

Only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 

22.  Harpers.    See  on  ch.  xiv.  2. 

Musicians  (jiouaucAv).  Only  here  in  the  New  TestamenL 
There  seems  to  be  no  special  reason  for  changing  the  render- 
ing to  minstrels,  as  Bar.  The  term  m/usio  had  a  much  wider 
signification  among  the  Greeks  than  that  which  we  attach 
to  it  "  The  primitive  education  at  Athens  consisted  of  two 
branches :  gymnastics  for  the  body,  m/usic  for  the  mind.  Mode 
comprehended  from  the  beginning  everything  appertaining  to 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BEVELATION  07  JOHN.  55fi 

the  province  of  the  nine  Muses ;  not  merely  learning  the  nee. of 
the  lyre  or  how  to  bear  part  in  a  chorus,  but  also  the  hearing, 
learning,  and  repeating  of  poetical  compositions,  as  well  as  the 
practice  of  exact  and  elegant  pronunciation — which  latter  ac- 
complishment, in  a  language  like  the  Greek,  with  long  words, 
measured  syllables,  and  great  diversity  of  accentuation  between 
one  word  and  another,  must  have  been  far  more  difficult  to 
acquire  than  it  is  in  any  modem  European  language.  A9 
the  range  of  ideas  enlarged,  so  the  words  mttsio  and  mimoal 
teachers  acquired  an  expanded  meaning,  so  as  to  comprehend 
matter  of  instruction  at  once  ampler  and  more  diversified. 
During  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century  b.o.  at  Athens,  there 
came  thus  to  be  found  among  the  musical  teachers  men  of  the 
most  distinguished  abilities  and  eminence,  masters  of  all  the 
learning  and  accomplishments  of  the  age,  teaching  what  was 
known  of  Astronomy,  Geography,  and  Physics,  and  capable  of 
holding  dialectical  discussions  with  their  pupUs  upon  all  the 
various  problems  then  afioat  among  intellectual  men  "  (Grote, 
**  History  of  Greece,"  vi.,  ch.  IxviL). 

Pipera  {avXirrr&v).  'Sj^Y.^fiute-^pHayera.  Only  here  and  Matt. 
ix.  23.  The  female  flute-players,  usually  dissolute  characters, 
were  indispensable  attendants  at  the  Greek  banquets.  Plato 
makes  Eryximachus  in  ^^  the  Symposium,"  say :  ^^  I  move  that 
the  fiute-girl  who  has  just  made  her  appearance,  be  told  to  go 
away  and  play  to  herself,  or,  if  she  likes,  to  the  women  who 
are  within.  To-day  let  us  have  conversation  instead  "  ('^  Sym- 
posium," 176).  Again,  Socrates  says:  "The  talk  about  the 
poets  seems  to  me  like  a  commonplace  entertainment  to  which 
a  vulgar  company  have  recourse;  who,  because  they  are  not 
able  to  converse  and  amuse  one  another,  while  they  are  drink- 
ing, with  the  sound  of  their  own  voices  and  conversation,  by 
reason  of  their  stupidity,  raise  the  price  of  flute-girls  in  the 
market,  hiring  for  a  great  sum  the  voice  of  a  fiute  instead  of 
their  own  breath,  to  be  the  medium  of  intercourse  among  them  " 
("  Protagoras,"  847).    Compare  Isa.  xxiv.  8 ;  Ezek.  xxvi.  13. 

Millstone.    Compare  Jer.  xxv.  10;  Matt  xxiv.  41. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


556  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NKW  TESTAMENT. 

28.  Bridegroom — bride.    Oompare  Jer.  xxv.  10. 

Great  men  {/leyurrave:).    'Rev.yjmnoea,    See  on  ch.  vi.  15. 

By  thy  eorceriee  {iv  ry  ^xip^uuceUf  aov).  See  on  ch.  ix.  21. 
Rev.,  more  literally,  with  thy  sorcery. 

Were  deceived  (^Xoi^Si^rair).  Or  led  astray.  See  on 
Mark  xiL  24. 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

1.  Hallelujah  (liXXi/Xot/M).  Hebrew.  Praise  ye  the  Lord. 
Only  in  the  Apocalypse  and  in  this  chapter.  Fifteen  of  the 
Psalms  either  begin  or  end  with  this  word.  The  Jewish  an- 
them of  praise  (Ps.  civ.-^^ix.),  snng  chiefly  at  the  feasts  of  the 
Passover  and  of  Tabernades,  derived  its  title  of  ike  Cheat  Hal^ 
Id  from  the  frequent  use  of  that  phrase. 

Honor.  Omit.  On  the  doxologies  in  the  Apocalypse,  see 
on  ch.  L  6, 

2.  True  {i^jq^vai).    See  on  John  i.  9. 

Did  corrupt  {S<f)^ip€p).  The  imperfect  tense  denoting 
habit 

Avenged  {i^eSitcvjaev).    Exacted  vengeance/r<?w  (cf). 

At  her  hand  {ix).  Lit.,  ^^from  her  hand."  See  on  ch.  ii.  7 ; 
xviii.  20. 

3.  Her  smoke,  etc.    Compare  Isa.  xxxiv.  10. 

5.  All  ye  Hie  servants— small  and  great.  Compare  Ps. 
cxiv.  13 ;  cxxxiv.  1. 

7.  The  marriage  of  the  Lamb.  For  the  figure,  compare 
Isa.  liv.  1-8 ;  Ezek.  xvi.  7-14;  Hos.  ii.  19 ;  Matt  ix.  15 ;  John 
iii.29;  Eph.  v.  26. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


RBVBLATION  OP  JOHN.  557 

8.  Fine  linen  (fivcaivov).  See  on  Luke  xvi.  19.  The  fonr 
vestments  of  the  ordinary  Jewish  priest  were  made  of  linen  or 
hyasus.  Their  symbolic  meaning  depended  in  part  on  the  white- 
ness and  Instre  of  their  substance  {KoBupov  icaX  Xafji/rrpSp  jnire 
and  bright). 

RIghteousneee  {iuuu&iuiTa).  More  strictly,  as  Rev.,  rigH- 
ecus  acts. 

10.  See  thou  do  it  not  (ipa  fufj).    See  not  (to  do  it). 

The  testimony  of  Jeeue  (ij  iiaprvpUi  rov  'Ii/crot)).  Some 
explain  as  the  testimony  which  proceeds  from  Jesus.  Jesus,  by 
imparting  this  testimony  to  believers  imparts  to  them  the  spirit 
of  prophecy.  Others,  the  witness  which  is  borne  to  Jesus.  The 
way  of  bearing  this  witness,  the  substance  and  essence  of  this 
testimony  is  the  Spirit  of  prophecy. 

11.  A  white  horee.    (Compare  ch.  vi.  2. 

12.  Crowna  {BuiSi^fMara).    See  on  1  Pet.  v.  4 ;  Jas.  1 12. 

13.  Dipped  (fiefiafifUpov).  The  readings  differ;  some  giving 
ftepavTi^lluhov  ypTwMedy  others  irep^pepafi^iivov  sprinkled  round. 
Eev.,  sprvnkled.    Ck>mpare  Isa.  Ixiii.  2, 3. 

The  Word  of  God  (o  Aiyof;  toO  GeoS).  This  name  for  our 
Lord  is  found  in  the  New  Testament  only  in  the  writings  of 
John.  It  is  one  of  the  links  which  connects  the  Apocalypse 
¥nth  John's  other  writings.  Ck>mpare  John  i.  1-14 ;  1  tfohn 
i.  1.  Some  object  to  this  on  the  ground  that,  in  the  Oospel  of 
John,  the  term  is  used  absolutely,  the  Word,  whereas  here  it  is 
qualified,  the  Word  of  Oody  which  the  Evangelist  nowhere  em- 
ploys, and  in  1  John  i.  1,  the  Word  of  Ufe.  But,  as  Alford 
observes :  ^^  It  may  be  left  to  any  fair-judging  reader  to  decide 
whether  it  be  not  a  far  greater  argument  for  identity  that  the 
remarkable  designation  o  Aoyof;  the  Word  is  used,  than  for  diver- 
sity, that,  on  the  solemn  occasion  described  in  the  Apocalypse, 
the  hitherto  unheard  adjunct  of  Ood  is  added."    The  idea  of 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


558  WORD  BTUDIBB  IN  THB  NBW  mBTAMENT. 

Gk>d  which  is  represented  here,  underlies  the  absolnte  term  the 
Ward  in  John  i.  1.  It  is  farther  urged  that  in  the  Qoepd  i 
A6yo^  is  applied  to  the  prehistoric  Christ,  while  in  this  psseage 
it  is  applied  to  the  historic  Christ  But  the  name  of  the  hii- 
toric  Christ  is  that  referred  to  in  ver.  12,  not  in  ver.  13.  It  ii 
the  name  *^  which  no  one  knoweth  bnt  He  Himself,"  expressing 
the  character  of  His  whole  redeeming  worL  The  name  in  yer. 
13  is  that  which  belongs  originally  and  essentially  to  Him. 

14.  Followed  {^teoXoiiSti).  Note  the  imperfect  tense  denot- 
ing progression,  and  thus  describing  the  advancing  movemeot 
of  the  host 

15.  Sword.    See  on  ch.  i.  16. 

Smite  {TraTcurarf),     See  on  ch.  xi  6. 

Shall  rule  (7ro</Aaye!).    See  on  ch«  iL  27. 

Wine-press.    See  on  ch.  ziv.  19. 

Of  the  fierceness  and  wrath  (rod  Bvfudi  icai  r^  opyiii). 
Omit  andj  and  render,  as  Rev.,  tkejieroendsi  of  the  toratL  See 
on  John  iii.  36. 

Of  Almighty  God  {rov  &€ou  rov  iravrwcpdropo^).  Lit,  cf 
Ood  the  aJl-Tuler.    See  on  ch.  L  8. 

16.  On  His  thigh.  Some  explain,  on  the  garment  where  it 
covers  the  thigh  to  which  the  sword  is  bonnd.  Compare  Fs. 
xlv.  3.  Others,  partly  on  the  vestnre,  partly  on  the  thigh  itself, 
where,  in  an  equestrian  fignre,  the  robe  drops  from  the  thigb. 
According  to  the  former  explanation  icdi  and  is  to  be  taken  S8 
explanatory  or  definitive  of  the  words  on  Sia  ffeeture.  Others 
again  suppose  a  sword  on  the  hilt  of  which  the  name  is  in- 
scribed. Expositors  refer  to  the  custom  of  engraving  the 
artist's  name  on  the  thigh  of  a  statue.  Thus  Cicero  says:  ^A 
most  beautiful  statue  of  Apollo,  on  the  thigh  of  wldch  the 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BEVBLATIOK  OF  JOHN.  659 

name  of  Mjron  had  been  graven  in  tiny  letters  of  silver" 
("  Against  Verres,"  iv.,  43).  Herodotus  describes  a  figure  of 
Sesostris,  bearing  across  the  breast  from  shoulder  to  shoulder 
the  inscription  written  in  the  sacred  character  of  Egypt:  ''With 
my  own  shoulders  I  conquered  this  land ''  (ii.,  106).  Kawlin- 
son  says  that  Assyrian  figures  are  found  with  arrow-headed  in- 
scriptions engraved  across  them,  and  over  the  drapery  as  well 
as  the  body. 

17.  An  angel  (6w  Sff/eKop).    lit,  ^^one  angeU* 

Fowla  (6pi^«9).    See  on  ch.  xviiL  2.    Rev.,  hirde. 

Midst  of  heaven.    See  on  ch.  viii.  13. 

Gather  yourselvea  together  {awdrfea^).  The  best  texts 
read  awdx^V^^  ^  gathered  together^  as  Eev.  Compare  Ezek. 
xxxix.  17  sqq. 

The  supper  of  the  great  God  {rh  Behrvov  roO  fieydkov 
0€oO).  Bead  to  fiiya  rav  for  rov  fieydKov,  and  render  the  great 
mpper  qf  Ood. 

18.  Captains  (xiX^^oi^).    See  on  Mark  vi.  21 ;  Luke  viL  2. 

20.  Was  taksn  {iwuicrSff).    See  on  Acts  iii  7. 
Mark*    See  on  ch.  xiii.  16. 

Lalce  (^fivrfv).    See  on  Luke  v.  1. 
Brimstone.    See  on  ch.  ziv.  10. 

21.  Were  filled  (ixpprdaSfftrap).    See  on  Matt  v.  6. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


560  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


CHAPTER  XX. 

1.  Of  the  bottomless  pit.  See  on  ch.  ix.  1.  This  is  to  be 
distingnisbed  from  the  lake  of  fire.     Compare  ver.  10. 

Chain  (S^Svirw).  See  on  Mark  t.  4.  Only  here  in  John's 
writings. 

In  his  hand  {hrC).    lit,  upon  :  resting  on  or  hanging  upon. 

2.  He  laid  hold  {iKpdrriaey).  See  on  Mark  viiL  3 ;  Acts 
iii.  11. 

The  dragon  {rhv  Bpdtcovra).  See  on  ch.  xii.  3.  The  word 
is  commonly  derived  from  ISpascov,  the  second  aorist  tense  of 
Biptcofuu  to  see  dearly^  in  allusion  to  the  sharp  sight  of  the 
fabled  dragon. 

Old  {apxoSop).    See  on  1  John  iu  7. 

The  Devil.  Note  the  three  epithets :  tAe  OldS&rporU,  the 
DevUy  Satan.    See  on  Matt  iv.  1 ;  Luke  x.  18. 

3.  Sealed.    See  on  John  iii.  33. 

Must  (Bet).  According  to  God's  purpose.  See  on  Matt.  xvL 
21 ;  Luke  il  49 ;  xxiv.  26. 

4.  Thrones.    See  on  ch.  ii  13. 

j    They  sat.    All  the  faithful  members  of  Christ's  Chnich. 
Ck>mpare  they  reigned  with  Christ. 

Beheaded  {veireXeKurfJvc^p).  From  iriKeteu^  an  cuoe.  Only 
here  in  the  Kew  Testament 

They  lived.    Equivalent  to  lived  ogam.    Compare  ver.  5. 
6.  Lived— again  (^(i^o-ay).    Bead  itSqaa^  Uoed^  as  in  Ter.  4. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


REYBLATIOH  OF  JOHN.  501 

6.  Hath  part  {Sx^^  fUpo^).  A  phrase  peculiar  to  John  as 
referrmg  to  a  person.    Compare  John  xiiL  8. 

Second  death.    See  on  ch.  iL  11. 

8.  Gog  and  Magog.  See  Ezek.  xxxviii.,  xxxix.  Compare 
Gten.  X.  2,  where  Magog  appears  as  a  son  of  Japhet  Magog  is 
a  general  name  for  the  northern  nations,  and,  according  to 
Ezekiely  Oog  is  their  prince.  Josephos  says  that  the  deeeendants 
of  Magog  were  the  Scythians. 

9.  On  the  breadth  {M  rb  wKdro^).  Lit.,  aver  {hrl).  As 
distinguished  from  the  "  four  comers  **  of  ver.  8.  They  over- 
spread the  earth. 

The  camp  (t^  irapefiffoXifp).  See  on  caetley  Acts  xxL  34. 
Encompassing  and  defending  the  city.    Compare  Fs.  xxxir.  7. 

The  beloved  city.    Compare  Ps.  IxxviiL  68. 

From  God.    Omit 

12.  Before  God.  Eead  Spovov  throne  for  9eov  God.  So 
Rev.,  before  the  throne. 

The  booke  (fitpkld).  No  article.  Read  loohe.  Compare 
Dan.  vii.  10. 

Book  of  life.    See  on  ch.  iii.  6. 

13.  The  eea.  As  commonly  nnderstood,  the  sea  means  th6 
literal  sea,  and  the  passage  signifies  that  the  dead  contained  in 
it  shall  rise.  So  Alford.  Other  interpreters,  however,  say  that 
it  cannot  mean  the  literal  sea.  Thns  Milligan  argues  that  the 
symbols  of  the  Apocalypse  mnst  always  be  interpreted  in  the 
same  way.  «  Symbols,''  he  says,  "are  a  form  of  speech,  and 
therefore  subject  to  the  rules  that  regulate  the  interpretation  of 
all  speech.  .  .  .  The  power  of  that  convention  which  links 
a  certain  sense  to  a  certain  sound  in  ordinary  terms,  is  not  less 
binding  in  the  presence  than  in  the  absence  of  metaphor  of  any 

Vol.  n.— 86 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


tifti  WORD  8TUDDBS  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

kind  wbatever.  Thus  when  we  read  in  the  Apocalypse  of  ^  the 
sea'  as  an  emblem  of  the  tronbled  and  sinfal  nations  of  the  earth, 
we  are  bound,  unless  forbidden  by  the  context,  to  carry  that  in- 
terpretation through,  and  to  understand  the  sea  of  ^  traubhd 
and  sif^ul  worUL^^ 

Hell(ojE%).    liey.y  Eqdea.    See  on  Matt  xvL  18. 

14.  Thia  ia  the  aecond  death.    Add  even  the  lake  of  fire. 

16.  And  whoaoever  {flrvi).    Lit,  if  any.    SoBer. 


CHAPTER  XXL 

1.  New  {icaiv6v).  See  on  Matt  zxyi  29.  Compare  laa. 
Ixv.  17. 

There  waa  no  more  aea  {fi  ^£Kaafra  ovtc  Scriv  St$).  Lit.,  as 
Bev.,  the  seats  no  more.  Here  as  in  xx.  13.  Some  explain  the 
sea  as  the  ungodly  world.  I  cannot  help  thinking  this  interpre- 
tation forced.  According  to  this  explanation,  the  passage  is  in 
the  highest  degree  tautological.  The  firet  earth  toas  jxuged 
atoayy  and  the  ungodly  toorld  was  no  more. 

2.  I  John.    Omit  John. 

New  Jeruaalem.  Others  join  new  with  coming  downy  and 
render  coming  doxxm  new  out  of  heaven. 

A  bride.    Ck>mpare  Isa.  Ixi.  10 ;  Ixii.  5. 

8.  With  men.  Men  at  large.  Ko  longer  with  an  isolated 
people  like  Israel. 

He  shall  dwell  {tr/cffvdxTei).  Lit,  tabernacle.  Only  in  the 
Apocalypse  and  John  i.  14.  The  word  "  denotes  much  more 
than  the  mere  general  notion  of  dwelling.  There  lies  in  it  one 
of  the  particulars  of  that  identification  of  Christ  and  His  people 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BEVBLATIOK  OF  JOHN.  668 

•which  is  fmidamental  to  the  seen''  8ee  on  John  i.  14.  Com- 
pare Ezek.  xzxvii.  27,  28. 

People  (Kaol).  Notiee  the  ^plnrsly  peoples  (so  Bev.),  because 
many  nations  shall  partake  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise. 
Compare  ver.  24. 

And  God  Himself  ehall  be  with  them  and  be  their  God. 
And  be  is  inserted.    The  Greek  is  shall  he  with  them  their  God. 

4.  And  God  ehall  wipe  away.  Omit  God.  Bead,  as  Eev., 
and  He  shall  wipe  away. 

All  teare  {vav  haxpvov).  lit.,  every  tear.  Compare  Isa. 
XXV.  8. 

There  ehall  be  no  more  death  {6  Bdinira^  ovk  Sarai  hi). 
Bender,  as  Bev.,  death  shall  be  no  more. 

Sorrow  {irhfSo^i).  Better,  as  Bev.,  mouminffj  since  the  word 
signifies  mcm^ested  grief.  See  on  Matt.  v.  4 ;  Jas.  iv.  9.  Com- 
pare Isa.  Ixv.  19.  "  That  soul  I  say,"  observes  Socrates,  "  her- 
self invisible,  departs  to  the  invisible  world — to  the  divine  and 
immortal  and  rational :  thither  arriving,  she  is  secure  of  bliss, 
and  is  released  from  the  error  and  folly  of  men,  their  fears  and 
wild  passions,  and  all  other  human  ills,  and  forever  dwells,  as 
they  say  of  the  initiated,  in  company  with  the  gods  "  (Plato, 
^  Phaedo,"  81).    So  Sophocles : 

"  Sorrow  toaobes  aot  the  detd.** 

**CBdipiii  Golonens,"  W6, 

**  How  thrice  happy  those  of  mortals,  who,  having  had  these 
ends  in  view,  depart  to  Hades ;  for  to  them  alone  is  it  given 
there  to  live ;  but  to  others,  all  things  there  are  evil "  ("  Frag- 
menf^    And  Euripides : 

**  The  dead,  tearless,  forgets  his  pains.** 

•«Troadeig,'*6O0b 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


564  WORD  STXTDm  DT  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

6.  True  and  feithful  {akoflkifol  teal  irurrol).  The  proper 
order  of  the  Greek  is  the  reyerse,  as  HeY.yJixdthfhd  and  true. 

6.  It  18  done  {yiycmv).  The  correct  readrng  is  t^Topoi^  tA^ 
a/re  oome  to  pass;  i.e^  theee  words. 

Alpha  and  Omega.  Both  have  the  article,  ^^  the  alpha," 
etc     See  on  ch.  L  8. 

Unto  him  that  ie  athirst.    Ck>mpare  Isa.  It.  1. 

Fountain  {'"vy^)-    See  on  John  iv.  6.' 

Of  the  water  of  life.  See  John  iv.  10, 14.  Compare  Isa. 
xii.3. 

7.  All  thinga  {irdvra).  The  correct  reading  is  ravra  ihem 
thinffs.    So  Rer. 

Hia  God  {airr^  0^).    Lit.,  God  onto  him. 

My  Son  (f*oi  6  vl6s!).  Lit,  the  Son  to  me.  See  on  John  L 
18.  This  is  the  onlj  place  in  John's  writings  where  vi69  mm 
is  used  of  the  relation  of  man  to  God. 

8.  The  fearful  (SetXoI?).  The  dative  case.  Hence^  as  Bev.^ 
for  thefearftd.    Only  here,  Matt  viii.  26,  and  Mark  iv.  40. 

Abominable  {iffBeXvyfUvoi^).  See  on  abominaiionj  Matt 
xxiv.  16.    Properly,  defiled  with  abomvnatione. 

Whoremongers  {ir6pyov;).  Moch  better,  as  Key.,  fornix 
oatore. 

Sorcerers.    See  on  soroeriesj  ch.  ix.  21. 

Shall  have  their  part  (rd  fUpa^  axn&v).  Lit,  the  whole  pas- 
sage reads :  to  ihefea/rfuly  etc.,  iheirpaH.   Shall  be  is  supplied. 

9.  Unto  me.    Omit 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BBVELiLTiaN  OF  JOHK.  d^t 

Vial8.    Properly  bauds.    See  on  ch.  v.  8. 

10.  In  the  Spirit.    See  on  ch.  L  10. 

Mountain.    Compare  Ezek.  xL  2. 

That  great  city,  the  holy  Jerusalem.  Omit  great 
Bender  the  article  as  nsoal,  and  not  as  a  demonstrative  pro- 
noun, and  construe  holy  with  oity.  So  Bev.,  the  holy  ^iHy 
Jervsalem. 

11.  Glory  of  God.  Not  merely  divine  brightness,  but  the 
presence  of  the  God  of  glory  Himself,    Compare  Exod.  xl.  34. 

Light  (^a>oT^p).  Strictly,  luminary ;  that  with  which  the 
city  is  illumined,  the  heavenly  Lamb.  See  ver.  23.  The  word 
occurs  only  here  and  Philip.  iL  15, 

Jasper.    See  on  ch.  iv.  3. 

Clear  as  crystal  (jepvirrdKKC^pvTC).  lit.,  shmmg  like  crys- 
tal. 

12.  And  had  (ixP^^^  '^)'    ^^^-y  naoi^  simply  and  literally, 


Gates  {miKSnHK).  Properly  large  gates.  See  on  Luke  x^L 
20 ;  Acts  xiL  18.    Compare  Ezek.  xlviii.  30  sqq. 

13.  East  iflifaTdKiji^).  See  on  Matt  iL  2,  and  on  dayspritn^y 
Luke  L  78.  See  the  tribes  arranged  by  gates  in  Ezek.  xlviiL 
81-84. 

West  (SvafA&p).    lit,  the  goings  down  or  settings. 

14.  Foundations  (B^iuXUm).  See  on  the  kindred  yerb 
BtfAeTuwre^  shall  seMsj  1  Pet  v.  10. 

In  them  the  names  {h  avrol^  ivofuvra).  The  correct  read- 
ing is  hr  avT&v  iwBexa  Ji^/Aara*  on  them  tvoehe  names. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


666  WORD  BTUDIBS  IN  THB  NBW  THBTAMENT. 

15.  A  golden  reed.  Add  fjUrpov  as  a  measure.  See  ch. 
xi.  1.     Compare  Ezek.  xL  5. 

16.  Four  equare  (rerpdffcnfo^).  From  rirpa/our  and  ymifla 
an  angle.  Only  here  in  the  Kew  Testament.  Compare  Ezek. 
xlviiL  16,  20. 

Twelve-thoueand  furlonge  (M^rroS^&uScieax^Xia&nr). 
Strictly,  to  the  length  of  {jhri)  twelve^  etc.  For  the  collective 
term  %i\u£8e9  thoueckfidey  see  on  ch.  y.  11.  Yor furlongs  see  on 
ch.  XV.  20.  The  twelve-thoosand  furlongs  would  be  1378.97 
English  miles.  Interpretations  vary  hopelessly.  The  descrip- 
tion seems  to  be  that  of  a  vast  cube,  which  may  have  been  sng- 
gested  by  the  Holy  of  Holies  of  the  tabernacle,  which  was  of 
that  shape.*  But  opinions  differ  as  to  whether  the  twelve- 
thousand  furlongs  are  the  measure  of  the  four  sides  of  the  city 
taken  together,  in  which  case  each  side  will  measure  three- 
thousand  furlongs;  or  whether  the  twelve-thousand  furlongs 
are  intended  to  represent  the  length  of  each  side.  The  former 
explanation  is  prompted  by  the  desire  to  reduce  the  vast  dimen- 
sions of  the  city.  Another  difficulty  is  raised  about  the  height 
Diisterdieck,  for  example,  maintains  that  the  houses  were 
three-thousand  stadia  in  height  The  question  arises  whether 
the  vertical  surface  of  the  cube  includes  the  hill  or  rock  on 
which  the  city  was  placed,  a  view  to  which  Alford  inclines. 
These  are  enough  to  show  how  utterly  futile  are  attempts  to 
reduce  these  symbolic  visions  to  mathematical  statement.  Pro- 
fessor Milligan  aptly  remarks :  ^^  Nor  is  it  of  the  smallest  mo- 
ment to  reduce  the  enormous  dimensions  spoken  of.    No  re- 

*  This  oobioal  plan,  applied  not  only  to  the  Tabemaole,  bat  to  the  Ark  of 
the  Flood,  the  Temple  of  Solomon  and  the  '*  King's  House,"  is  minntel/ 
worked  out  in  ««The  Holy  Houses"  by  Dr.  Timothy  Otis  Paine;  a  book  fnU 
of  curious  erudition,  in  which  the  Tabemaole,  the  Ark  of  Noah,  the  Temple, 
and  the  Capitol  or  King's  House,  are  treated  as  developments  from  a  oommon 
type  ;  but  which  prooeeds  on  the  utterly  untenable  hypothesis  that  the  tem- 
ple of  Eaekiers  Tision  was  Solomon's ;  and  that,  accordingly,  from  the  two 
books  of  Kings  and  the  prophecies  of  Jeremiah  and  Eaekiel  all  the  data  are 
furnished  for  a  complete  restoration  of  the  Temple ;  the  prophetic  yiaion  of 
^ekiel  supplying  the  details  omitted  in  the  historic  record  of  Kings. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BEVBLATION  OP  JOHN.  567. 

dnction  brings  them  within  the  bounds  of  verisimilitade ;  and 
no  effort  in  that  dii*ection  is  required.  The  idea  is  alone  to  b^ 
thought  of." 

17.  Cubits  {^nrx&v\  The  word  originally  means  that  part 
of  the  arm  between  the  hand  and  the  elbow-joint,  the  forearm. 
Hence  a  cubit  or  ell^  a  measure  of  the  distance  from  the  joint 
of  the  elbow  to  the  tip  of  the  middle  finger,  i.e.^  about  a  foot 
and  a  half.  The  precise  length,  however,  is  disputed.  CvhU 
is  from  the  Latin  cubitus  the  eJhow^  on  which  one  redines  {eih 
hat).  Some  take  the  one  hundred  and  forty-four  cubits  as  rep- 
resenting the  height  of  the  wall ;  others  the  thickness.  If  the 
height,  then  they  must  be  interpreted  as  equal  to  the  twelve- 
thousand  furlongs,  since  the  length  and  the  breadth  and  the 
height  of  the  city  are  equal  (ver.  16).  It  is  to  be  noted,  how- 
ever, that  there  is  a  distinction  between  the  measure  of  the  cify 
and  the  measure  of  the  waU.  ^The  most  inconsiderable  wall " 
remarks  Dusterdieck,  ^'  is  sufficient  to  exclude  all  that  is  im- 
pure.'' 

Th«  meaaure  of  a  man,  that  ia,  of  the  angel.    ^  It  is  to 

be  the  dwelling-place  of  men ;  and  even,  therefore,  when  an 
angel  measures  it,  he  measures  it  according  to  the  measure  of  a 
man"  (Milligan). 

18.  The  building  {hSofufcv;).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. From  iv  in  and  SoofuCco  to  build.  Lit.,  that  which  is  built 
in.  Hence  the  building  of  the  waU  is  the  material  built  into 
the  wall ;  of  which  the  wall  was  composed. 

Glasa  (vdKip).  Only  here  and  ver.  21.  For  the  kindred  ad- 
jective vdKivof:  qfglasSy  see  on  ch.  iv.  6. 

19.  All  manner  of  precioua  atonea.  Compare  Isa.  liv.  11, 
12 ;  1  Chron.  xxix.  2. 

> 
Sapphire  (frdw^Lpo^).     Compare  Isa.  liv.  11 ;    Ezek.  i.  26. 

Probably  lapis  lazuli.  Our  sapphire  is  supposed  to  be  repre- 
sented by  the  jacinth  in  ver.  20.    Fliny  describes  the  trdir^tpo^ 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


its  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  HBW  TESTAMENT. 

M  opaqne  and  sprinkled  with  epecks  of  gold,  and  states  that  it 
came  from  Media  (t.^.,  Persia  and  Bokhara)  whence  the  snpplj 
is  brought  to  this  day.  King  Q^  Precious  Stones  and  Gems," 
cited  by  Lee),  says :  *^  Before  the  true  precious  stones  were  in- 
troduced from  India,  tlie  lapis  lazuli  held  the  highest  place  in 
the  estimation  of  the  primitive  nations  of  Asia  and  Oreece ;  in 
fact  it  was  almost  the  only  stone  known  to  them  having  beauty 
of  color  to  recommend  it.'' 

Chalcedony  ixoKicrfimi).  From  Chalcedon,  where  the  stone 
was  found  in  the  neighboring  copper  mines.  It  was  probably 
an  inferior  species  of  emerald,  as  crystal  of  carbonate  of  copper, 
which  is  still  popularly  called  ^'  the  copper  emerald."  Pliny 
describes  it  as  small  and  brittle,  changing  its  color  when  moved 
about,  like  the  green  feathers  in  the  necks  of  peacocks  and 
pigeons. 

Emerald.    See  on  ch.  iv.  3. 

20.  Sardonyx  {<rapS6w^.  The  most  beautiful  and  rarest 
variety  of  onyx.  Pliny  defines  it  as  originally  signifying  a 
white  mark  in  a  aardy  like  the  human  nail  (2w|)  placed  ttpan 
fleshy  and  both  of  them  transparent.  Onyx  is  called  from  the 
resemblance  of  its  white  and  yellow  veins  to  the  shades  in  the 
human  finger-nail.  The  early  Greeks  make  no  distinction  be- 
tween the  onyx  and  the  sardonyx. 

Sardiua.    See  on  ch.  iv.  3. 

Chrysolite  (xpuotSXi^o^).  From  ypvai^  geld  and  \t^  stone. 
Lit,  goldrstane.  Identified  by  some  with  our  topaZy  by  others 
with  amber.  Pliny  describes  it  as  ^^  translucent  with  golden 
lustre." 

Beryl  (/SifpvXXo^).  Pliny  says  that  it  resembled  the  green- 
ness of  the  pure  sea.  It  has  been  supposed  to  be  of  the  same 
or  similar  nature  with  the  emerald. 

Topaz  {yfm6J^iov).  Compare  Job  xxviii.  19.  The  name  was 
derived  from  an  island  in  the  Bed  Sea  where  the  gem  was  first 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BEVBLATIOK  OF  JOHN.  S69 

discovered.  The  stone  is  our  peridot  The  Soman  lapidaries 
distinguished  the  two  varieties,  the  chrysopteron^  our  chryaoUte^ 
and  the  prasoidesy  our  peridot.  The  former  is  much  harder, 
and  the  yellow  color  predominates  over  the  green.  The  modem 
topaz  was  entirely  unknown  to  the  ancients. 

Chrysoprasus.  Bev.,  chrysoprase.  From  ypwri^  gold  and 
irpdaov  a  leek;  the  color  being  a  ti-anslueent,  golden  green,  like 
that  of  a  leek.  According  to  Pliny  it  was  a  variety  of  the 
beryL 

Jacinth  ipixw^).    See  on  ch.  ix.  17. 

Amethyst  {ikfiiBwrrt^).  From  h  not  and  fu^wm  to  he  drunken 
toith  vnney  the  stone  being  supposed  to  avert  intoxication.  Pliny 
distinguishes  it  from  the  jacinth,  in  that,  in  the  latter,  the  vio- 
let hue  of  the  amethyst  is  diluted.  The  stone  is  the  amethyst- 
ine quartz,  or  rock-crystal,  colored  purple  by  manganese  of  iron. 

21.  Pearls  (fiapyaplTai).  The  pearl  seems  to  have  been 
known  from  the  earliest  times  to  the  Asiatic  Greeks,  in  conse- 
quence of  their  intercourse  with  the  Persians.  Among  the 
motives  which  impelled  Csesar  to  attempt  the  conquest  of 
Britain,  was  the  fame  of  its  pearl-fisheries.  Pearls  held  the 
highest  rank  among  precious  stones.  The  Latin  term  unto 
(unity)  was  applied  to  the  pearl  because  no  two  were  found 
exactly  alike ;  but  the  word  became  in  time  restricted  to  the 
fine,  spherical  pearls,  while  the  generic  name  was  margarita. 
Shakespeare  uses  union  ior  pearl  in  Hamlet,  Act  v.,  Sc.  2. 

<«  The  king  ihAll  drink  to  Hamlet's  better  health : 
And  in  the  cap  an  union  shall  he  throw 
Bicher  than  that  which  four  snccessiye  kings 
In  Denmark's  orown  have  worn.'* 

And  again: 

<«  Drink  of  this  potion :  is  thj  tiiUon  here  f  " 

Every  several  gate  (ivi^  eU  Itca^rro^  r&v  wvXAvmv).  Bev., 
each  one  of  the  several  gatesy  thus  bringing  out  the  force  of  the 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


S70  WORD  8TTJDIBS  IH  THE  1!IBW  TBBTAMBErr. 

genitive  itvXmihov  of  gates.  The  idea  woeral  is  conveyed  by 
iaf&^  as  Lnke  ix.  3,  ayk  hvo  xvtSnwi  ^^  two  coats  a(pieoe  :  "  Joliu 
ii.  6,  ia^  §ierpffrriui  Bio  fj  rpek  **  two  or  three  firkins  apiece,^ 

Street  (TrXareui).    See  on  Lake  xiv.  21.   From  vXaTv^hroad. 
Hence  the  hroadway. 

22.  No  temple.    The  entire  city  is  now  one  holy  temple  of 
God.     See  on  ch.  i.  6. 

23.  The  glory  of  God  did  lighten  it.  Compare  Isa.  Ix. 
19,20. 

The  light  (o  \\rxy<^).  Bev.,  better,  lamp.  See  on  John 
v.  35. 

24.  Of  them  which  are  saved.    Omit. 

In  the  light  {iv  r^  jwrX).    Read  hth  rov  ^mrh^  ^ amidst  the 

light "  or  "Jy  the  light." 

Do  bring  {<l>ipov<riv).    The  present  tense,  denoting  habit 

Glory  and  honor.    Omit  and  honor.    Compare  Isa.  Ix.  3. 

27.  That  defileth  (xouhwp).  The  participle.  But  the  cor- 
rect reading  is  the  adjective  kowov  oommofh,  hence  unhallotoecL 
Bev.,  tmclean. 

Worketh  {ttoiovp).    Lit,  maketh  or  doeth. 

^^In  this  present  life,  I  reckon  that  we  make  the  nearest 
approach  to  knowledge  when  we  have  the  least  possible  com- 
munion or  fellowship  with  the  body,  and  are  not  infected  with 
the  bodily  nature,  but  remain  pure  until  the  hour  when  God 
himself  is  pleased  to  release  us.  And  then  the  foolishness  of 
the  body  will  be  cleared  away,  and  we  shall  be  pure  and  hold 
converse  with  other  pure  souls,  and  know  of  ourselves  the  clear 
light  everywhere,  which  is  no  other  than  the  light  of  truth. 
For  no  impure  thing  is  allowed  to  approach  the  pure  "  (Plato, 
«Ph»do,"67). 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BBYBLATXON  OF  JOHN.  571 

CHAPTER  XXIL 

1.  Pure.    Omit 

Clear  QsjaiJim'pov).    See  on  Lnke  xxiii.  11.    Kev.,  hrighi. 

2.  In  the  midst  of  the  street  thereof.  Some  oomiect 
these  words  with  the  preceding.     So  Bev. 

On  either  side  {ivrevSep  teal  ivreSSep).  For  the  latter  iv- 
revSep  read  i/cet^,  and  render,  as  Rev.,  on  this  side  and  on 
that. 

Tree  i^fihav).    See  on  Lnke  xxiii  31,  and  Apoc.  ii.  7. 

Twelve  manner  of  fruits  {jcagntoiyi  8<&8€iea).  Lit.,  tv>elvs 
fruits.  Some  render  crops  or  harvests  of  fruit.  On  these 
two  verses  compare  Ezek.  xlvii.  1-12 ;  Joel  iiL  18 ;  Zech.  idv.  8. 

3.  Shall  serve  (KarpewrtnHnv).  See  on  Lnke  i.  74.  Bev., 
do  Sim  service.  The  word  originallj  means  to  serve  for  hire. 
In  the  New  Testament,  of  the  worship  or  service  of  GK>d  in  the 
use  of  the  rites  intended  for  His  worship.  It  came  to  be  nsed 
by  the  Jews  in  a  very  special  sense,  to  denote  the  service  ren- 
dered to  Jehovah  by  the  Israelites  as  His  pecnliar  people.  See 
Bom.  ix.  4;  Acts  xxvi.  7 ;  Heb.  ix.  1,  6.  Hence  the  significant 
application  of  the  term  to  Christian  service  by  Paul  in  Philip, 
iii.  3. 

4.  See  His  feoe.  Compare  1  John  iii.  2 ;  Matt  v.  8;  £xod« 
xxxiiL  20 ;  Ps.  xvii.  15. 

i.  No  night  there  {hetS).  Substitute  in  any  more.  Sev., 
there  shall  he  night  no  more. 

6.  The  Lord  God  {Kvpia^  6  8e^).  Rather,  as  Rev.,  the 
Zordjthe  God. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


572  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THB  HEW  TESTAMENT. 

Of  th«  holy  prophets  {r&v  iyiav  wpo^nrr&v).  For  ayuav 
holy  substitute  irveufuir<ov  spirits,  and  render,  as  Bev.,  the  Gcd 
of  the  spirits  of  the  prophets. 

Be  done  {y€pi<rS<u).    Better,  as  Bev.,  come  to  pom. 

7.  Keepeth  {rrfp&v).  A  favorite  word  with  John,  ooenrring 
in  his  writings  more  frequently  than  in  all  the  rest  of  the  New 
Testament  together.     S^  on  reserved  1  Pet.  i  4. 

Book  {fiifiKiov).  Diminutive,  properly  a  little  book  or  serolL 
See  on  writing^  Matt  xix*  7 ;  hilly  Mark  x.  2 ;  hook,  Luke  iv.  17. 

8.  I  John  saw  (^w  'lowiw^  6  fikhrmv).  The  A.  V.  over- 
looks the  article  with  the  pai'ticiple — the  one  seeing^  Hence 
Bev.,  correctly,  IJohn  am  he  that  hea/rd  cmd  saw. 

Had  heard  and  seen  {fycowra  icaX  !ffKey^).  Aorist  tense. 
There  is  no  need  of  rendering  it  as  a  pluperfect  Bev.,  rightly, 
I  heard  arid  saw.  The  appeal  to  hearing  and  seeing  is  com- 
mon to  all  John's  writings.  See  John  i.  14 ;  six.  35 ;  xxL  14 ; 
1  John  i.  1,2;  iv.  14. 

9.  See  thou  do  it  not  {Spa  fuf).    Lit,  see  not. 

Thy  brethren  the  prophets.  The  spiritual  brotheriiood 
of  John  with  the  prophets  is  exhibited  in  the  Apocalypse. 

10.  Seal  {<rif>parf{ajy;).  Bev.,  seal  up.  Tliis  word  occurs 
eighteen  times  in  the  Apocalypse  and  twice  in  the  Grospel,  and 
only  five  times  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament  It  means  to 
oor^fi/rm  or  attest  (John  iii  33) ;  to  close  up  far  security  (Matt, 
xxvii.  66 ;  Apoc.  xx.  3) ;  to  hide  or  keep  secret  (Apoc.  y.  4;  xxiL 
10)  \  to  m4X/rk  a  person  or  thing  {h.ipoc.^lZ\  £ph.L13;  iv.80). 

Time  {ieaip6^).    See  on  Matt  xii.  1. 

11.  Unjust  {aSiic&v).    Bev.,  better,  v/nrighteous. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BEVBLATION  OF  JOHN.  673 

Let  him  be  unjust  {aBuet^drtc).  The  verb  means  to  do 
vnckecUy.    Hence  Bev.,  correctly,  let  hvm.  do  unrighteoumew. 

He  which  is  filthy  (o  ptmSni).  Only  here  in  the  Kew  Testa- 
ment. On  the  kindred  noun  j^xnro^  fiith^  see  on  1  Pet.  iii.  2L 
^PvircLpla  JiUhiness  occurs  only  in  Jas.  i.  21 ;  and  the  adjecti7e 
pxmckp&iJiUhyj  only  in  Jas.  ii*  2. 

Let  him  be  filthy  {pvnwcdroii).  The  best  texts  read  ftwrau- 
5f/T<»  let  Mm  he  mcuieJiUhy.    So  Rev. 

Let  him  be  righteous  (BucaimSi^).  Bead  Bueeuoavpffp 
woifftrdm  let  hvm  do  riffhteoitsness.    So  Bev. 

Let  him  be  holy  (arfuurSi^).  Bev.,  giving  literally  the 
force  of  the  passive  voice,  let  him  he  made  holy. 

12.  My  reward  is  with  me  (o  fAurS6^  /aov  /*€t  ifAov).  Mur- 
.969  reward  is  strictly  vmgee.  Compare  Isa.  xl.  10 ;  Ixii.  11. 
See  on  2  Pet  ii.  13. 

To  give  (aTroSofipcu).  Lit,  to  give  hack  or  in  retwm  for^ 
thus  appropriate  to  fjiMr^  reward  Hence  Bev.,  better,  reinder. 
See  on  gvoe  an  accountj  Luke  xvi.  2 ;  and  gave.  Acts  iv.  33. 

Shall  be  {hrra^.    Bead  iirrw  is. 

14.  That  do  His  commandments  (o«  wouwvres;  t^  hnoXivi 
avrov).  Bead  oi  irKvvovre^  rh^  aroXii^  aur&v  they  that  wash 
their  robes.    Compare  ch.  vii.  14. 

That  they  may  have  right  to  the  tree  of  life  (Zw  icrai  ^ 
ifovaia  airr&v  hrl  ro  ^vKov  t^  ^'«nfs).  Lit,  in  order  that  theirs 
shaJl  he  a/uthoriiy  over  the  tree  cf  life.  For  i^ova-la  rightj 
authority^  see  on  John  i.  12.  ^Eirl  may  be  the  preposition  of 
direction:  "may  have  right  to  corns  to^  (w)  Bev.)  or  may  be 
rendered  over. 

15.  Dogs  {oi  Kuve^).  The  A.  V.  omits  the  article  "  tJie  dogs.'' 
Compare  Philip,  iii.  2.    This  was  the  term  of  reproach  with 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


574  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAKENT. 

which  the  Jndaizero  Btigmatized  the  Qentiles  as  impnre.  In 
the  Mosaic  law  the  word  is  used  to  denonnoe  the  moral  profli- 
gacies of  heathen  worship  (Dent  xxiii.  18).  Compare  Matt, 
xv.  26.  Here  the  word  is  nsed  of  those  whose  moral  impnritj 
exclndes  them  from  the  New  Jemsalem.  '^  As  a  term  of  re- 
proach, the  word  on  the  lips  of  a  Jew,  signified  chiefly  im^ 
jrariiy;  of  a  Greek,  impudence.  The  herds  of  d<^  which 
prowl  about  Eastern  cities,  without  a  home  and  without  an 
owner,  feeding  on  the  refuse  and  filth  of  the  streets,  quarrelling 
among  themseWes,  and  attacking  the  passer-by,  explain  both 
applications  of  the  image  "  (laghtfoot,  on  Philip.  iiL  2). 

Sorcerers*    See  on  ch.  ix.  21,  and  compare  ch.  xxL  8. 

Whoremongers  {ir6pvoi).    Kev.,  better,y&mica<c>r«. 

Maketh  {iroi&v).  Or  doeth.  Compare  doeth  the  truths  John 
iii.  21 ;  1  John  i.  6.     See  on  John  iii.  21. 

16.  The  root.    Compare  Isa.  xi  1, 10.    See  on  UToBareney 

Matt.  ii.  23. 

The  morning-star.    See  on  ch.  iL  28. 

17.  The  Spirit.    In  the  Church. 
Ths  Bride.    The  Church. 

Heareth.    The  voice  of  the  Spirit  and  the  Bride. 

19.  Ths  Book  of  Life.    Bead  rot)  ftfXov  the  tree.    So  Ber. 

20.  Even  so  {vaX).    Omit. 

21.  Our  Lord  {fiti&v).    Omit 

With  you  all  O^r^  irdvmv  vpAv).  The  readings  differ. 
Some  read  fieriL  iriinmv  with  dUy  omitting  you.  Others,  lierh 
T&v  arfUnf  xoith  the  eainte. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


LIST  OF  OBBEK  W0BD6  AND  PHBASBS  USBD  BY  JOHN  ONLY. 


Words  peenUar  to  the  Gospel,  the  Bpistlee,  or  the  Apooaljrpee  are  marked  O., 
1  Bpb,  2  Bp»,  8  Bp.,  Apoc  Also  words  oommoa  to  the  Gospel  with  either  of  the 
other  wriUnga. 


''AX^ 

t6  A  KcH  TO  Of 

ayytXUi, 
dyycXXtf, 

iiXXax^Pf 
dXXffkmSiaf 


)  Alpha,  ) 

)  Alpha  and  Omega, ) 

Abaddon, 

message, 

toannonnoe, 

captivity, 

to  be  f nllj  ripe, 

to  go  a  fishing, 

some  other  \njf 

hallelnjah, 

aloe, 

to  have  sin. 


oficidvoTOf,  amethyst, 

6  *A/ii)y,  the  Amen, 

a/i^p,  dfiijPf        verily,  verily, 

^(oontraoted )  ^m 
tromi6p),    )    ' 
aWk  f  &  f  joioTor,    every  several  one, 
dpofMpniToSf       "wiihont  sin, 

Jamtmtng  fw^ff,  zesnireotion  of  life, 
Jufatrrairis  Kpio"'  resorrection  of  jndg- 

ft»ff,  ment, 

dyOpoicuS,  heap  of  bnming  coals, 

dii>ifmiroKTopoff   manslayer,  murderer, 

aFTtxpUrrotf       antichrist^ 

cSvrXfMy  todraw  (water  or  wine), 


Apoc. 

Apoa 

lEp. 

O. 

Apoa 

Apoc 

O. 

G. 

Apoa 

G. 

G.,lEp. 


Apoa 
Apoa 
G. 


Apoa 
G. 


G. 


(Apoa    i.,    8,    11; 
1       xxL,  6 ;  xxii,  18 

Apoa  ix.,  11 

1  Ep.  ilL,  11 

XX.,  18 

Apoa  xiii,  10 

Apoa  xiv.,  18 

xxL,  8 
•x.,1 

Apoa  xix.,  1,8, 4^6 

xix.,  89 

ix.,  41;  XV.,  22,  24; 
xix.,  11.  1  Ep. 
i.,8 

Apoa  xxL,  20 

Apoc.  iii.,  14 

L,51;iii,  8,6;  v., 

19,  etc. 
(xiii, 20;  xvL,  28; 
I     XX.,  28 

Apoa  xxL,  21 

viii,  7  (passage  re- 
jected) 

v.,  29 


G.  v.,  29 

G.  xviii,  18 ;  xxi.,  9 

G.,  1  Ep.        viii.,  44.  1  Ep.  iii 

16 
lEp.,2Ep.    1  Ep.  ii,  18,  22; 

iv.,  8.    2  Ep.  7 
G.  ii.,8,9;  iv.,7,16 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


xiT.,  80; 


576     6BKBK  WORDS  AND  PHRASES  USED  BY  JOHN  OHI«T. 

SwrXjifta,  a  tiling  to  dnw  with,     G.  it.,  11 

Art^   '^   [he«mw0red«id«Hd.  O.  « ii    19;  iiL,  3;  iv^ 

€Mr«,  J  ^^  t     10,  ete. 

Jar^pXOfim    tit 

ra  aruru,       to  go  or  foDow  after,  G.  ziL,  19 

*AvoXXmms         ApoUjoo,  i^KM.  Apoo.  ix^  11 

awoavpdymyos,    out  of  the  syiuigogiiey  G.  ix.,   22 ;    xiL,    42 ; 

xyL,  2 

&patt»st  withoat  seam,  G.  zix.,  23 

^pcoc,  a  bear,  Apoo.  Apoo.  xiiL,  % 

*KppajMmt        AnnagedoB,  Apoo.  Apoo.  ztL,  16 

apx^pi'^^^^^'^t     nder  of  the  feast,  G.  ii-i  8, 9 

«kr/*ov(Tw^V  prince  of  thiaiwrld,      G.  -{™-*.     ;/ 

\  I  I       XYl.,    11 

tow),  I  I  * 

^^laor,  wonnwood,  Apoo.  Apoa  fiiL,  11 

Jl^'-^f     block  belote,  pP^  Apocn..  U 

/Soior,  branch,  G.  ziL,  13 

fiaatanain&t^        torment,  i^poo.  Apoa  ix.,  5 ;   zir., 

11 ;  XTiiL,  7,  10, 
15 
fiarpmxpt,  frog,  Apoa  Apoc.  xtL,  13 

fitlpukXot,  beryl,  Apoo.  Apoa  xxL,  20 

/3</3XapcdiOF,        little  book,  i^K>o.  Apoa  x.,  2^  8,  9,  10 

fiififmmcm,  eat,  G.  tL,  13 

fi^Tfwt,  oloster  (of  gn9>«8),         Apoa  Apoa  xir.,  18 

$pimyff  thunder,  G.,  Apoa        xiL,  29.   Apoo.  ir^ 

5;Ti,  1,  ete.    In 
Markiii^l7»«aa 
translation 
fifSirvwog,  fine  linen,  Apoa  Apoo.  xriiL,    16; 

xix.,  8,  14 
roASaSa,  Gabbathft,  G.  xix.,  13 

ywfi^,  birth,  G.  ix.,  1 

yfvrriirjpat&fm'  to  be  bom  again,  or 
S^**  from  above,  G.  iii,  3 

(Toi/jecov,  \  — •  »       i'      I     !▼.!  7;  T.,  1,4^18 

(rov)    iryrv-VtobebomoftheSpirit,  G.  iii,  5, 6i,  8 

yfi«N^  old  man,  G.  iiL,4 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GRBKK  WORDS  AND  PHBASBS  USED  BY  JOHN  ONLY.     57T 


yKvxraoKOfiop, 

bag, 

G. 

zii.,  6 ;  ziii,  29 

dtupwo, 

to  weep, 

G. 

xi,  36 

d€iXiiia», 

to  be  afraid, 

G. 

adv.,  27 

dfiearoSf 

tenth, 

G.,  Apoc. 

L,89.  Apocxxi.,20 

t6  dccaroy. 

the  tenth  part, 

Apoc. 

Apoc  xL,  13 

diadfifio, 

crown, 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  xii,3;  ziii., 
l;ziz.,12 

d<a(a>m;«»9 

to  gird. 

G. 

ziii.,  4,  6 ;  zzL,  7 

diavy^s, 

transparent, 

Apoc 

Apoc  zzL,  21 

AilhffioSf 

Didymos  (twin), 

G. 

zi,  16;  zz.,  24; 
zzi,2 

diw\6^, 

to  doable. 

Apoc 

Apoc  zviii.,  6 

dpOKMP, 

dragon, 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  zii.,  3,  4,  7; 
ziii,  2,  etc. 

twelfth. 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  zzL,  20 

ryKalma, 

feast  of  thededioation, 

G. 

Z.22 

iyXP^^f 

anoint, 

Apoc 

Apoc  iii.,  18 

fItHU       €K      TOV 

to  be  of  the  world. 

1  Ep.,  G. 

viiL,  23;   zv.,  19; 

K6a'fWV, 

zvii.,  14,  16; 
zviii,  36.  1  Ep. 
ii.,16;  iv.,5 

€hmiKTap&w, 

to  be  from  above. 

G. 

viii.,23. 

€&a»      C/C     T&¥ 

KOT^f 

to  be  from  beneath. 

G. 

viiL,  23 

^KKtVTt»f 

to  pierce. 

G.,Apoc 

ziz.,37.  Apoc.  i.,  7 

iiamm^ 

to  withdraw. 

G. 

v.,  13 

4k  TOV  al&pogf 

since  the  world  began. 

G. 

iz.,  32 

Af^oiTiyof, 

of  ivory. 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  zviii.,  12 

'W(knPiK6s, 

Greek, 

Apoc 

Apoc.  iz.,  11 

i/U», 

tospne. 

Apoc 

Apoc.  iii.,  16 

ifiw6pu>p, 

merchandise. 

G. 

ii,  16 

ilt4nHTam^ 

to  breathe  npon. 

G. 

zz.,22 

MmfUfaif, 

building, 

Apoc. 

Apoc  zzi,  18 

4(aK6iruHf 

Biz  hundred, 

Apoc 

Apoc.  ziii.,  18; 
ziv.,  20 

dfipx^fr^ai 

<nrd,  irap^  rov 

to  come   forth  from 

G. 

viiL,  42;  ziii,  3; 

S€OV, 

God, 

zvL,  27,  80 

ii^C^ 

to  awake  one  out  of 
sleep. 

G. 

zi,ll 

ivapoTOff 

accursed. 

G. 

viL,  49 

npper  gannent. 

G. 

zzi.,  7 

iiMxOf^ 

to  receive. 

8Ep. 

3Ep.9,  10 

fWixp^ 

to  anoint, 

G. 

iz.,  6,11 

Vol.  n.— 87 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


678 


tA^PX^Wmi, 

things  that  are  ocxminc^ 

a 

xyL.  13 

Wifrx6n,l„iMpm,iA^hBtdMj, 

a 

▼1,89,40,44,  54; 

TiL,87;xL.a4; 

xuL,48 

fijXti^ 

to  be  zealonB, 

Apoe. 

ApoaiiL,  19 

Oirrdf, 

hot, 

Apoo. 

Apoa  iii,  15^  16 

«Xoc, 

nail, 

O. 

XX.,  26 

fllUmfMm, 

half  an  honr, 

Apoo. 

Apoa  Yiii^  1 

M^ 

which  was  (epithet  of 
Ood), 

Apoc. 

Apoai,4,8;  tr.,  8 

^tp, 

than  at  all, 

o. 

xii,48 

TtpOtf 

the  second  death. 

Apoa 

lApoa  iL,  U;   xx^ 
\     14;xxL,8 

to  wonder  with  great 
wonder, 

Apoo. 

Apoa  XTiLy  6 

SfU^ff, 

brimstone, 

Apoo. 

Apoa  ix.,  17 

9ff<K^f^^, 

worshipper  of  CKkI, 

G. 

ix.,  81 

9c«pfirdaMiroir,  to  see  deatli, 

G. 

▼iii,  61 

5W» 

sheath, 

G. 

xviiL,ll 

V«*«. 

cattle. 

G. 

iv.,  12 

di^im, 

thyine  (wood). 

Apoa 

Apoc.  XYiiL,  12 

Za<nrsff» 

Jasper, 

Apoo. 

Apoa  !▼.,  8;  xxL, 
11,  18, 19 

iXiur^ife, 

propitiation. 

lEp. 

lBp.iL,2;  iv.lO 

T6hnn^, 

cavalry. 

Apoa 

Apoc.  ix.,  16 

IfHtf 

rainbow. 

Apoa 

Apoa  i^.,  8;  x.,  1 

KtOalpmy 

to  purge. 

a 

x^.,2 

KaraSt^fAOf 

corse. 

Apoa 

Apoaxxiiy  8 

to  seal. 

Apoa 

Apoa  ▼.,  1 

Korfrymfh 

accuser. 

Apoa 

Apoa  xiL,  10 

KaVIULf 

heat. 

Apoa 

ApoaiiL,  16  ;ktL, 

K€bpOff 

cedar. 

G. 

xvilL,  1 

lutpla, 

swathing  for  a  eofpse : 
band. 

G. 

xi,44 

to  mix,  mingle. 

Apoa 

Apoo.   xiT.,    10; 
xviiL,  6 

KtpfUh 

small  coin. 

G. 

a.,  16 

K€pfJUttUFl  l/f  1 

money-changer. 

G. 

&.,14 

gardener. 

G. 

XX..16 

KOap^fdStt 

harper. 

Apoa 

Apoo.ziT.,2;xviiL, 
22 

KunmitmfUitff 

cinnamon, 

Apoa 

Apoo.  xviii.*  18 

KkMflfMO, 

theft, 

Apoa 

Apoo.  ix.,  21 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


GBBEK  WOBDB  AND  PHRA8B8  T7BED  BY  JOHN  ONLT.      579 


MXfjfUt, 

brancb, 

a 

XY.,  2,  4,  6,  6 

Kolftifais, 

taking  lest, 

0. 

xi,  13 

KoKkoVpiOWf 

eye-aalve, 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  iii,  18 

KcXvfAfiri^pih 

pool, 

G. 

T.,a,47;ix.,7,ll 

KOfi^6T9pOP 

?X«*^ 

to  amend, 

G. 

iv.,62 

«pi»4» 

barley, 

Apoa 

ApocYi,  6 

KptiUfOff 

made  or  oonBisting  of 
barley. 

G. 

▼i..  9,  13 

KpwrraKkiCmj 

to  be  as  ozystal. 

Apoc 

Apoc  xxL,  11 

Kpwrnkkotf 

crystal, 

Apoc. 

ApociT.,6;zxiL,  1 

KVKAtVVf 

toenoircley 

Apoc.     * 

Apoc  XX.,  9 

KVxk^Pf 

round  abont, 

Apoc 

Apoc  iy.,  8,  4,  B; 

V      11 

17  Kvpuucif  fiiJpth  the  Lord's  daj. 

Apoc 

T.,  XX 

Apoc  L,  10 

K€VTUiVy 

towel, 

G. 

xiii,4,6 

Xi^onmSf, 

censer, 

Apoc 

Apoc.  yiii,  3,  6 

Xcd<((rrpt»refy 

payement^ 

G. 

xix.,  13 

Xcirap((ff» 

dainty. 

Apoc. 

Apoc  xviii.,  14 

XiVpa, 

poand. 

G. 

xii,  3;  xix.,89 

X<^» 

spear. 

G. 

xix.,34 

marble, 

Apoc 

Apoc  xyiii.,  12 

to  gnaw. 

Apoc 

Apoc  xvi.,  10 

mid-heaTcn, 

Apoc 

ApocviiL,18;xiy^ 
6;  xix.,  17 

pctnU, 

to  be  midway, 

G. 

yiL,14 

M€<r(r/4iff, 

Messiah, 

G. 

i.,41;  iv.,26 

It^ptfnit^ 

flirkin, 

G. 

iL,6 

IMIW^OtS 

forehead, 

Apoc 

Apoc  Tii.,  3;  iz^ 
4;xiiL,  16,etc 

t^P^f 

thigh, 

Apoc 

Apoc  xix.,  16 

f^f^ 

mixtnre, 

G. 

xix.,89 

f^^. 

mansion,  abode, 

G. 

xiy.,  2,  23 

fM€wrut6tf 

musician, 

Apoc 

ApocxviiL,22 

liVKoofiaij 

to  roar. 

Apoc 

Apoc  X.,  3 

/AvXiyor, 

made  of  millstanins, 

Apoc 

ApocxviiL,21 

pUrf, 

▼iotory. 

lEp. 

1  Ep.  y.,  4 

NiieoXafn;c^ 

Nioolaitan, 

Apoc 

Apoc  iL,  6, 15 

ptvrriPf 

basin. 

G. 

xiii,5 

wdrvrnf 

to  pierce. 

G. 

xix.,  84 

«^ 

to  stink. 

G. 

xi,  89 

linen  bandage, 

G. 

xix.,  40;  XX.,  5, 6, 7 

^vvOoff, 

untimely  flg, 

Apoc 

Apoc  yi,  18 

MpcOK^ 

yonngass, 

G. 

xii.,  14 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


580     OBEEK  WORDS  AND  PHBA8B8  USED  BY  JOHN  ONLY. 


4  oUuf 

ovak  (with  ao-  ] 
COB.  of  per-  j 
8on)»  ! 

0VKOV¥f 

oipOy 

iyjtdptoPf 

waMpufiff 
wapdichfTOS^ 


iropdoXcff, 
irffXcKifoi, 

wn^€p6f, 

ircpiirarf  tr     fV 

wtparariiv     h 
T§  (Ticorif  or 

vrpcirarffty     fV 

IT  y  €  v  fi  a    r^ff 

wodfipfft, 
woittp  rijv  dX^ 

wopffivpovs, 


where  there, 
fmits, 

Tision,  sight, 
Tiolenoe, 
bird, 

the  woe» 


woe, 


Apoo. 
Apoo. 
Apoa 
Apoa 
Apoo. 

Apoo. 


Apoo. 


not  then  (interrogatiTe),  G. 
tail,  Apoo. 


fish, 
appearanoe, 


G. 

G.,  Apoo. 


lad,  G. 

Comforter,  Adrooate,     G.,  1  Ep. 


leopard,  Apoo. 

kill  with  an  axe,  behead,  Apoo. 
fifth,  Apoo. 


father-in-law, 
to  bind  about, 

\  to  walk  in  the  tmth. 


G. 
G. 

2  Ep.,  8  Ep. 


•  to  walk  in  darkness,       G.,  lEp. 


to  walk  in  the  light, 

to  fly. 
to  smite, 

spirit  of  error, 

reaohing  to  the  feet, 

to  do  the  troth, 

purple, 


lEp. 

Apoa 
Apoo. 

lEp. 

Apoo. 

G.,  1  Ep. 

G.,  Apoo. 


Apoo.  xiL,  6, 14 
Apoc  xyiiL,  14 
Apoo.  iy.,  8;ix.,  17 
Apoo.,  xriiL,  21 
Apoo.     zviii,     2  ; 

xix.,  17,  21 
ipoc.  ix.,  12;  xi., 

14 

!Apoo.  yiiL,  13 ;  xiL, 
12 

zyiii,  37 

Apoo.  ix.,  10,  19; 

xiL,4 
Ti.,  9,  11;  xxL,  9, 

10,18 
Tii,   24;   xL,    44. 

Apoo.  L,  16 
tL,9 
xiv.,  16,  26;    xr., 

26;xvi.,7.  lEp. 

iL,  1 
Apoo.  xiiL,  2 
Apoa  XX.,  4 
Apoayi.,9;  ix.,  1; 

xvi.,  10;  xxL,  20 
xriii,  18 
xL,44 

2Ep.4.   dSlp.8^  4 

!Tiii,  12;  xiL,  85t. 
lEp.L,  6;  iL, 
11. 

1  Ep.  L,  7 

Apoa  xiL,  14 
Apoa  yiiL,  12 

1  Ep.  iv.,  6 

Apoa  i,  13 

iiL,21.    lEp.L,  6 

xix.,  2,  6.  Apoo. 
xriii,  16 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


OREBK  WORDS  ASB  PHRASBS  UBBD  BY  JOHN  ONLY.     581 


irorafioff)6priTos 

,  oarried   away  of  the 
flood, 

Apoa 

Apoc.  zii.,  16 

w&npotf 

whether, 

G. 

Til,  17 

wpo^ucrf, 

G. 

▼..2 

wpofi<irto¥f 

little  sheep, 

G. 

xxL,17 

irpoo-oircw, 

to  beg, 

G. 

ix.,8 

VpOiTKVPIJfrtfff 

worshipper^ 

G. 

ir.,  28 

food. 

G. 

xxL,  6 

tr/wWf, 

pertaining  to  morning, 
early, 

Apoc. 

Apoc  ii,  28 

6    wpmrot   Koi 
6  HaxoTos, 

the  first  and  the  last, 

Apoc. 

(Apoc    i.,    11,   17; 
(     xxii.,  18 

wripwot 

heel. 

G. 

xiii.,  18 

WTwrftOj 

spittle, 

G. 

ix.,6 

wipunst 

of  fire. 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  ix.,  17 

wvfi^f, 

red, 

Apoc 

Apoc  ▼i.,4;  xiL,3 

ptdri  (pcda), 

chariot, 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  xyiii.,  18 

p<im. 

to  flow, 

G. 

vii.,88 

pwaitm^ 

to  defile, 

Apoc 

Apoc  XTii.,  11 

^vw6^ 

to  be  filthy. 

Apoc 

Apoc.  TTii.,  11 

*Fi»fuu<rriy 

in  Latin, 

G. 

xix.,  20 

aakwurnit, 

trumpeter, 

Apoc 

Apoc  xyiii,  22 

athnfrnposf 

sapphire. 

Apoc 

Apoc.  xxL,  19 

<rapdioy» 

sardios  (stone). 

Apoc 

ApocxxL,  20 

irapd6wv(, 

sardonyx. 

Apoc 

Apocxxi,  20 

(TCfudoXir, 

fine  flonr. 

Apoc 

Apoc  xTiii.,  18 

GfipiK6f   {aipi- 

silk. 

Apoc 

Apoc  xriiL,  12 

ai^ijpos, 

iron. 

Apoc 

Apoc  XTiii.,  12 

aircXoff, 

leg, 

G. 

xix.,  31,  82,  88 

aofpo/wfiyiof 

feast  of  tabemades, 

G. 

yii,2 

aiaip6m. 

to  dwell. 

G.,Apoc 

i,  14.  Apoo.  vii., 
16;xii,12;xiii, 
6;  xxi.,  8 

of  emerald, 

Apoc 

Apoc  iy.  8 

a/iapaydos, 

emerald. 

Apoc 

Apoc.  xxi,  19 

arpffinam, 

to  live  delidonsly, 

Apoc 

Apoc  xyiii,  7,  9 

OTpfjPOt, 

revelry,  Tolnptnoosnees,  Apoa 

Apoc  xyiii.,  8 

trvfifuOriTrit, 

feUow-disdple, 

G. 

xi,  16 

avmuripxoiMU, 

to  accompany  into. 

G. 

yi.,22;  xyiii,  15 

a^fumh 

shiTes  (lit.  bodies). 

Apoc 

Apoc  xyiii,  18 

of  a  talent's  weight. 

Apoc 

Apoc  xyi,  21 

r^tcnouft 

little  child, 

G.,lEp. 

xiii.,  88.  lEp.ii, 
12,  28;  iii,  18; 
ir.,  4;  y.  21 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


582     OBEBK  W0BD8  AMD  PHRASW  VBMD  BY  JOHN  OITLT. 


TtrapTOiotf 

oftbefoarthday, 

a. 

zi.,d9 

foor-square, 

Apoo. 

Apoa  TxLf  16 

rrrpoiufpotf 

offoarmonfchsy 

O. 

IT.,  86 

to  1*7  down  Um  life, 

0.,lEp. 

x^  11,  15,  17,  18; 
xiiL,  87,  88 ;  xr., 
18.    l^iiL.  16 

Ttpwnit, 

oortline«» 

Apoo. 

ApoazTiii,19 

rtrXofy 

title, 

G. 

SIX.,  19,  20 

r6(a^f 

bow, 

Apoo. 

Apoa  yi.,  2 

rawdCuMff 

top*., 

Apoa 

Apoa  xxi,  20 

rpcxiw, 

ofbftir, 

Apoo. 

Apoavi,  12 

iaidt^ufotp 

of  jaointh, 

Apoo. 

Apoc.  ix.,  17 

ioKU^Sf 

jadnth. 

Apoo. 

ApoaxzL,  20 

iakipos, 

of  glass, 

Apoo. 

Apoa  iy.,  6;  xr.,  2 

ZiDios, 

gli«, 

Apoo. 

Apoo.  xzL,  18,  21 

Wp^ 

wirfier-pot, 

G. 

iL,6,7;iT..a8 

l<lHiPr6s, 

woTen, 

G. 

xix.,28 

^omJf, 

lantern. 

G. 

xviiL,  8 

drag,  enchantment. 

Apoo. 

Apoa  ix.,  21 

soroerer. 

Apoo. 

Apoo.xxL,  8;xxti., 

15 
Apoo. T.,  8;  XT.,  7; 

4H6k^ 

bold  or  sanoer, 

Apoo. 

XTi,  1,  St  eto. 

to  love  pro  rnninfflioe, 

8Ep. 

8£p.9 

to  prate, 

3Ep. 

8£p.  10 

♦omf» 

G.,  Apoo. 

x]i,iaApoe.TiL,9 

4>payi)iKtop, 

soonrge, 

G. 

ii,15 

xdkaCa, 

hail, 

Apoo. 

Apoa  Tiii,  7  ;  xL, 
19;xirL,21 

XiJXufof, 

of  brass. 

Apoo. 

Apoo.  ix.,  20 

xdkiafi^Pf 

ohaloedony, 

Apoo* 

ApoaxxL,  19 

XaXieoXi/3aM>r, 

fine  brass, 

Apoo. 

Apoa i.,  15;  iL.  18 

XflH» 

on  the  gronnd. 

G. 

ix.,  6;xtoL,6 

XapTiyff, 

paper. 

2Ep. 

2Ep.l2 

x«W^«» 

brook. 

G. 

xriii.,  1 

xXioprff, 

lukewarm, 

Apoa 

Apoo.  iii.,  16 

X<H>^. 

measure,  aohoMiiz, 

Apoo. 

Apoa  tL,  6 

Xo^'Mi* 

to  be  angry, 

G. 

TiL,28 

XfHfTfia, 

anointing,  nnotion, 

lEp. 

1  Ep.  ii,  20,  27 

ehxysolite. 

Apoa  xxi.,  20 

Xfnfo^pairotf 

chrjsoprasns. 

Apoo. 

Apoa  xxi,  20 

Xpv<r6m9 

to  make  golden, 

Apoo. 

Apoo.    xTii.     4; 
xviii.,  16 

ylrmiUo^t 

■op, 

G. 

xiiL,  26,  27,  80 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


(Figurei  rtfer  to  the  pages,) 


Abaddon,  510 

Abide,  840 

Abideth,  110,  174,  829,  8i7 

Abominable,  564 

Above,  170 

Aooomplished,  286 

Aoonsation,  274 

Aconse,  141 

Aoonser,  524 

Adnltezy,  455 

Advocate,  824 

Aenon,  104 

Afraid,  247 

Agree,  867,  548 

AHve,44d 

All,  86,  885 

Alleluia,  556 

Almighty,  420 

Alone,  146,  219 

Alpha,  419 

Altar,  497,  505 

Altogether,  187 

Amen,  418,  469 

Amend,  180 

Amethyst,  569 

Andrew,  72,  217 

Angel,  408 

Angels,  76,  292,  488 

Angiy,  159 

Anguish,  259 

Annas,  269 

Anointed,  182, 199 


Answered,  508 

Antichrist,  887,  895 

Antipas,  447 

Appear,  841,  844,  472 

Appearance,  160 

Appearing,  406 

Ark  of  the  covenant,  521 

Armageddon,  542 

Arose,  146 

Ascend,  154,  294 

Ascended,  96 

Ashamed,  842 

Asia,  412 

Ask,  202,  250,  259,  260,  299,  970 

Asked,  114 

Askest,  118 

Ass,  217 

Assnre,  852,  877 

Avenged,  554,  556 

Awake  {vefb),  200 

BABTunf,  545 
Backside,  487 
Bag,  212 
Balaam,  447 
Balances,  495 
Band,  268 
Bare  {verb),  218 
Barl^,  144 
Baskets,  145 
Bason,  227 
Battle,  541 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


584 


INDHX  OF  BNOLI8H  WORDS. 


Bew  (Mr5),  26e,  487 

Bear  reoordy  86d,  406 

Bear  witness,  54,  866 

BsMt,519 

Bessts,481 

Bed,  182,  455 

Before,  55 

BeginniDg  (notm),  24,  85,  170,  804, 

469 
Begotten,  53,  59,  857,  872 
Beheaded,  560 
Beheld,  52,  78 
Behind,  425 

Behold,  66, 105,  285,  848 
Believe,  49,  148, 157, 187,  198,  266 
Believed,  88,  86,  87,  178,  222,  292 
Believeth,  109,  228 
Believing,  295 
Bellj,  168 
Beloved,  858,  854 
Beneath,  170 
Beryl,  568 
Besought,  289 
Bestowed,  848 
Bethan J,  65 
Bethe8da,182 
Bethsaida,  74 
Betraj,  154,  228 
Betrayed,  268 
Bird,  549 
Birth,  181 
Black,  495 
Blasphemy,  448 
Blessed,  216 
Blessing,  492 
Blew,  147 
Blinded,  221,  888 
Blood,  50,  287,  864,  506 
Boat,  -s,  148 
Bondage,  178 
Book,  572 
Book  of  life,  468 
Bom,  50,  98,  275,  842,  848,  849 


Bom  again,  90 
Bosom,  60,  281 
Bottomless,  507 
Bow  (noun),  494 
Bowels,  852 
Brake,  286 
Branoh,  249 
Brass,  428 

Bread,  144, 149,  229,  298 
Breadth,  561 
Breast,  281,  282 
Breasts,  589 
Breastplates,  509 
Breathed,  294 
Brethren,  294^  850 
Bride,  105 
Bridegroom,  105 
Brimstone,  518,  534 
Bring,  198,  896 
Bring  forward,  402 
Broken,  184, 198,  459 
Brook,  267 
Brother,  832,  862 
Building,  567 
Borden,  458 
Burial,  218 
Bom,  547 
Burning,  189 
Bury,  290 
Buy,  284,  471 

Oabab,281 

Gage,  548 

Oaiaphas,  210 

Oalf,482 

CaUed,848 

Game,  58,  124,  125,  275 

Oamp,  561 

Oana,  79 

Oandlestiok,  489 

Ckadlestioks,  426 

Obnnot,  157, 176 

Oaptain,  269 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


INDEX  OF  ENGUSH  WOBDa 


58S 


OireUi,  192 

Cany,  183 

Gast  {acHvelf^),  485 

Cost  forth,  249 

Cost  out,  221,  861,  403 

Catoheth,  192 

Caught,  296,  298 

Cause  (notm),  254 

Chain,  560 

Chaloedonj,  568 

Changers,  83 

Chariots,  553 

Cheer  (notm),  261 

Chief  captains,  500 

Child,  130 

ChHdren,  115^  285,  297,  391,  456 

Chosen,  229 

Christ,  155 

Chrysolite,  568 

Chiysoprasus,  669 

Churches,  456 

Cinnamon,  552 

City,  111 

Clean  {cufjedive),  249 

aeanseth,  317 

Cloke,  264 

Clothed,  463,  479 

Cloud,  615 

Cloudis,  418 

Coals,  270,  298 

Coat,  285 

Cock,  272 

Cold,  470 

Come,  239,  266,  395 

Come  down,  149 

Come  upon,  221 

Cometh,  43,  103,  387, 396 

Comforter,  243 

Comfortless,  245 

Coming,  342 

Command  {verb)^  262 

Commandment,  235 

Commit,  87 


Conmdtted,  137 
Committeth,  346 
Companion,  420 
Comprehended,  40 
Condemn,  100, 101,  362 
Condemnation,  187 
Confess,  222,  320,  394, 468 
Confidence,  341,  864,  369 
Containing,  81 
Continue,  178,  527 
Converted,  222 
Conveyed,  183 
Convinceth,  178 
Cords,  84 
Com,  217 
Council,  210 
Counsel  (verb),  471 
Countenance,  429 
Country,  128 
Court,  517 
Creature,  493 
Cried,  276 
Crown,  277,  446,  466 
Crowns,  479,  509 
Cried,  55,  161,  228 
Crystal,  480,  565 
Cubits,  297,  567 
Cup,  269 
Cured,  188 
Cursed,  165 
Custom,  276 

Daihtt,  653 

I>amse]L270 

Dark,  146,  291 

Darkness,  40,  101,  814,  331 

Dealings,  113 

Death,  179, 180,  350,  370,  446,  466, 

497 
Deceive,  319,  348 
Deceived,  166 
Deceiveth,  168 
Decked,  644 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


586 


IHDBZ  OF  Uf GLIBH  WOBDA 


I>eokre,812 

Beolftred,  61,  616 

Dedication,  195 

Defiled,  278,  588 

DeHoftoies,  549 

Deliyexed,  282 

Denieth,889 

Depart,  226,  265 

Departed,  499 

Depths,  457 

Destroy,  85,  848 

DeTil,  155, 159, 176, 179,  848,  849, 

444,560 
Devour,  622 
Didjmii8,201 
Dine, -d,  299 
Diotrephes,  408 
Dipped,  557 
Dispersed,  162 
Division,  195 
Do,  101,  103,  185 
Dothetmth,815 
Doctrine,  158,  895,  896 
Doest,401 
Dogs,  578 
Door,  190,  465 
Doable  (verb),  650 
Doubting,  230 
Dragon,  522,  560 
Draw,  114,  161,  221,  297 
Drawont,  81 
Drinketh,  115 
Dmnk  {verb),  82 
Dwell,  604,  662 
Dwellest,  70 
Dwelleth,  168,  892 
Dwelt,  61,  71 

Eaolb,  482,507 
Ear,  269,  440 
Early,  278 
Earth  (the),  498 
Earthly,  96,  106 


Earthqiiake,  499 

East,  501 

Eaten,  85, 146 

Bateth,  168,  229 

Ebal,118 

Elder,  891 

Elders,  478 

Elect,  891 

Emerald,  477 

End,  225 

Ended,  226 

Enter,  98 

Ephe80s,426 

Ephndm,  211 

Error,  857 

Eternal  life,  806,  851«  868,  869 

Even  (noun),  146 

Everlasting,  534 

Evil,  101,  188,  265,  488 

Evil  one,  884 

Euphrates,  611 

Example,  228 

Expedient,  265 

Eyesalve,  472 

£;yes,  886 

Fact  to  Fact,  897, 404 

Faith,  868 

Faithful,  821, 414, 469 

Faithfully,  401 

Faithless,  296 

lUlen,  488,  646 

False  prophets,  865 

Father,  119, 168, 177, 219,  %a^  342, 

298,  806,  810,  824,  889 
Father-in-law,  270 
Fathers,  liq,  888 
Fault,  276 
Fear  (notm),  861 
Feast,  284 
Feast  day,  87 
Feast  of  tabemades,  156 
Feed,  800,  504 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


IHDBX  OF  SNOIiBH  WOBDA 


587 


Fell,  482 

Fellow-disoiples,  201 

Fellow-helpers,  402 

Fellowship,  809,  310,  549 

Fever,  180 

Fig-tree,  75,  76 

Fill  (verb),  81 

FiUed,  148,  587 

Fathji  678 

Findeth,  72,  78 

FiQe  floor,  552 

Fimsh,  125, 189 

Fire,  428 

Firkins,  81 

First,  482 

First  begotten,  415 

Fish  (noun),  298 

Fishes,  144,  298 

Fisher's  ooot,  297 

Flesh,  50,  98,  268,  886,  547 

Flow,  168 

Fold  (funm),  192,  198 

Follow,  74,  189,  408,  585 

Followed,  558 

For  {in  exchcmge),  57 

For  {because),  58 

Force,  146 

Forehead,  644 

Forgive,  822 

Fomioation,  175,  455,  544 

Found,  78 

Foundation,  528 

Fonrsqnare,  566 

Fragments,  145 

Friend,  281 

Frogs,  541 

Fruits,  558 

Fall,  251,  260,  811,  897 

Fohiess,  56 

Furlongs,  586^  666 

Gabbatha,  282 
Qaiii8,899 


Garden,  268,  290 

Garment,  427 

Garmente,  227,  468 

Gates,  565 

Gather,  250,  586 

Gave,  99 

Gave  up,  286 

Gentiles,  162,  402 

Gerisdm,  118 

Gift,  114 

Girded,  or  Girt,  227,  427 

Girdedst,  801 

Girdle,  427 

Give,  440,  547 

Given,  58,  226 

Giveth,  191 

Glass,  480,  587 

Glorified,  164,  285,  250 

Glory,  52,  417,  520 

Glory  of  God,  565 

Gnawed,  541 

Go,  161,  289,  256 

Go  abont,  159 

Go  away,  169,  255 

Gog,  561 

Godly,  402 

Godiq^eed,  896 

Gold,  471 

Good  {noun),  852 

Good  {cuyecHve),  138,  190 

Goodly,  558 

Grace,  54,  892,  412 

Grapes,  586 

Grass,  145 

Graves,  138 

Grave-olothes,  207 

Great  men,  499 

Greater,  358,  880 

Greatly,  106,  898 

Greek,  284 

Greeks,  217 

Grievous,  863,  539 

Groaned,  204 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


588 


INDBX  OF  EK6LIBH  WORDa 


Onide  {verb),  256 
Ooile,  75 

Hahi  (noun),  506 
Hair,  509 
HiU,272 
Hand,  516 
Handled,  805 
Happy,  229 
Hard,  158 
Hardened,  222 
Harps,  489,  587 
Harpers,  583 
Harrest,  126 
Hate,  258,  850 
Hated,  258 
Hateth,  882 
Hath,  859 
Have,  167 
Heal,  129 
Healed,  138 
Health,  899 
Hear,  158,  166 
Heard,  461 
Heareth,  869 
Heart,  226,  287 
Heat  {subsUmtive),  504 
Heavenly,  97 
Hebrew,  284,  510 
Heel,  229 
Held,  497 
HeU,  496 
Hereby,  826,  856 
Herein,  126,  250,  859 
Hireling,  191 
Hold  (noun),  548 
Holy,  265,  464,  488,  588 
Holy  Ohofit,  164,  294 
Holy  one,  888 
Honor,  140,  498 
Hope,  845 
Horns,  489 
Horse,  498 


Horses,  509,  513 

Horsemen,  511 

Hosanna,  216 

Hot,  470 

Hour,  80,  217,  226,  337,  611 

Honse,  237 

Hnrt  (poMtotf),  446 

Husband,  117 

Husbandman,  249 

Hyssop,  286 

Idols,  375,  447 
Image,  528 
Impotent,  132 
Incense,  490 
Increased,  471 
Ink,  397 

Iscariot,  156^  233,  246 
Israelite,  75 
Ivory,  661 

Jaodith,  612 

Jacob,  114 

Jasper,  476 

Jerusalem,  467 

Jezebel,  453 

Jesus,  68,  316 

Jew,  -s,  62,  88, 104,  120.  184,  443 

John,  42,  408,  410 

Jona,  73 

Joy,  261,  400 

JudisBa,  103 

Judge  (verb),  498 

Judgment,  188,  860 

Judgment-seat,  282 

Judgments,  588 

Just,  321 

KiBBP,  179,  219,  243,  82d,  327,  354, 

863,  376,  409 
Eeepeth,  159, 459,  572 
Kept,  213,  265,  465 
Key,  HI,  438,  464 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


INDHX  OF  KNGUSH  WORDS. 


589 


Eidron,  267 

Km,169 

Kindred,  491 

Kindreds,  419,  628 

King,  510 

King  of  the  Jews,  275 

Kings,  416 

Kingdom,  420 

Knew,  46,  87,  88,  298 

Knock,  478 

Know,  89,  96,  125,  140,  160,  167, 

227,  228,  240,  268,  826 
Knowest,  95,  227 
Knoweth,  252,  856 
Known,  241 

liABOB  {noun),  487 

Labors,  585 

Labored,  127 

Lad,  144 

Lady,  891 

Laid  hands,  168 

Lamb,  66,  489,  582 

Lambs,  800 

Lament,  258 

Lamps,  480 

Lanterns,  268 

Laodicea,  468 

Last,  482 

Last  day,  150, 168»  224 

Latin,  284 

Law,  198,  221 

Leadeth,  528 

Leaned,  801 

Leaning,  280 

Leave  (notm),  289 

Leave  {verb),  517 

Left  {verb),  111,  180,  488 

Leopard,  526 

Letters,  158 

Levites,  63 

Liar,  177,  889 

Lieth,878 


Lie  (to  speak  falsely),  815 

Lie  {noun),  177 

Life,  88,   187,  208,  219,  241,  806, 

807,868,445 
Lifted,  98,  172,  221 
Light  {noun),  89, 189, 166, 812, 815, 

565 
Lighteth,  44 
Lightnings,  479 
Likewise,  185 
Linen,  289,  588,  557 
Lion,  482 
Listeth,  94 

Little  children,  828,  888,  884 
Little  ship,  297 
Live  {verb),  245 
Living  {pariicipie),  114 
Locusts,  507 
Looked,  280,  805 
Looking,  70 
Lord,  497 
Lord's  day,  425 
Lose,  895 

Lost  {passively),  265 
Love  (notm),  250,  857,  858, 860,  488 
Love  of  God,  827 
Love  {verb),  258,  800,  862 
Loved,  200,  205,  225,  291 
Lovest,  800 
Loveth,  185,  261 
Lnkewarm,  470 
Lost,  885 
Lusts,  176 
liying,  231 

Mads,  86,  88 
Magdalene,  285 
Make,  828,  465 
Make  war,  449 
Malchns,  269 
Malefactor,  274 
Man,  67,  89, 175 
Mim  child,  522 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


690 


HTDEZ  OF  mf  OUBH  WOBD& 


Manifest  (verb),  d46 

Manifested,  807,  846 

Manifestation,  407 

Manna,  149,460 

Manner,  848 

Mansions,  286 

Marble,  662 

Mark,  529 

Marriage,  79 

Martyrs,  645 

Marrel  {verb),  186 

Master,  96,  208,  228 

Measure  (noun),  107, 496,  667 

Meat,  125, 148,  297 

Merchandise,  85,  660 

Merchants,  649 

Meroj,  892 

Message,  811 

Messias,  78, 122 

Met,  202 

Mid  Heaven,  607 

Midst,  158,  288 

Mind  (noun),  646,  547 

Miracles,  88, 148 

Miserable,  471 

Mixtnre,  289 

Month,  511 

Moon,  521 

Morning  star,  460 

Mountains,  646 

Mnrderor,  176,  851 

Mnrmnred,  151 

Mnrmoring,  158 

Musicians,  554 

Must,  98,  111,  292,  407 

Mystery,  544 

NAm>,297 

Name,  60,  87,  248,  254»  402,  458, 

462,644 
Napkin,  207,  292 
Nathanael,  74 
Nation,  210,  211 


Nations,  459 
Nanreth,  74,  268 
Net,  297 

New,  290,  880, 458 
Nioodemns,  89 
Nioolaitons,  489 
Nobleman,  129 
Noisome,  689 
Nnmber  (notm),  680,  581 

OWBWXDf  154 

Offended,  254 

Officers,  161,  268 

Old,  91,  880 

Omega,  419 

Only,  141 

Open  {a€(f6cHf>e),  76,  466 

Opened,  474 

Openly,  157,  158 

Ordained,  252 

Oreroome,  261,  884 

Orereometh,  868,  864,  440 

Ought,  119,  228,  829 

Outrun,  291 

Own,  47,  261 

Pazi^ob,270 
Pale,  496 
Palms,  216,  502 
Paper,  896 
Paps,  427 
Parable,  189 
Paradise,  442 
Ptffoel,112 
Part  (notm),  561 
Partaker,  896 
Passed,  850 
Passover,  224 
Past,  881 
Patienoe,  487,  466 
Patmos,421 
Pavement,  282 
Peace,  247 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


nVDBX  OP  HKCfLIBH  WORDa 


691 


Pearls,  569 

Pen,  404 

Penoe,212 

Pennyworth,  144 

People,  165,  206»  211,  215,  668 

Peroeive,  118 

Perdition,  265 

Perfect,  861,  862,  461 

Perfected,  827 

PergamoB,  446 

Persecute,  184 

Persecuted,  258 

Peter,  72 

Phttriseee,  110 

Philadelphia,  468 

PhiHp,  78,  217 

Pierced,  287,  419 

Pilate,  274 

Pillar,  467 

Pipers,  555 

Place  (notm),  174,  210,  289 

Please,  172 

Pleasing,  854 

Pleasure,  486 

Point  {noun),  129 

Pool,  181 

Poor,  212 

Porch,  196 

Porches,  182 

Porter,  189 

Potter,  459 

Pover^,  448 

Pound,  -s,  212,  289 

Poured,  584 

Power,  48, 459,  486 

Praise  (notm),  185,  222 

Prating,  408 

Pray,  264,872 

Prayers,  490,  505 

Preach,  584 

Precious,  212 

Pre-eminence,  408 

Preferred,  55 


Prepare,  289 
Pride,  886 
Priests,  68,  416 
Prince,  221 
Print,  294 
Prison,  104 
Proceeded,  175 
Prophesy  (verb),  518 
Propitiation,  825 
Prosper,  899 
Proverb,  -s,  260 
Pore,  845 
Porgeth,  249 
Purifleth,  845 
Purifying,  80, 105 
Purple,  279 
Put,  182,  226,  548 
Put  on,  279, 295 
Putteth,189 

QuBsnoN  {noun),  104 
Quickeneth,  186 
Quickly,  284 

Babbi,  70,  76,  89 

Bain  {verb),  518 

Bainbow,  476 

Beached,  549 

Beadeth,  409 

Beady,  157 

Beoeiye,  188,  141,  240,  257,  867, 

895 
Beoeiyed,  47,  48,  129, 461 
Beceiveth,  106 
Becord  (notm),  167 
Bed,  495 
Bedeem,  491 
Bejecteth,  228 
Bdns,  466 
Bejoice,  189 
Bejoiced,  180,  898 
Bemain,  145 
Bemit,294 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


692 


INDBX  OF  ENGLISH  WOKD& 


Bepented,  514 

BeproTe,  255 

Beproved,  101 

Besorted,  268 

Best  (verb),  498 

BesurreotioD,  138,  202 

BevelatioD,  405 

Beyiled,  186 

Beward,  395,  578 

Bioh,443 

Biches,  492 

Bighteons,  160,  324,  842 

Bighteonsness,  256,  848,  849 

Bipe,  586 

Bivera,  164 

Boareth,  515 

Bobber,  189,  276 

Bobe,  280 

Bobes,  498 

Bod,  459 

Boot  (noun),  488 

Bowed,  147 

Bnle  {verb),  459,  523 

Bnler,  415 

Buler  of  the  feast,  81 

Saokoloth,  499,  518 

Saorifioed,  447 

Said,  125,  127 

Saints,  545 

Salvation,  120 

Samaria,  113 

Same,  224 

Sanotify,  266 

Sanctified,  198 

Sapphire,  567 

Sardis,  460 

Sardine,  476 

Sardonyx,  568 

Satan,  233,  444,  457 

Save,  220 

Saviour,  127,  358 

Saw  (verb),  68,  69,  70, 143,  293,  409 


Say,  125,  224 

Saying,  -s,  126,  127,  162,  179,  246 

Scarlet,  544 

Scorpions,  507,  510 

Sconrge  {notm),  84 

Sconrged,  277 

Scripture,  198,  292 

Scriptures,  140 

Scroll,  499 

Sea,  143,  561,  562 

Seal,  107 

Seal  {verb),  572 

Sealed,  148,  488 

Seam,  285 

Search  {verb),  140,  166 

Searcheth,  456 

Seat,  447 

Seats,  478 

Second  death,  446 

Second  time,  91 

Seduce,  840,  455 

See,  109,  147,  256,  257,  418 

Seed,  349 

Seek,  70 

Seen,  58,  96, 152,  358 

Seeth,  66,  151,  191,  223,  292,  d52 

Sent,  41,  100,  127,  137,  188,  229, 

266,  272,  294,  357 
Serpent,  523 
Serpents,  513 
Servant,  174,  408 
Servants,  80,  275 
Serve,  219,  503,  571 
Service,  255 
Set  {activa^),  465 
Set  (passively),  475 
Set  down,  228 
Seven,  410,  411 
Shame,  542 
Shape,  140 
Sheath,  269 
Sheep,  300 
Sheep-market,  131 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


593 


Shew  {verb),  257,  260,  807,  407 

Shewed,  295 

ShiDeth,  40,  882 

Shipmaster,  554 

Shivers,  459 

Shore,  296 

Shortly,  407 

Sick,  129 

Sight,  854 

Signs,  129 

Signified,  406 

Silk,  550 

Siloam,  188 

Simon,  156,  299 

Simon  Peter,  155,  269 

Sin  (noim),  169,  174,  178,  817,  847, 

870 
Sin  {verb),  870 
Sinned,  828 
Sinneth,  848 
Sins,  821,  822,  847 
Sir,  508 
Sister,  206 
Sit,  145 

Six  hundred  threescore  and  six,  581 
SknU,  288 

Slain  (poMtvdfy),  489,  497 
Sleepeth,  200 
Slew,  850 
Smite,  518 
Smote,  280 
Smyrna,  442 
Somewhat,  488 
Son,  180 

Son  of  man,  77,  427 
Son  of  God,  69,  198,  848,  868 
Sons,  49,  848 
Song,  587 
Sop,  282,288 
Sorceries,  514 
Sore,  589 
Sorrow,  259.  568 
Sorrowful,  258 

Vol.  n.-^ 


Sonl,  220,  400 
Sools,  497 
Sound  {noun),  94 
Sonnd  {verb),  506 
Space,  455 
Speak,  96,  458 
Speakest,  261 
Speaking,  475 
Spear,  286 
Speech,  176 
Spice,  552 
Spices,  290 
Spikenard,  212 
Spirit,  121,  122,  164,  854,  422 
Spirit  (of  God),  91,  93 
Spirits,  418 
Spiritually,  519 
Spue,  471 
Standeth,  65 
Stars,  488 
Stings,  610 
Stinketh,206 
Stone,  78,  80,  452,  548 
Stood,  69,  168, 177,  489 
Stooping,  292 
Straight,  64 
Street,  570 
Strength,  429,  465 
Strengthen,  461 
Stretch,  801 
Strong,  885 
Stnick,  271 
Stnmbling,  888 
Stnmblingblock,  447 
Snfferest,  458 
Sup,  474 
Supper,  226,  227 
Sure,  155 
Sware,  516 
Sword,  428,  495,  497 
Sychar,  HI 

Synagogue,  158^  185,  222,  271,  444, 
465 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


594 


INDEX  OF  BNOLIBH  WOBDa 


Taxb,161 

Take  away,  66,  194 

Taken  away,  291 

TUent,643 

Tarried,  104 

Tkste  (verb),  180 

Taught,  152 

Tell,  95,  122 

Temple,  83 

Temptation,  466 

Ten  thoneand,  492,  512 

Tenth,  71 

Testify,  858 

Testimony,  188,  408,  588,  557 

Thanks,  145 

Thief,  189, 190,  462 

Thigh,  658 

Thirst  (verb),  115 

Thorns,  277 

Thousands,  492 

Throne,  478 

Thmst,  295,  535 

Thnnders,  515 

Thnnderings,  479 

Thyatira,453 

Thyine,  551 

Tiberias,  296 

Time,  157,  516 

Title,  283 

Together,  126 

Told,  134 

Took,  269 

Took  np,  197 

Topaz,  568 

Torment,  361,  550 

Tonch,  293 

Toncheth,  378 

Towel,  227 

Trade,  554 

Titmsgresseth,  346,  895 

Transgression,  346 

Travail,  259 

Treasury,  168 


Tree,  440 

Tribulation,  420,  443 

Tried,  445 

Tried  in  the  fire,  472 

Troubled,  204,  220,  230 

True,  44,  121,  126,  138,  161,  168, 

249,  264,  288,  331,  374,  464,  469 
Trumpet,  425,  475 
Trust  (verb),  141 
Truth,  54,  121,  179,  241,  245,  256^ 

275,  319 
Try,  354 

Turned  back,  298 
Twelve,  154 

Unoeioh,  338 

Understand,  222 

Understanding,  374 

Understood,  172 

Unloose,  65 

Unrighteousness,  159,  823^  d72 

Untimely,  499 

Yeeilt,  135,  188,  329 
Vessel,  551 
Vessels,  459 
Vesture,  285 
Vials,  490 
Victory,  363,  537 
Vine,  249 
Vinegar,  286 
Violence,  554 
Virgins,  533 
Vision,  406 
Voice,  140 
Voices,  479 

WAdBB,  126 

Wail,  419 

Walk  (verb),  167,  200,  814,  815 

Walked,  70,  154 

Walkedst,  301 

Walkest,  400 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


INDBX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


595 


Walketh,  487 

Wanted,  79 

Wash,  227 

Washed,  227,  416,  508 

Watchful,  461 

Water,  91,  104,  864,  865 

Waters,  548,  547 

Waterpot,  -s,  80, 124 

Way,  240 

Wearing,  280 

Weaiy,  488 

Wearied,  112 

Weep,  204,  268 

WeU  (noun),  112,  117 

WeU  {adverb),  117 

Went,  129,  .147,  226 

Went  back,  154 

Went  out,  125,  888 

Went  up,  298 

Wept,  204,  488 

West,  565 

White,  126,  452,  468,  589 

Whole,  182,  159 

Whoremongers,  564 

Wicked  One,  878 

Wickedness,  878 

Wilderness,  64 

Will  {verb),  182,  140,  158 

Willingly,  147 

Wind,  98 

Winepress,  586 

Wings,  482 

Wish  {verb),  899 


Withered,  182,  250 

Witness,  42, 168,  254,  868,  414 

Witnesses,  518 

Woman,  80,  118,  124,  259 

Wonders,  129 

Wool,  428 

Word,  25,  84,  178,  224,  246,  806, 

828,  827 
Word  of  God,  408,  557 
Words,  107, 155,  264 
Work,  -s,  242 
Work  (verb),  184 
Worketh,  184 

World,  44,  170,  825,  356, 861 
Wormwood,  506 
Worse,  82 

Worship  {verb),  119,  120,  122 
Worshipper,  -s,  121,  186 
Woven,  285 
Wouni  527 
Wounded,  526 
Wrapped,  292 
Wrath,  110,  500 
Wretched,  471 
Write,  810,  824,  425 
Writings,  141 
Written,  85, 168,  884,  869 

Toimo,  801 

Zeal,  85 
Zealous,  473 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS. 


{Figures  r^er  to  the  pages.) 


A»419 

afivaaoif  607 
ayciKktoM,  189,  180 
ayanam,  185,  200,  225,  800 
dToin;,  260,  827,  885,  857 
oYytXoSf  408 
6ytdC»,  198,  266,  678 
Syiot,  155,  265,  464 
6ypl[uf  845 
ilyvoff,  845 

dyopdC«>>  284,  491,  588 
aypdfifiarost  142 
<?yd»,  198 
ay«ytfo/iat,  275 
ad€X<^r,  882,  850,  851 
adiit/o>,  446,  578 
adutco,  159,  828,  872 

tuytak6t,  296 

oliMa,  50,864 

a7p«,  66, 188, 194,  196 

oi<rxvM>fMii,  842 

oiVcM,  118,  114,  202,  260,  869,  870 

alria,  276 

cilxiuikma'ia,  162 

oT^i^,  46,  187,  887,  418 

al^ptof,  808,  868,  684 

6xfid[»f  686 

dic6)<oveim,  74,  143,  535,  549 

<I«cov«»,  158,  256,  869,  461 

iUparoyy  584 

OKpiSi  607 


dXafoyrui,  886 

oXf/^o),  199 

oX^^cm,  54, 121,  179 

iKflOns,  44,  188,  288 

£Kije^v6s.  44,  121,  126,  149, 161, 168, 

249,  881,  874,  469 
dXfies>s,  75,  160,  178 
aXXaxoBiPj  188 
dXXi/Xovco,  556 
oXXi^Xoay,  815 
^IXXofUU,  117 

^vcTif,  560 

AfiOfnap^,  823,  870 

a^iapr/a,  169,  174,'  178, 188,  817,  822, 

847,  870 
dfUBvoToSf  569 
ifi^p,  76,  188,  418 
dfipoSf  66 
SfintXoSf  249 
ofiircXov/iyof,  249 
iifu»iiOP,  552 
dra/3aiM0, 154,  294 
aM]/3Xfir<k>,  184 

dyoyyc'XXtf,  122, 184,  267, 260,  312 
apaytPWTKttf  409 
avaicci/iai,  280 
dt^inrm,  145,  228,  801 
dpdaratru,  188 
(iMiroX^,  601 
ar^p,  67,  117 
ap^poKia,  270 
ai^/;«*iroffrc{rof,  176,  851 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


698 


INDEX  OF  GBEHE  WOBDa 


MfH^wot,  67,  89,  175 
^iym,  76,  466,  474 
aro^ui,  346 
mm',  57 
tanXtw,  81 
SprXtf/iOf  114 
<fi^,  170 
^tt^cr,  90 
a((a>r,  402 
ojroyy«XX«,  807 
dir'  V«»  76,  230,  685 
cartiBfm,  109 

ofrcpxo/uift,  129,  154,  169,  255 
SntoTot,  295 

air((,  160,  168,  172,  175,  224,  804, 
811 

&tro0aipcaf  298 

atrodlUctfUf  673 

arro$vrfaK»,  162 

dfrcMcdXv^cr,  405 

diroXo^i/Soiw,  395 

ofrAXv/u,  266 

awopiofMLf  230 

atrcNTrfXX*,  41,  64,    100,  127,  266, 

272,  294,  367 
ofitxrvMrytfyor,  186 
dwox^piC^fUUf  499 
^brro/ioi,  293,  373 
dn»\9ta,  265 
dp€(rr6tf  364 

ct/HOTCI0»,  299 

dppiofAOif  839 

api^or,  800,  489 

4i^a{«>,  192,  196 

Sppa<l>of,  285 

/^^v,  67,  622 

V<>  ^235,  236,  256,  261,  888 

Sprot,  144 

dpxMotf  330,  523 

dpx^,  28,  170,  304,  469 

dpx^TplickiPot,  81 

^/i^Mi^,  221,  416 

daetv€»,  129,  182 


darjfp,  460 

daxTlfioavrrff  542 

0^X17,  188,  192,  270 

o^XiTr^ff,  565 

ovToff,  87,  88 

dtl>ifffu,  111,  180,  218^  21M»  das,  438 

^XP*,445 

ifu^of,  506 

/3r£A>r,  457 

/So^r,  216 

iSaXX.,  182,  226,  249,  295,  861, 486 

fidpoSf  458 

Papvff  863 

ffcuravtCmf  622 

paaiunafiSff  550 

/SocrcXcui,  420 

/SfluriXfvr,  416 

/Sao-cXuc^r,  129 

/Sacrrdfa),  197,  218,  437 

fi^Xwraopaif  664 

&€fipi»nay  146 

BijdalSapa,  65 

Bi79av(a,  65 

Bi/dcrdd,  132 

/39m«.282 

pfipvKXoSf  668 

i9i'a,48 

fitPkiop,  148 

/3<W,  88,  852 

ffkaaif)fipiaf  448 

/3Xrir»,  66,  292,  488 

/3(((r«e«>,  800 

^P«X<»»  618 
PpmfM,  125 

Pp&ais,  125,  148 
PHaaufOf,  557 

yafo^Xdiccov,  168 
ydfioi,  79 
ytfii(»f  81,  146 
yei«m7,  181 
yfvi^  90,98 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


'.4 


INDBX  OF  GREEK  WORDa 


699 


i*i.' 


li^ 


yip»Vt  91 

y€i»py6t,  249 

•y^,  45y  106 

y/yo/Mu,  86,  88,  41,  49,  60,  55,  58, 

117,  133,  181,   193,   226,  246, 

250,  296,  349,  397,  421,  445, 

475 
yu^Kc^  46,  87,  95,  155,  160, 172, 

227,  241,  263,  326,  856 
yXflMTcnSjcofMy,  212 
yv&yaif  547 

r>yWf«>  151 

y6fAos,  550 

ypdftfuif  141 

ypa0^,  86,  140, 198 

yp64>m,  85, 168,  310,  884,425 

ypTyopco),  461 

yvv^,  259 

daifKoytfo^c,  195 

doifidMov,  159 

doi^oo,  204 

d<i,  98,  119,  407,  560 

dccicrv/u,  407 

dfcXcdtt,  247 

dffiiTMyy  226,  227 

dccnnfn;?,  497 

dfxofJMi,  129 

9^,444 

di7X($<M>,  246 

di/i^pioy,  144,  212 

did,  87,  422,  525 

HutfiaKkofuu,  141 

dcd^oXor,  155,  349,  444 

d<adida>fi(,  547 

diaftfwv/if,  227 

dtoyoco,  374 

iiaawopOf  162 

diorpdStt,  104 

bidaKT6s,  152 

didi<ricaXor,  95,  203,  228 

didaxn,  158,  271,  895,  396 

Aidvfux,  201 


d(d«/u,  58,  137,  348,  465,  548 

di€yr(p»,  146 

dtipxofuUf  117 

diKatoSf  321 

diKtuoaiStnj,  256 

ducaiwfia,  538,  557 

dlKTVOVf  297 

£ucfrpi<fniSf  408 

diirXdcD,  550 

d<Vf<l«o,  115 

dittfcoD,  134 

dofciftd^o),  354 

ddXof ,  75 

dd£a,  52,  185,  222,  417 

do^dCo*,  164,  235,  250 

dovXf  vo»,  173 

dovXor,  130 

dp(<iea>y,  522,  560 

dvpofusf  48 

dwardr,  500 

liwrfialf  565 

do»p€dy,  114,  254 

f  CM»,  458 

iPpdiari,  510 

ryKolpu^  195 

fyjcaXffw,  141 

;^Aa»,  73,  147 

f  ^uedr,  402 

r^f,  210,  211,  459 

ttdc^  ol^  88,  89,  95,  119, 16<^  167, 

227,  409,  474 
tld»k60tfrop,  447 
€iMiov,  375 
tUAp,  528 
f?M«',  162,  170,  181 
f  &at  f«e,  74, 179 
tlprftnj,  392 
f/r,  60,  172,  367,  425 
cfc,  A^,  197 
^K,  f'j,  104,  137,  158, 170,  224.  886, 

355,  356,  373,  466,  514,  537 
^lc^aXX«,  84, 189,  221 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


600 


INDEX  OF  ORBEK  WORDS. 


^KdiMim,  566 

^cfim,  48,  61,  68,  7%  86,  122,  188, 

157,  184,  186,  224,  284,  246, 

288,829 
iusfwrim,  419 
igXtyofULif  229 
/icX<«rc(f,  891 
iicptj^,  188 
^Kwiwrm,  488 
iXdaamVf  82 
ikavtm,  147 
Arxx«i  101,  178 
A«f  AMSf ,  471 
IXfof,  892 
iXtiffapTtvott  551 
cXicor,  589 
Akvm,  151,  297 
•EXX7r-f  f,  162,  217 
Air/{<»,  141 
tyfikiw^y  70 
ififiptftdofiatf  204 
^/i««,  471 
^AM(f,  178 

€flWOplO¥f  85 

tfivopoty  549 
IfiwpoaBtp,  55,  852 
f/i^aWftf,  246 
cfu^o-aM,  294 
fV,  52,  68,  245,  491,  506 
tpdofitjaitf  567 
MpytiOf  48 
iyrac/HJC^,  290 
^rratfiuur/ASs,  218 
fWfXXofuu,  252 
cWoX.;,  194,  235 
imf\i(r<r»f  292 

CMOYTCOV,  854 

f^tpj^ofiat,  175,  338 
<(«rdf<»,  299 
f(rfytofiaif  61 
f$ofiokoytoftaif  463 
c^ovo-to,  48,  194 
€(ttnviC<iit  200 


?(i*,  861 

^<yn9,  87,  284 

^voyytXio,  811 

iwtpdvnfft  297 

M,  845,  487,  498»  508,  587 

cVfyrsof ,  96 

hnBvida,  176,  885 

MitttfitUf  206 

iwiX§yofMaif  181 

^inr/irr*,  281 

iwurrp€<p«»f  222 

iwupopttot  406 

^XP^«,  182 

iwovpapiot,  97 

^^,186 

ifrydCofuu,  184,  401,  554 

fpyor,  129,  242 

fptvpomy  140,  456 

/pi^fu^M,  547 

lpxo/««,  47,  119,  289,  257,  266,  396, 

896 
^p«rd«>,  259,  289,  872 
^ot/,  811 
lirxoToc,  150 
?(r«»^y,  487 
f^ayy€X<t«*>  516,  584 
fv^wff,  147 

€V$V¥»f  64 

f  vXoy<«t,  216 

cvXoyta,  492 

fvodov/Mu,  899 

€VpiaKm,  78 

€{f;(o/uu,  899 

rxtt,  167,  259,  859,  497 

faa»,  114,  158,  448 
ff  orrff,  470 
fiyXcvM,  478 
{^Xoff,  85 
{i;rffo*,  159 
{i7n;<riff,  104 
C<i0off,  40 
Cto^(,  495 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


INDEX  OF  GBBEK  WORDS. 


601 


M,  88, 187, 155,  806,  807,  808,  445 
C«*ivv»,  801 
C&ov,  481 
((MOfroMM,  186 

f^ito),  150,  175 
^p,  24,  41,  55,  804 
^v€pf  JS£A 

SoMiroff,  850,  456,  497 

^apatta,  261 

^taofuu,  52,  59,  68,  70,  805 

dcibv,  584 

dcX^/io,  486 

^Ukm,  94,  182,  140,  158,  165, 176 

e€6t,  59 

3€0(rff/37ff,  186 

dfpoirfva*,  188 

dcpur/idr,  126 

da*p<«,  59,  118,  147,  151, 179, 191, 

228,852 
fsffiai,  269 
diyp/by,  519 
dX/^rir,  259,  420,  448 
fSp€iAfta,  115 
dpf^ycw,  258 
dp($M>ff,  447,  478 
dvcvoff,  551 
dv/M(r,  110 
dvpa,  465 
^vfmp6s,  189,  270 
dvcruurr^piov,  497,  505 

160IUU,  129,  188 

Idf,  idcrc,  66,  105,  848 

ttiof,  47,  78, 128,  184, 159,  177,  261 

UpWf  416 

Icpdir,  88 

'Ic/MKToXvficrac,  160 
"l^irovff,  58 
aatrfuir,  825 
^rioir,  227,  280 


tpa,  125,  286,  251,  258, 255, 261, 862, 

895 
lovdaios,  62, 108 
hnruc6vf  511 
Tpir,  476 

'ItncapOmis,  156,  283 
'l(rpaffXcn;r,  75 
itmifUf  65,  177 
^o-xvpdff,  885 
laxit,  48 
^x^ff,  298 
*I«»oy7ff,  42,  73 

icaaai/M»,  249 
ica^/fa»,  817 
itaAip<(ff,  249 
<ca^<&r,  286 
jcai,  46,  50 
Kaiv6s,  235,  290,  880 
Ktup6sf  157 
Kacroiyc,  111 
«eai<»,  139 
«eajcofrot($r,  274 
icaje5r,*438,  539 
KoKcLfioSf  404 
icaXcoo,  343 
KoXcJt,  190,  197 
KoXcor,  117,  179, 402 
KOfuWf  488 
Kopdlof  287 
card,  894 
Karapedp^f  83,  149 
Kara0oX^,  528 
mTcryuwo-fea*,  852 
iconueo/w,  547 
Karakafifiap»f  40,  221 
Karafnl>payi(ofuUf  488 
KOTitrBm,  85,  522 
icanfyopcM,  141,  525 
KorTyop^  141 
Korriyopotf  524 
ffortt,  170 
Kf  dpoir,  267 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


603 

aiwrpom,  610 
KtpafUK6ty  460 
KtpSfpvfu^  684 
upitarurT^ff  88 
afimr6s,621 
mMpQ^  489 
«iA^^,  688 
giwi^iyioy,  662 

«Xa(is  204,  268,  488 

«X^^a,146 

icXfVT^c,  189,  190,  462 

kX^  249 

KocXco,  168 

xoi^mSo^mu,  200 

ffoifi^ir,  200 
rf  •»,  896 
Wo,  809,  810 

«kiKOf,  217 

KiSXa<riv,  861 

coXXovpiov,  472 

KoKkvPiOTfltf  84 

jtiSXirof,  6<^  280,  281 
KoKvfMfiffOpap  181 

KOIlllt^TfpOPp  180 

ffoiriOM,  127 
itcdrof ,  487,  636 

MOHTM,  419 

iccS<r/M>f,  36,  46,  170 
c(!^iM>f,  146 
cp4/9y3aror,  132 
KpdCm,  66,  161,  228 
Kparim^  600 
KpiroSf  48 
Kpavya(u»t  276 
KpiBtvoSf  144 
Kpiita,  188 
xpcW,  100.  498 
ic/MVir,  137,  300 
cpovw,  473 
i^>vvTt»,  460 


QTDBX  or 


KpWToXXlfili  665 

Kn(i»,  86 
jKrur/Ao,  498 
Kvfit/minft,  654 
Kvpiof  891 
Mvpuicof ,  426 
ffvpcof,  608 
ffi^i',  678 

X<iX/«*,  172,  186, 224,  258,  261,  475 

XiiXmS,  127,  176 

\afifi6pm,  48,  106,  141,  257,  461,  468, 

486 
Xoftwdf,  480 
\atimp6t,  689,  668 
Aoodocrvf ,  468 
X«$ff,  211,  668 
Xorpffio,  266 
Xarptvm,  608,  671 
Xtyii,  172,  268,  261,  475 
XtwrtoPy  227 
XcviciSf,  126,  462,  468 
X^M^r,  636 
Xjyimyff,  189,  276 
X^,898 
Ai9ooTp«»roff,  282 
XiM>y,  638 
Xiirap6ti  668 
Xir/M,  212 
Xifyof ,  26, 84, 127, 176, 224,  246, 306, 

823,  327,  667 
Xrfyx',,286 
Xoido/Mfl*,  186 
XoM*,  227,  416 
Xvir«a>,  268 
Xi;fn7,  269 
XvxfiOy  426 
Xv;(M>r»  139 
Xi;a>,  66,  85,  134,  198,  848 

fuucdpiotf  229 
/Mii'Mi,  460 
ftapyaplufs,  bQ9 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


INDKX  OF  OBBBK  WORDft 


608 


fuipfMapoPf  652 

lioprvpiti,  64, 366,  404,  408 

IJMpTvpia^  42,  138,  408 

fuiprvSf  414 

fuuradofuitf  641 

fuumy6<,»,  277 

fjMirrSs,  427 

fMXMpOt  ^^6 

fuynrravft,  499 

lAtBvv,  82 

fictfa>y,  368,  380 

/ifXav,  397 

fifXf  c»  192 

fMXX»,  129, 471 

lur^  70,  110,  163,  329 

fUaos,  85 

fuaovparrffAt^  507 

IAt(r6»f  168 

Mfrd,  244,  310,  338,  360,  426 

/Afra/3aiVa>,  226,  360 

fUTouctaiof  162 

/ifrpiyT^f,  81 

/«^i,124 

^iUUMD,  273 

MfyfM,  289 

fwcp6v,25S 

fuiuoftaif  408 

Mitr/os  263,  332 

fu(re6s,  126,  395 

fuaOctrot,  191 

funffUioVf  138 

fUM^cvflo,  455 

fu>XvM0,  633 

Mom;,  238 

liotwyft^i,  27,  63,  69,  367 

;i<(M>r,  141 

fiArxof,482 

fiovaucSt,  664 

fivKooitai,  615 

fivpidsj  492 

pvpi(i»f  199 

wi/^r,  85 


rapdor,  212 

yc<^7,  418 

vft^p6s^  466 

v€»rtpos^  301 

ma«,  261,  334,  368,  364,  440,  687 

Win;,  363 

wimjp,  227 

pinr»,  227 

M>c«»,  222 

p6funf  198 

M>vff,  546 

mSaa»f  287 

(tlpoi^t  250, 636 

f7/KJ^,182 

(vXoir,440 

^fcoff,  468 
6din^a>,256 
<^r,  64 
^«,  206 
^€v,  338 
3^dMoy,  289 
o^ci'o,  237 
otnodoftM^  86 

olK€V\UVtlt  45 

2Xof ,  169,  187 

^vi^,  499 

6^<«»ff,  136 

6/ioXoyf'a»,  186,  222,  820,  355,  394 

6/ioO,  126 

JM/HOV,  217 

^yo/io,  60,  254,  402 

^mor,  174 

SftriaOfv^  487 

M(rWf  56 

imraaia^  406 

vwmpa^  663 

opaftOf  406 

Spatrtt,  406 

6paa>,  68,  66, 109, 143,  257,  418 

3py^,  110, 500 

6pfuiffia,  554 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


604 


INDEX  OF  QBEEK  WORD& 


iprnw^  649 

<$p0am,  245 

^loff,  464,  688 

Sa-of,  48 

Jcrrir,  180,  806,  419,  426 

orov,  182,  841,  368,  485,  504 

ovdiUj  814 

ovKcriy  252 

ol  fi^,  129, 149,  227 

oJv,  180,  161,  157, 161,  169,  258 

o^ff,  62,  159, 162 

64>€SXw,  228,  829 

^xXof,  62,  165,  206,  215,  216 

oylrapwv,  144,  298 

a^/a,146 

^V^ff,  160,  429 

iraMpwp,  144 

irocdtov,  180,  297,  884 

irmdiaioffy  270 

9raXai<$c,  880 

naPTOKpar^p,  420 

irdiTorr,  172 

irapd,  42,  152,  166,  244,  811,  898 

irapay»f  881 

irapadcuror,  442 

napadidwiu,  154,  228,  268,  286 

napdickfiToSf  248, 824 

wapoKvirrWf  292 

irapaXofifidiHaf  47,  240 

irapdoXcr,  526 

iraptfificXrf,  561 

vapB^PoSf  588 

irapoiiua,  189,  260 

iropovcrui,  842 

ira^pffiria,  157,  158,  841 

TTor,  86,  150,  255,  885,  845 

yrdirxa,  276 

varao'O'^,  518 

iron}p,  53,  177,  808 

ndr/xor,  421 

narpis,  128 

iTf  i^o),  109,  852,  877 


irf  ipdftf,  144 

ircXcKcf o/MU,  560 

im^pdff,  270 

im>^,  568 

irrp/,  151,  255,  804 

iTfpc^aXXo*,  279,468,479 

vtpiC^ptfvfiif  427 

irfpiirorf »,  70, 154^  200, 801, 815, 401, 

487 
irfpurtrcvM,  145 
mpura6sf  190 
irirpos^  78 
innn?,  112,  117 
ff^X^r,  567 

9ruSC»,  161,  168,  296,  298 
ir/M#,115 
«-iirr«t,  546 
m«FT€i;«,  49, 88, 86,  87, 157, 173, 187, 

198,  222,  223,  287,  868 
iTMrrucdf,  212 
ircWir,  868 

maT6t,  295,  821,  401,  414,  469 
irXoM^,  158,  165,  819,  848,  456 
trXoyij,  357 
irXdpOf,  894 
n-Xorcio,  670 
irX^pi^r,  64 

nXfjp6u,  157,  251,  260,  811,  461 
irX^pM/io,'  56 
nXouipcov,  148,  297 
nXoioVf  146 
nXotrrcflt,  471 

nwtvpa,  98,  121,  122,  164,  413,  422 
irptyfuniKWi  619 
irWo»,  147 
wodript)Sj  427 
«roi€«,  86, 103, 185, 169, 828, 846, 863, 

527,548 
noipaiiwi  300,  459,  604 
troiiunjf  193 
irow,  197,  274,  801 
frc^€fi«tio»  449 
iroXf/iO(,  641 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS. 


605 


iroXv^  127 

VokvTlfJMtf  212 

nornp6s,  101,  265«  834,  689 
fropcvo/uu,  180,  289,  255 

WOpMtOf  175 

n6pPOff  564 
irop^vpcoff,  279 
narafio<l>6ptfT0ff  525 
iroron-dff,  848 
wptuTwpiov,  272 
irpatrcTM,  101,  108 
irpctr/Svrrpof,  891 
irpoayo»,  895 
wpoaiTiaoiJuu,  141 
vpofiaTiK6t$  181 
wp6fiaTO¥,  800 
irpoiTfjfiira),  402 
9rp<$f ,  88,  808,  824,  870 
irpoa€vxV9  505 
vpoaKwtw,  119, 120, 122 

WpOCKWIlTfft,  121 

irpoo^oyioK,  297 
vpofrffUpWf  255 
wporptx»9  291 
vp6<lHiO'iSf  254 
wpoffnfrtv^^  518 
irpMc,  278 
npwi^f  460 
wpAroy,  258 
np&rotf  55 
wpttT&roKof,  415 

nv\»Vf  565 
irvpcn^r,  180 
nvpdofjuu,  472 
nvpp6ff  495 
iTMpdtf,  222 

pd^doff,459 
fiairuTfta^  271 
p<da,  553 
^'«»  (to;«(W),  168 


^/ui,  107,  148,  264 
poik^Kua,  428,  497 
fnm6oif  573 

aa^fiaroWf  a'afifiara^  291 
<r<iXiriy(,  425,  475 
Sofiopctm,  113 
0'an<f>€ipot,  567 
acipdovv^f  568 
tropf,  50,  93 
(mapos,  499 
<n7/iaiM»,  408 
<n7/M»oy,  83,  129,  148 
aripucWf  550 
2ifM»y,  156 
(r«eaydaX/fa>,  154,  254 
(TKoMKoVf  888 
(TiccOoff,  459,  551 
irioyi^,  51,  504,  562 
aickfip6tf  158 
<rcor^,  40,  167,  814,  881 
(ncdror,  40,  101,  814 
afwipdydiyof,  477 
aovdaptoPf  207,  292 
otrc/pa,  268 
<nrXii7x^852 
(midioy,  536 
oTiK^X^,  586 
orf^oMff,  445,  466,  479 
<rr9A>ff,  281,  282 
<m}icc»,  65,  177 
cmki,  182 
oTiSfMi,  897 
oTp^yor,  549 
oTuXor,  467 
avyicoumi4«tf  549 
(Tvyjcoirwydff,  420 
(rvyxpaoiAiUf  113 
(TWK^j  75,  76 
(rvXXofi/SayM,  269 
avpfiovKtvmt  471 
(rvppaBtfnii,  201 
irvp4^p*»^  255 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


606 


INDBX  OF  QRBRK  WOBD& 


•*,268,  628 
inwaytry^,  153,  271 
wmdptop^  210 
avif9py6sp  402 
tnmipxofttUf  271 
awfi&tiat  276 
avwrplfimf  459 
<nVMi,151 

(r^{««,  850,  4S9,  497,  526 
<r^payi{»,  107,  148,  572 
irx^crfMi,  195 
ir)(oafio¥,  84 
ir<Vt»,200 
irtM^p,  127,  858 
awnipUtf  120 

TakaiMwpoSf  471 
roXoBTtaior,  548 
Tapifia-ir«t,  220 
rii^,  188 

no^oir,  285,  828 
Tf  fvor,  49,  891 
TffXciof,  861 
TffXcuU,  125,  189,  827 
TfX;*,  286,  587 
rtXos,  225 
TtraprtuoSf  206 
r€Tpay9$pos,  566 

T9Tp6fUfWOPf  126 

n|p€t»,  248,  826,  827,  409,  459,  465 

WAi/ii,  191,  252,  851 

n^,  498 

WrXof ,  288 

rotovroc,  122 

T6$aP,49i 

roirafioy,  568 

n$roff,  210,  289 

f^,  288 

rpvyoii,  586 

rp^,  158,  229 

n^or,  294 


rv^((«,  888 

vaMpBiPos,  512 

{nSXimc,  480,  587 

vyia/Mi,  899 

vyi^ff,  182, 159 

Idpia,  80,  114 

^d«p,  104,  864,  865 

vUt,  49,  115,  180 

{;»iy»,  147,  155, 161, 169,  200,  204, 

216,  240,  252,  256, 589 
vwaprau,  202,  217 
vwamiais,  216 
vwtpf  200 

vrniptTfis,  161,  268,  275 
vw6,  75,  76 

vwoKofiPaptt,  402 
vro^i^,  466 

VOTffpCO*,  79 

v<txu^6tf  285 
(^^r<^98,221 

0a(M»,  40,  882 

<^MiMpd«,  295,  807,  844,  472 

^aWp«Mrt(,  407 

0aM>ff,  268 

^dpfuucfui,  514 

0avXof,  101,  188 

^p«>,  896 

ifiuikfff  490 

<^«'«,  185,  205,  253,  261,  291,  800 

^cXoirp«»rrv«*,  408 

<»Xvopct»,  408 

<^c«3of,  861 

^m^,  216,  502 

^op«.«,  280 

<l>oprioPf  458 

^fNtyAXcoir,  84 

<^p<op,  112,  114,  507 

<^Xaia^,  104,  548 

<ffvKda<r<Of  265,  375 

^X^,  419,  491,  528 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


INDBX  OF  GBBBK  WOBDa 


*»»^,  64,  94 

4>^h  89,  139,  166,  312,  315 
^•w^^/'i  167,  565 
*^«f«,  40 

;t«v«,  106,  396 
X'^^^,  568 
;t<iAicoXi)8aj»oy,  428 
;ta/*a*,  182 
Afap«f  106,  259,  400 
X^poyiM,  529 
X^^Cofiat,  343 
Af'W,  350 
Af«V<ff,  54  392 
;t«A«7?ff,  396 
Ar*«/wppo5,  267 
X<Xiad€f,  492 
;riXui/>;^off,  269 
X^tap6s,  470 
Af^w/HJff,  496 
Arolw^,  496 
Xo^  159 
Afo^af*,  148 
X^pTot,  146 
;tP««,  199 
XP^tr/io,  338 


607 


X/x^Wf,  516 
Xpvfriop,  471 
Arpi/<r<lX«^f,  568 
Atf>wA»,  544 
Ar«»P««,  81,  174 
Af»piw,  112 
Af«p«V,  37 


yhvdinrpo<ti^Trfs,  356 
V^doff,  177 
I  yhviTTffs,  177,  339 
V?7Xa^'«B,  306 
H<t>os^  452 

U^;r7»  219,  220,  400,  497 
i^XPotf  470 
\f»fiiC»f2S2 
U'otf^i^,  232 

i2,  419 
Udc,  546 
Ui',  60 
I  6  wv,  teat  6  fy,  412 

&pa,  217,  337 

<S»f,  53 

Ar^ifuop,  269 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


3  2044  036  329  993 


CONSERVED 
HARVARD  aXX£OE 


Digitized  by  VjODQIC 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


