WORD  PICTURES 


NEW 

-. 

TESTAMENT 


m 


2D 


GO 


qqj 


m 


m 

00 


0 


A.  T.  ROBERTSON 


Volume  II 


LUKE 


WORD  PICTURES 

IN  THE 
NEW  TESTAMENT 

A.  T.  Robertson 


This  six-volume  commentary  on  the 
New  Testament  was  published  in 
1930-33.  Ministers  and  other  Bible  stu- 
dents still  acclaim  it  for  combining 
thorough  scholarship  with  teaching 
skill  and  insight. 

"It  is  a  verse  by  verse  commentary 
on  the  English  text  (with  the  corre- 
sponding Greek  in  English  letters) 
stressing  those  meaningful  and  picto- 
rial suggestions  which  are  often  im- 
plicit in  the  original  significance  of 
the  words  but  are  lost  in  translation. 
.  .  .  The  author  makes  available  for 
those  who  do  not  know  Greek  a  large 
amount  of  critical  and  exegetical  ma- 
terial and  of  interpretative  insight  di- 
rectly connected  with  studies  in  the 
original  text." — The  Christian  Century 

Dr.  Robertson's  scholarship  was  at 
all  times  unimpeachable,  his  spiritual 
insight  was  profound,  and  his  style  was 
of  the  highest  order.  His  genial  wit,  his 
human  touch  and  interest,  and  his 
unique  phrasing  carry  an  appeal  for 
every  reader. 


r^u^/ 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2010 


http://www.archive.org/details/wordpicturesinne02robe 


WORD   PICTURES 

IN   THE 
NEW  TESTAMENT 


BOOKS   BY  PROFESSOR  A.  T.   ROBERTSON 

The  English  New  Testament  as  a  Whole: 
SYLLABUS  FOR  NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDY 
THE  STUDENT'S  CHRONOLOGICAL  NEW  TESTAMENT 
STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT 
NEW  TESTAMENT  HISTORY   (AIRPLANE  VIEW) 

The  Greek  New  Testament: 
WORD  PICTURES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT  (IN  SIX  VOLS.) 
A  SHORT  GRAMMAR  OF  THE  GREEK  NEW  TESTAMENT 
A  GRAMMAR  OF  THE  GREEK  NEW  TESTAMENT  IN  THE  LIGHT 

OF  HISTORICAL  RESEARCH 
THE  MINISTER  AND    HIS  GREEK  NEW  TESTAMENT 
AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  TEXTUAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE  NEW 

TESTAMENT 
STUDIES   IN  THE  TEXT  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT 

The  Gospels  and  Jesus: 
A  HARMONY  OF  THE  GOSPELS  FOR  STUDENTS  OF  THE  LIFE  OF 

CHRIST 
A  COMMENTARY  ON  MATTHEW 
STUDIES  IN  MARK'S  GOSPEL 

LUKE  THE  HISTORIAN  IN  THE  LIGHT  OF  RESEARCH 
A  TRANSLATION  OF  LUKE'S   GOSPEL 
THE  DIVINITY  OF  CHRIST   IN  THE  GOSPEL  OF  JOHN 
JOHN  THE  LOYAL  (THE  MINISTRY  OF  THE  BAPTIST) 
THE  PHARISEES  AND  JESUS   (STONE  LECTURES  FOR   1916) 
EPOCHS  IN  THE  LIFE  OF  JESUS 
KEYWORDS  IN  THE  TEACHING  OF  JESUS 
THE  TEACHING  OF  JESUS   CONCERNING  GOD  THE  FATHER 
THE  CHRIST  OF  THE  LOGIA  (PORTRAITS  OF  CHRIST  IN  Q  AND 

THE  GOSPELS) 
THE  MOTHER  OF  JESUS:  HER  PROBLEMS  AND  HER  GLORY 

Paul: 
PAUL  AND  THE  INTELLECTUALS  (EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS) 
EPOCHS  IN  THE  LIFE  OF  PAUL 
PAUL  THE  INTERPRETER  OF  CHRIST 
PAUL'S   JOY  IN  CHRIST  (EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS) 
THE  GLORY  OF  THE  MINISTRY   (II  COR.  2:12-6:10) 
THE  NEW  CITIZENSHIP 

Other  Studies  in  the  New  Testament: 
SOME  MINOR  CHARACTERS   IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT 
STUDIES  IN  THE  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES 

MAKING  GOOD   IN  THE   MINISTRY   (SKETCH   OF  JOHN   MARK) 
TYPES  OF  PREACHERS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Biography: 
LIFE  AND  LETTERS  OF  JOHN  ALBERT  BROADUS 


WORD   PICTURES 

IN  THE 
NEW  TESTAMENT 


BY 

ARCHIBALD  THOMAS  ROBERTSON 

A.  M.,  D.  D.,  LL.  D.,  Litt.  D. 

PROFESSOR  OF  NEW  TESTAMENT  INTERPRETATION 

IN  THE 

SOUTHERN  BAPTIST  THEOLOGICAL  SEMINARY 

OF 

LOUISVILLE,  KENTUCKY 


Volume  II 
THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE 


BROADMAN  PRESS 

NASHVILLE,  TENNESSEE 


COPYRIGHT,  1930, 

BY  SUNDAY  SCHOOL  BOARD 

OF  THE 

SOUTHERN    BAPTIST   CONVENTION 

4213-02 

ISBN:  0-8054-1302-2 


PRINTED    IN    THE    UNITED    STATES    OF    AMERICA 


To 

DR.  ADOLF  DEISSMANN 

of  Berlin 

who  has  done  so  much 

to  make  the  words  of  the 

new  testament  glow  with  life 


BY  WAY  OF  INTRODUCTION 

There  is  not  room  here  for  a  full  discussion  of  all  the  in- 
teresting problems  raised  by  Luke  as  the  author  of  the 
Gospel  and  Acts.  One  can  find  them  ably  handled  in  the 
Introduction  to  Plummer's  volume  on  Luke's  Gospel  in  the 
International  and  Critical  Commentary,  in  the  Introduction 
to  Ragg's  volume  on  Luke's  Gospel  in  the  Westminster  Com- 
mentaries, in  the  Introduction  to  Easton's  Gospel  According 
to  St.  Luke,  Hayes'  Synoptic  Gospels  and  the  Book  of  Acts, 
Ramsay's  Luke  the  Physician,  Harnack's  Date  of  the  Acts  and 
the  Synoptic  Gospels,  Foakes-Jackson  and  Kirsopp  Lake's 
Beginnings  of  Christianity,  Carpenter's  Christianity  Ac- 
cording to  St.  Luke,  Cadbury's  The  Making  of  Luke-Acts, 
McLachlan's  St.  Luke:  The  Man  and  His  Work,  Robertson's 
Luke  the  Historian  in  the  Light  of  Research,  to  go  no  further. 
It  is  a  fascinating  subject  that  appeals  to  scholars  of  all 
shades  of  opinion. 

The  Same  Author  for  Gospel  and  Acts 

The  author  of  Acts  refers  to  the  Gospel  specifically  as  "the 
first  treatise,"  ton  proton  logon,  (Acts  1:1)  and  both  are 
addressed  to  Theophilus  (Luke  1:3;  Acts  1:1).  He  speaks 
of  himself  in  both  books  as  "me"  (kamoi,  Luke  1:3)  and 
/  made  (epoiesamen,  Acts  1:1).  He  refers  to  himself  with 
others  as  "we"  and  "us"  as  in  Acts  16:10,  the  "we"  sections 
of  Acts.  The  unity  of  Acts  is  here  assumed  until  the  author- 
ship of  Acts  is  discussed  in  Volume  III.  The  same  style  ap- 
pears in  Gospel  and  Acts,  so  that  the  presumption  is  strongly 
in  support  of  the  author's  statement.  It  is  quite  possible  that 
the  formal  Introduction  to  the  Gospel  (1  n-4)  was  intended  to 


viii  BY  WAY  OF  INTRODUCTION 

apply  to  the  Acts  also  which  has  only  an  introductory  clause. 
Plummer  argues  that  to  suppose  that  the  author  of  Acts  im- 
itated the  Gospel  purposely  is  to  suppose  a  literary  miracle. 
Even  Cadbury,  who  is  not  convinced  of  the  Lucan  author- 
ship, says:  "In  my  study  of  Luke  and  Acts,  their  unity  is  a 
fundamental  and  illuminating  axiom."  He  adds:  "They 
are  not  merely  two  independent  writings  from  the  same  pen; 
they  are  a  single  continuous  work.  Acts  is  neither  an  ap- 
pendix nor  an  afterthought.  It  is  probably  an  integral  part 
of  the  author's  original  plan  and  purpose." 

The  Author  of  Acts  a  Companion  of  Paul 

The  proof  of  this  position  belongs  to  the  treatment  of 
Acts,  but  a  word  is  needed  here.  The  use  of  "we"  and  "us" 
in  Acts  16:10  and  from  20:6  to  the  end  of  chapter  28  shows 
it  beyond  controversy  if  the  same  man  wrote  the  "we" 
sections  and  the  rest  of  the  Acts.  This  proof  Harnack  has 
produced  with  painstaking  detail  in  his  Date  of  the  Acts  and 
the  Synoptic  Gospels  and  in  his  volume  The  Acts  of  the  Apostles 
aoid.  u>  lus  Luke  the  Physician. 

This  Companion  of  Paul  a  Physician 

The  argument  for  this  position  lies  in  the  use  of  medical 
terms  throughout  the  Gospel  and  the  Acts.  Hobart  in  his 
Medical  Language  of  St.  Luke  proves  that  the  author  of  both 
Gospel  and  Acts  shows  a  fondness  for  medical  terms  best 
explained  by  the  fact  that  he  was  a  physician.  Like  most 
enthusiasts  he  overdid  it  and  some  of  his  proof  does  not 
stand  the  actual  test  of  sifting.  Harnack  and  Hawkins 
in  his  Horae  Synopticae  have  picked  out  the  most  pertinent 
items  which  will  stand.  Cadbury  in  his  Style  and  Literary 
Method  of  Luke  denies  that  Luke  uses  Greek  medical 
words  more  frequently  in  proportion  than  Josephus,  Philo, 
Plutarch,  or  Lucian.     It  is  to  miss  the  point  about  Luke 


BY  WAY  OF  INTRODUCTION  ix 

merely  to  count  words.  It  is  mainly  the  interest  in  medical 
things  shown  in  Luke  and  Acts.  The  proof  that  Luke  is  the 
author  of  the  books  does  not  turn  on  this  fact.  It  is  merely 
confirmatory.  Paul  calls  Luke  "the  beloved  physician" 
{ho  iatros  ho  agapetos,  Col.  4:14),  "my  beloved  physician." 
Together  they  worked  in  the  Island  of  Malta  (Acts  28:8-10) 
where  many  were  healed  and  Luke  shared  with  Paul  in  the 
appreciation  of  the  natives  who  "came  and  were  healed 
{etherapeuonto)  who  also  honoured  us  with  many  honours." 
The  implication  there  is  that  Paul  wrought  miracles  of  heal- 
ing (iasato),  while  Luke  practised  his  medical  art  also.  Other 
notes  of  the  physician's  interest  will  be  indicated  in  the  dis- 
cussion of  details  like  his  omitting  Mark's  apparent  discredit 
of  physicians  (Mark  5:26)  by  a  milder  and  more  general 
statement  of  a  chronic  case  (Luke  8:43). 

This   Companion  and  Author  Luke 

All  the  Greek  manuscripts  credit  the  Gospel  to  Luke  in 
the  title.  We  should  know  that  Luke  wrote  these  two  books 
if  there  was  no  evidence  from  early  writers.  Irenaeus  defi- 
nitely ascribes  the  Gospel  to  Luke  as  does  Clement  of 
Alexandria,  Tertullian,  the  Muratorian  Fragment.  Plum- 
mer  holds  that  the  authorship  of  the  four  great  Epistles  of 
Paul  (I  and  II  Corinthians,  Galatians,  Romans)  which  even 
Baur  accepted,  is  scarcely  more  certain  than  the  Lukan 
authorship  of  the  Gospel.  Even  Renan  says:  "There  is 
no  very  strong  reason  for  supposing  that  Luke  was  not  the 
author  of  the  Gospel  which  bears  his  name." 

A  Sketch  of  Luke 

His  name  is  not  a  common  one,  and  is  probably  a  short- 
ened form  of  Lukios  and  Lukanos.  Some  of  the  manuscripts 
of  the  Gospel  actually  have  as  the  title  Kata  Lukanon. 
Dean  Plumptre  suggests  that  the  Latin  poet  Lucanus  was 


x  BY  WAY  OF  INTRODUCTION 

named  after  Luke  who  probably  was  the  family  physician 
when  he  was  born.  That  is  conjecture  as  well  as  the  notion 
of  Hayes  that,  since  the  brothers  Gallio  and  Seneca  were 
uncles  of  Lucanus  they  were  influenced  by  Luke  to  be 
friendly  toward  Paul  both  in  Corinth  and  in  Rome.  It  is 
probable  that  Luke  was  a  Greek,  certainly  a  Gentile,  pos- 
sibly a  freedman.  So  this  man  who  wrote  more  than  one- 
fourth  of  the  New  Testament  was  not  a  Jew.  It  is  not  cer- 
tain whether  his  home  was  in  Antioch  or  in  Philippi.  It  is 
also  uncertain  whether  he  was  already  converted  when 
Paul  met  him  at  Troas.  The  Codex  Bezae  has  a  "we" 
passage  after  Acts  1 1 :27  which,  if  genuine,  would  bring  Luke 
in  contact  with  Paul  before  Troas.  Hayes  thinks  that  he 
was  a  slave  boy  in  the  family  of  Theophilus  at  Antioch, 
several  conjectures  in  one.  We  do  not  know  that  Theophilus 
lived  at  Antioch.  It  may  have  been  Rome.  But,  whether 
one  of  Paul's  converts  or  not,  he  was  a  loyal  friend  to 
Paul.  If  he  lived  at  Antioch,  he  could  have  studied  medicine 
there  and  the  great  medical  temple  of  Aesculapius  was  at 
Aegae,  not  far  away.  As  a  Greek  physician,  Luke  was  a 
university  man  and  in  touch  with  the  science  of  his  day. 
Greek  medicine  is  the  beginning  of  the  science  of  medicine 
as  it  is  known  today.  Tradition  calls  him  a  painter,  but  of 
that  we  know  nothing.  Certainly  he  was  a  humanist  and  a 
man  of  culture  and  broad  sympathies  and  personal  charm. 
He  was  the  first  genuine  scientist  who  faced  the  problem 
of  Christ  and  of  Christianity.  It  must  be  said  of  him  that 
he  wrote  his  books  with  open  mind  and  not  as  a  credulous 
enthusiast. 

The  Date  of  the  Gospel 

There  are  two  outstanding  facts  to  mark  off  the  date  of 
this  Gospel  by  Luke.  It  was  later  than  the  Gospel  of  Mark 
since  Luke  makes  abundant  use  of  it.  It  was  before  the  Acts 
of  the  Apostles  since  he  definitely  refers  to  it  in  Acts  1:1. 


BY  WAY  OF  INTRODUCTION  xi 

Unfortunately  the  precise  date  of  both  termini  is  uncertain. 
There  are  stili  some  scholars  who  hold  that  the  author  of  the 
Acts  shows  knowledge  of  the  Antiquities  of  Josephus  and  so 
is  after  a.d.  85,  a  mistaken  position,  in  my  opinion,  but  a 
point  to  be  discussed  when  Acts  is  reached.  Still  others 
more  plausibly  hold  that  the  Acts  was  written  after  the  de- 
struction of  Jerusalem  and  that  the  Gospel  of  Luke  has  a 
definite  allusion  to  that  event  (Luke  2i:2of.),  which  is  in- 
terpreted as  a  prophecy  post  eventum  instead  of  a  prediction 
by  Christ  a  generation  beforehand.  Many  who  accept  this 
view  hold  to  authorship  of  both  Acts  and  Gospel  by  Luke. 
I  have  long  held  the  view,  now  so  ably  defended  by  Harnack, 
that  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  closes  as  it  does  for  the  simple 
and  obvious  reason  that  Paul  was  still  a  prisoner  in  Rome. 
Whether  Luke  meant  the  Acts  to  be  used  in  the  trial  in 
Rome,  which  may  or  may  not  have  come  to  pass,  is  not  the 
point.  Some  argue  that  Luke  contemplated  a  third  book 
which  would  cover  the  events  of  the  trial  and  Paul's  later 
career.  There  is  no  proof  of  that  view.  The  outstanding 
fact  is  that  the  book  closes  with  Paul  already  a  prisoner  for 
two  years  in  Rome.  If  the  Acts  was  written  about  a.d.  63, 
as  I  believe  to  be  the  case,  then  obviously  the  Gospel  comes 
earlier.  How  much  before  we  do  not  know.  It  so  happens 
that  Paul  was  a  prisoner  a  little  over  two  years  in  Caesarea. 
That  period  gave  Luke  abundant  opportunity  for  the  kind 
of  research  of  which  he  speaks  in  Luke  1:1-4.  In  Palestine 
he  could  have  access  to  persons  familiar  with  the  earthly 
life  and  teachings  of  Jesus  and  to  whatever  documents  were 
already  produced  concerning  such  matters.  Luke  may 
have  produced  the  Gospel  towards  the  close  of  the  stay  of 
Paul  in  Caesarea  or  during  the  early  part  of  the  first  Roman 
imprisonment,  somewhere  between  a.d.  59  and  62.  The 
other  testimony  concerns  the  date  of  Mark's  Gospel  which 
has  already  been  discussed  in  volume  I.  There  is  no  real 
difficulty  in  the  way  of  the  early  date  of  Mark's  Gospel. 


xii  BY  WAY  OF  INTRODUCTION 

All  the  facts  that  are  known  admit,  even  argue  for  a  date  by 
a.d.  60.  If  Mark  wrote  his  Gospel  in  Rome,  as  is  possible, 
it  would  certainly  be  before  a.d.  64,  the  date  of  the  burning 
of  Rome  by  Nero.  There  are  scholars,  however,  who  argue 
for  a  much  earlier  date  for  his  gospel,  even  as  early  as  a.d. 
50.  The  various  aspects  of  the  Synoptic  problem  are  ably 
discussed  by  Hawkins  in  his  Horae  Synopticae,  by  Sanday 
and  others  in  Oxford  Studies  in  the  Synoptic  Problem,  by 
Streeter  in  his  The  Four  Gospels,  by  Hayes  in  his  The  Synop- 
tic Gospels  and  the  Book  of  Acts,  by  Harnack  in  his  Date  of 
the  Acts  and  the  Synoptic  Gospels,  by  Stanton  in  his  The 
Gospels  as  Historical  Documents,  and  by  many  others.  My 
own  views  are  given  at  length  in  my  Studies  in  Mark's 
Gospel  and  in  Luke  the  Historian  in  the  Light  of  Research. 

The   Sources   of  the  Gospel 

In  his  Preface  or  Prologue  (1:1-4)  the  author  tells  us  that 
he  had  two  kinds  of  sources,  oral  and  written,  and  that  they 
were  many,  how  many  we  have  no  way  of  telling.  It  is  now 
generally  accepted  that  we  know  two  of  his  written  sources, 
Mark's  Gospel  and  Q  or  the  Logia  of  Jesus  (written  by 
Matthew,  Papias  says).  Mark  is  still  preserved  and  it  is 
not  difficult  for  any  one  by  the  use  of  a  harmony  of  the  Gos- 
pels to  note  how  Luke  made  use  of  Mark,  incorporating 
what  he  chose,  adapting  it  in  various  ways,  not  using  what 
did  not  suit  his  purposes.  The  other  source  we  only  know 
in  the  non-Markan  portions  of  Matthew  and  Luke,  that  is 
the  material  common  to  both,  but  not  in  Mark.  This  also 
can  be  noted  by  any  one  in  a  harmony.  Only  it  is  probable 
that  this  source  was  more  extensive  than  just  the  portions 
used  by  both  Matthew  and  Luke.  It  is  probable  that  both 
Matthew  and  Luke  each  used  portions  of  the  Logia  not  used 
by  the  other.  But  there  is  a  large  portion  of  Luke's  Gospel 
which  is  different  from  Mark  and  Matthew.  Some  scholars 
call  this  source  L.    There  is  little  doubt  that  Luke  had  an- 


BY  WAY  OF  INTRODUCTION  xin 

other  document  for  the  material  peculiar  to  him,  but  it  is 
also  probable  that  he  had  several  others.  He  spoke  of 
"many."  This  applies  especially  to  chapters  9  to  21.  But 
Luke  expressly  says  that  he  had  received  help  from  "eye- 
witnesses and  ministers  of  the  word,"  in  oral  form  this 
means.  It  is,  then,  probable  that  Luke  made  numerous 
notes  of  such  data  and  used  them  along  with  the  written 
sources  at  his  command.  This  remark  applies  particularly 
to  chapters  1  and  2  which  have  a  very  distinct  Semitic 
(Aramaic)  colouring  due  to  the  sources  used.  It  is  possible, 
of  course,  that  Mary  the  mother  of  Jesus  may  have  written 
a  statement  concerning  these  important  matters  or  that 
Luke  may  have  had  converse  with  her  or  with  one  of  her 
circle.  Ramsay,  in  his  volume,  Was  Christ  Born  at  Bethlehem? 
shows  the  likelihood  of  Luke's  contact  with  Mary  or  her 
circle  during  these  two  years  at  Caesarea.  Luke  handles 
the  data  acquired  with  care  and  skill  as  he  claims  in  his  Pro- 
logue and  as  the  result  shows.  The  outcome  is  what  Renan 
called  the  most  beautiful  book  in  the  world. 

The  Character  of  the  Book 

Literary  charm  is  here  beyond  dispute.  It  is  a  book  that 
only  a  man  with  genuine  culture  and  literary  genius  could 
write.  It  has  all  the  simple  grace  of  Mark  and  Matthew 
plus  an  indefinable  quality  not  in  these  wonderful  books. 
There  is  a  delicate  finish  of  detail  and  proportion  of  parts 
that  give  the  balance  and  poise  that  come  only  from  full 
knowledge  of  the  subject,  the  chief  element  in  a  good  style 
according  to  Dr.  James  Stalker.  This  scientific  physician, 
this  man  of  the  schools,  this  converted  Gentile,  this  devoted 
friend  of  Paul,  comes  to  the  study  of  the  life  of  Christ  with 
a  trained  intellect,  with  an  historian's  method  of  research, 
with  a  physician's  care  in  diagnosis  and  discrimination,  with 
a  charm  of  style  all  his  own,  with  reverence  for  and  loyalty 
to  Jesus  Christ  as  Lord  and  Saviour.    One  could  not  afford 


xiv  BY  WAY  OF  INTRODUCTION 

to  give  up  either  of  the  Four  Gospels.  They  each  supple- 
ment the  other  in  a  wonderful  way.  John's  Gospel  is  the 
greatest  book  in  all  the  world,  reaching  the  highest  heights 
of  all.  But  if  we  had  only  Luke's  Gospel,  we  should  have 
an  adequate  portrait  of  Jesus  Christ  as  Son  of  God  and  Son 
of  Man.  If  Mark's  is  the  Gospel  for  the  Romans  and 
Matthew's  for  the  Jews,  the  Gospel  of  Luke  is  for  the  Gen- 
tile world.  He  shows  the  sympathy  of  Jesus  for  the  poor 
and  the  outcast.  Luke  understands  women  and  children 
and  so  is  the  universal  Gospel  of  mankind  in  all  phases  and 
conditions.  It  is  often  called  the  Gospel  of  womanhood,  of 
infancy,  of  prayer,  of  praise.  We  have  in  Luke  the  first 
Christian  hymns.  With  Luke  we  catch  some  glimpses  of 
the  child  Jesus  for  which  we  are  grateful.  Luke  was  a  friend 
and  follower  of  Paul,  and  verbal  parallels  with  Paul's  Epistles 
do  occur,  but  there  is  no  Pauline  propaganda  in  the  Gospel 
as  Moffatt  clearly  shows  (Intr.  to  Lit.  of  the  N.T.,  p.  281). 
The  Prologue  is  in  literary  Koine  and  deserves  comparison 
with  those  in  any  Greek  and  Latin  writers.  His  style  is 
versatile  and  is  often  coloured  by  his  source.  He  was  a  great 
reader  of  the  Septuagint  as  is  shown  by  occasional  Hebraisms 
evidently  due  to  reading  that  translation  Greek.  He  has 
graciousness  and  a  sense  of  humour  as  McLachlan  and  Ragg 
show.  Every  really  great  man  has  a  saving  sense  of  humour 
as  Jesus  himself  had.  Ramsay  dares  to  call  Luke,  as  shown 
by  the  Gospel  and  Acts,  the  greatest  of  all  historians  not 
even  excepting  Thucydides.  Ramsay  has  done  much  to 
restore  Luke  to  his  rightful  place  in  the  estimation  of  modern 
scholars.  Some  German  critics  used  to  cite  Luke  2:1-7  as  a 
passage  containing  more  historical  blunders  than  any  simi- 
lar passage  in  any  historian.  The  story  of  how  papyri  and 
inscriptions  have  fully  justified  Luke  in  every  statement 
here  made  is  carefully  worked  out  by  Ramsay  in  his  various 
books,  especially  in  The  Bearing  of  Recent  Discovery  on  the 
Trustworthiness  of  the  New   Testament.     The  main  feature 


BY  WAY  OF  INTRODUCTION  xv 

of  this  proof  appears  also  in  my  Luke  the  Historian  in  the 
Light  of  Research.  So  many  items,  where  Luke  once  stood 
alone,  have  been  confirmed  by  recent  discoveries  that  the 
burden  of  proof  now  rests  on  those  who  challenge  Luke  in 
those  cases  where  he  still  stands  alone. 


CONTENTS 


THE    GOSPEL   ACCORDING    TO    LUKE 

PAGE 

Chapter            I  .......  3 

Chapter           II 21 

Chapter         III 37 

Chapter          IV 48 

Chapter           V 68 

Chapter          VI 80 

Chapter        VII          , 97 

Chapter      VIII  .         .         .         „        .        .         .110 

Chapter          IX 124 

Chapter           X 144 

Chapter         XI 158 

Chapter        XII          . 171 

Chapter      XIII 185 

Chapter      XIV 194 

Chapter        XV 204 

Chapter      XVI 215 

Chapter     XVII 225 

Chapter  XVIII 231 

Chapter      XIX  .  239 

Chapter        XX 249 

Chapter      XXI 256 

Chapter    XXII  .......  264 

Chapter  XXIII 279 

Chapter  XXIV 290 

XVll 


THE  GOSPEL 
ACCORDING  TO  LUKE 


CHAPTER  I 

I.  Forasmuch  as  (epeideper).  Here  alone  in  the  N.T., 
though  common  in  literary  Attic.  Appears  in  the  papyri. 
A  triple  compound  [epei  =  since,  de  =  admittedly  true,  per  = 
intensive  particle  to  emphasize  importance).  Many  (polloi). 
How  many  no  one  knows,  but  certainly  more  than  two  or 
three.  We  know  that  Luke  used  the  Logia  of  Jesus  written 
by  Matthew  in  Aramaic  (Papias)  and  Mark's  Gospel.  Un- 
doubtedly he  had  other  written  sources.  Have  taken  in  hand 
(epecheiresan) .  A  literal  translation  of  epicheireo  (from  cheir, 
hand  and  epi,  upon).  Both  Hippocrates  and  Galen  use  this 
word  in  their  introduction  to  their  medical  works.  Here  only 
in  the  N.T.,  though  a  common  literary  word.  Common  in 
the  papyri  for  undertaking  with  no  idea  of  failure  or  blame. 
Luke  does  not  mean  to  cast  reflection  on  those  who  preceded 
him.  The  apocryphal  gospels  were  all  much  later  and  are 
not  in  his  mind.  Luke  had  secured  fuller  information  and 
planned  a  book  on  a  larger  scale  and  did  surpass  them  with 
the  result  that  they  all  perished  save  Mark's  Gospel  and 
what  Matthew  and  Luke  possess  of  the  Logia  of  Jesus. 
There  was  still  room  for  Luke's  book.  That  motive  influ- 
ences every  author  and  thus  progress  is  made.  To  draw  up, 
a  narrative  (anataxasthai  diegesin).  Ingressive  aorist  middle 
infinitive.  This  verb  anataxasthai  has  been  found  only  in 
Plutarch's  Moral.  968  CD  about  an  elephant  "rehearsing" 
by  moonlight  certain  tricks  it  had  been  taught  (Moulton 
and  Milligan,  Vocabulary).  That  was  from  memory  going 
regularly  through  the  thing  again.  But  the  idea  in  the  word 
is  plain  enough.  The  word  is  composed  of  tasso,  a  common 
verb  for  arranging  things  in  proper  order  and  ana,  again. 
Luke  means  to  say  that  those  before  him  had  made  attempts 

3 


4  WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

to  rehearse  in  orderly  fashion  various  matters  about  Christ. 
"The  expression  points  to  a  connected  series  of  narratives 
in  some  order  (taxis),  topical  or  chronological  rather  than 
to  isolated  narratives"  (Bruce).  u  They  had  produced  some- 
thing more  than  mere  notes  or  anecdotes"  (Plummer). 
Die  ge  sis  means  leading  or  carrying  a  thing  through,  not  a 
mere  incident.  Galen  applies  this  word  some  seventy-five 
times  to  the  writing  of  Hippocrates.  Which  have  been  ful- 
filled (ton  peplerophoremenon) .  Perfect  passive  participle 
from  plerophoreo  and  that  from  pleres  (full)  and  phero  (to 
bring).  Hence  to  bring  or  make  full.  The  verb  is  rare  out- 
side of  the  LXX  and  the  N.T.  Papyri  examples  occur  for 
finishing  off  a  legal  matter  or  a  financial  matter  in  full. 
Deissmann  (Light  from  the  Ancient  East,  pp.  86f.)  gives  ex- 
amples from  the  papyri  and  inscriptions  for  completing  a 
task  or  being  convinced  or  satisfied  in  mind.  The  same  am- 
biguity occurs  here.  When  used  of  persons  in  the  N.T.  the 
meaning  is  to  be  convinced,  or  fully  persuaded  (Rom.  4:21; 
14:5;  Heb.  6:11;  10:22).  When  used  of  things  it  has  the 
notion  of  completing  or  finishing  (II  Tim.  4:5,  17).  Luke  is 
here  speaking  of  "matters"  (pragmatbn).  Luke  may  refer 
to  the  matters  connected  with  Christ's  life  which  have  been 
brought  to  a  close  among  us  or  accomplished.  Bruce  argues 
plausibly  that  he  means  fulness  of  knowledge  "concerning 
the  things  which  have  become  widely  known  among  us 
Christians."  In  Col.  2 :2  we  have  "  fulness  of  understanding " 
(ies  plerophorias  tes  suneseos).  In  modern  Greek  the  verb 
means  to  inform.  The  careful  language  of  Luke  here  really 
pays  a  tribute  to  those  who  had  preceded  him  in  their  narra- 
tives concerning  Christ. 

2.  Even  as  (kathbs).  This  particle  was  condemned  by  the 
Atticists  though  occurring  occasionally  from  Aristotle  on. 
It  is  in  the  papyri.  Luke  asserts  that  the  previous  narratives 
had  their  sound  basis.  Delivered  unto  us  (paredosan  hemin). 
Second  aorist  active  indicative  of  paradidomi.    Luke  received 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  5 

this  tradition  along  with  those  who  are  mentioned  above 
(the  many).  That  is  he  was  not  one  of  the  "eyewitnesses." 
He  was  a  secondary,  not  a  primary,  witness  of  the  events. 
Tradition  has  come  to  have  a  meaning  of  unreliability  with 
us,  but  that  is  not  the  idea  here.  Luke  means  to  say  that  the 
handing  down  was  dependable,  not  mere  wives'  fables.  Those 
who  drew  up  the  narratives  had  as  sources  of  knowledge  those 
who  handed  down  the  data.  Here  we  have  both  written 
and  oral  sources.  Luke  had  access  to  both  kinds.  Which 
from  the  beginning  were  eyewitnesses  and  ministers  of  the  word 
{hoi  ap*  arches  autoptai  kai  huperetai  genomenoi  tou  logon). 
"Who"  is  better  than  "which"  for  the  article  here.  The 
word  for  eyewitnesses  (autoptai)  is  an  old  Greek  word  and 
appears  in  the  papyri  also.  It  means  seeing  with  one's  own 
eyes.  It  occurs  here  only  in  the  N.T.  We  have  the  very 
word  in  the  medical  term  autopsy.  Greek  medical  writers 
often  had  the  word.  It  is  a  different  word  from  epoptai 
(eyewitness)  in  II  Pet.  1  :i6,  a  word  used  of  those  who  be- 
held heavenly  mysteries.  The  word  for  "ministers"  (huper- 
etai), under  rowers  or  servants  we  have  had  already  in  Matt. 
5:25;  26:58;  Mark  14:54,  65,  which  see.  We  shall  see  it  again 
in  Luke  4:20  of  the  attendant  in  the  synagogue.  In  the  sense 
of  a  preacher  of  the  gospel  as  here,  it  occurs  also  in  Acts 
26:16.  Here  "the  word"  means  the  gospel  message,  as  in 
Acts  6:4;  8:4,  etc.  From  the  beginning  apparently  refers  to 
the  beginning  of  the  ministry  of  Jesus  as  was  true  of  the 
apostles  (Acts  1:22)  and  of  the  early  apostolic  preaching 
(Acts  10:37-43).  The  Gospel  of  Mark  follows  this  plan. 
The  Gospel  of  Luke  goes  behind  this  in  chapters  1  and  2  as 
does  Matthew  in  chapters  1  and  2.  But  Luke  is  not  here 
referring  to  himself.  The  matters  about  the  childhood  of 
Jesus  Christ  would  not  form  part  of  the  traditional  preaching 
for  obvious  reasons. 

3.  It  seemed  good  to  me  also  (edoxe  khmoi).     A  natural 
conclusion  and  justification  of  Luke's  decision  to  write  his 


6  WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

narrative.  They  had  ample  reason  to  draw  up  their  narra- 
tives. Luke  has  more  reason  to  do  so  because  of  his  fuller 
knowledge  and  wider  scope.  Having  traced  the  course  of  all 
things  (parekolouthekoti  pdsin) .  The  perfect  active  participle 
of  a  common  verb  of  the  ancient  Greek.  Literally  it  means 
to  follow  along  a  thing  in  mind,  to  trace  carefully.  Both 
meanings  occur  abundantly  in  the  ancient  Greek.  Cadbury 
(Appendix  C  to  Beginnings  of  Christianity,  Vol.  II,  pp.  4891!.) 
objects  to  the  translation  "having  traced"  here  as  implying 
research  which  the  word  does  not  here  mean.  Milligan 
(Vocabulary)  is  somewhat  impressed  by  this  argument.  See 
my  discussion  of  the  point  in  Chapter  XVI  of  Studies  in  the 
Text  of  the  N.T.  (The  Implications  in  Luke's  Preface)  where 
the  point  is  made  that  Luke  here  claims  fulness  of  knowledge 
before  he  began  to  write  his  book.  He  had  the  traditions 
of  the  eyewitnesses  and  ministers  of  the  word  and  the  narra- 
tives previously  drawn  up.  Whether  he  was  a  personal  con- 
temporary with  any  or  all  of  these  events  we  do  not  know 
and  it  is  not  particularly  pertinent.  He  had  mentally  fol- 
lowed along  by  the  side  of  these  events.  Galen  used  this 
verb  for  the  investigation  of  symptoms.  Luke  got  himself 
ready  to  write  before  he  began  by  full  and  accurate  knowl- 
edge of  the  subject.  Akribos  (accurately)  means  going  into 
minute  details,  from  akron,  the  topmost  point.  And  he  did  it 
from  the  first  (anothen).  He  seems  to  refer  to  the  matters  in 
Chapters  1:5  to  2:52,  the  Gospel  of  the  Infancy.  In  order 
(kathexes) .  Chronological  order  in  the  main  following  Ma  rk's 
general  outline.  But  in  9:51  to  18:10  the  order  is  often 
topical.  He  has  made  careful  investigation  and  his  work 
deserves  serious  consideration.  Most  excellent  Theophilus 
(kratiste  Theophile).  The  name  means  god-lover  or  god- 
beloved.  He  may  have  been  a  believer  already.  He  was 
probably  a  Gentile.  Ramsay  holds  that  "most  excellent" 
was  a  title  like  "Your  Excellency"  and  shows  that  he  held 
office,  perhaps  a  Knight.    So  of  Felix  (Acts  23  :26)  and  Festus 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  7 

(Acts  26:25).    The  adjective  does  not  occur  in  the  dedication 
in  Acts  1  :i. 

4.  Mightest  know  {epignbis).  Second  aorist  active  sub- 
junctive of  epiginosko.  Full  knowledge  {epi-)}  in  addition 
to  what  he  already  has.  The  certainty  {ten  asphaleian). 
Make  no  slip  {sphallo,  to  totter  or  fall,  and  a  privative) .  Luke 
promises  a  reliable  narrative.  "Theophilus  shall  know  that 
the  faith  which  he  has  embraced  has  an  impregnable  histor- 
ical foundation"  (Plummer).  The  things  {logon).  Literally 
"words,"  the  details  of  the  words  in  the  instruction.  Wast 
instructed  {katechethes).  First  aorist  passive  indicative.  Not 
in  O.T.  and  rare  in  ancient  Greek.  Occurs  in  the  papyri. 
The  word  echeo  is  our  word  echo  (cf.  I  Thess.  1 :8  for  exechetai, 
has  sounded  forth).  Katecheo  is  to  sound  down,  to  din,  to 
instruct,  to  give  oral  instruction.  Cf.  I  Cor.  14:9;  Acts  21 :2i, 
24;  18:25;  Gal.  6:6.  Those  men  doing  the  teaching  were 
called  catechists  and  those  receiving  it  were  called  catechu- 
mens. Whether  Theophilus  was  still  a  catechumen  is  not 
known.  This  Preface  by  Luke  is  in  splendid  literary  Koine 
and  is  not  surpassed  by  those  in  any  Greek  writer  (Herodo- 
tus, Thucydides,  Polybius).  It  is  entirely  possible  that  Luke 
was  familiar  with  this  habit  of  Greek  historians  to  write 
prefaces  since  he  was  a  man  of  culture. 

5.  There  was  {egeneto).  Not  the  usual  en  for  "was,"  but 
there  arose  or  came  into  notice.  With  this  verse  the  literary 
Koine  of  verses  1  to  4  disappears.  To  the  end  of  chapter  2 
we  have  the  most  Hebraistic  (Aramaic)  passage  in  Luke's 
writings,  due  evidently  to  the  use  of  documents  or  notes  of 
oral  tradition.  Plummer  notes  a  series  of  such  documents 
ending  with  1:80,  2:40,  2:52.  If  the  mother  of  Jesus  was 
still  alive,  Luke  could  have  seen  her.  She  may  have  written 
in  Aramaic  an  account  of  these  great  events.  Natural  re- 
serve would  keep  her  from  telling  too  much  and  from  too 
early  publicity.  Luke,  as  a  physician,  would  take  special 
interest  in  her  birth  report.    The  supernatural  aspects  dis- 


8  WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

turb  only  those  who  do  not  admit  the  real  Incarnation  of 
Jesus  Christ  and  who  are  unable  to  believe  that  God  is  supe- 
rior to  nature  and  that  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  God  to  earth 
justifies  such  miraculous  manifestations  of  divine  power. 
Luke  tells  his  story  from  the  standpoint  of  Mary  as  Matthew 
gives  his  from  the  standpoint  of  Joseph.  The  two  supple- 
ment each  other.  We  have  here  the  earliest  documentary 
evidence  of  the  origins  of  Christianity  that  has  come  down 
to  us  (Plummer).  Herod,  King  of  Judea  (Heroidou  basileos 
tes  Ioudaias).  This  note  of  time  locates  the  events  before 
the  death  of  Herod  the  Great  (as  he  was  called  later),  ap- 
pointed King  of  Judea  by  the  Roman  Senate  B.C.  40  at  the 
suggestion  of  Octavius  and  Antony.  He  died  B.C.  4.  Of 
the  course  of  Abijah  {ex  ephemerias  Abid).  Not  in  old  Greek, 
but  in  LXX  and  modern  Greek.  Papyri  have  a  verb  derived 
from  it,  ephemereo.  Daily  service  (Neh.  13:30;  I  Chron. 
25:8)  and  then  a  course  of  priests  who  were  on  duty  for  a 
week  (I  Chron.  23:6;  28:13).  There  were  24  such  courses 
and  that  of  Abijah  was  the  eighth  (I  Chron.  24:10;  II  Chron. 
8:14).  Only  four  of  these  courses  (Jedaiah,  Immer,  Pashur, 
Harim)  returned  from  Babylon,  but  these  four  were  divided 
into  twenty-four  with  the  old  names.  Each  of  these  courses 
did  duty  for  eight  days,  sabbath  to  sabbath,  twice  a  year. 
On  sabbaths  the  whole  course  did  duty.  At  the  feast  of 
tabernacles  all  twenty-four  courses  were  present.  Of  the 
daughters  of  Aaron  (ek  ton  thugateron  Aaron).  "To  be  a  priest 
and  married  to  a  priest's  daughter  was  a  double  distinction" 
(Plummer) .  Like  a  preacher  married  to  a  preacher's  daughter. 
6.  Righteous  before  God  (dikaioi  enantion  tou  theou).  Old 
Testament  conception  and  idiom.  Cf.  2:25  about  Simeon. 
Expanded  in  Old  Testament  language.  Picture  of  "noblest 
product  of  Old  Testament  education"  (Ragg)  is  Zacharias 
and  Elisabeth,  Mary  and  Joseph,  Simeon  and  Anna  who 
were  "privileged  to  see  with  clear  eyes  the  dawn  of  the  New 
Testament  revelation." 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  9 

7.  Because  that  (kathoti).  Good  Attic  word,  according  to 
what.  Only  in  Luke  and  Acts  in  the  N.T.  In  the  papyri. 
Well  stricken  in  years  (probebekotes  en  tais  hemerais  auton). 
Wycliff  has  it  right:  "Had  gone  far  in  their  days."  Perfect 
active  participle.    See  also  verse  18. 

8.  While  he  executed  the  priest1  s  office  {en  tot  hierateuein 
auton).  A  favourite  idiom  in  Luke,  en  with  the  articular  in- 
finitive and  the  accusative  of  general  reference  where  the 
genitive  absolute  could  have  been  used  or  a  temporal  con- 
junction and  finite  verb.  It  is  proper  Greek,  but  occurs  often 
in  the  LXX,  which  Luke  read,  particularly  in  imitation  of 
the  Hebrew  infinitive  construct.  The  word  hierateuo  does 
not  appear  in  the  ancient  Greek,  but  in  the  LXX  and  this 
one  example  in  Luke.  It  is  on  the  Rosetta  Stone  and  the 
early  inscriptions  so  that  the  word  was  simply  applied  by 
the  LXX  translators  from  current  usage. 

9.  His  lot  was  {elache).  Literally,  he  obtained  the  lot. 
Second  aorist  active  indicative  of  lagchano,  to  obtain  by  lot, 
a  very  old  verb  from  Homer  on.  It  is  used  either  with  the 
genitive  as  here,  or  the  accusative  as  in  Acts  1:17;  II  Pet. 
1:1.  Papyri  show  examples  with  the  accusative.  It  was 
only  once  in  a  lifetime  that  a  priest  obtained  the  lot  of  going 
(eiselthon,  here  nominative  aorist  active  participle  agreeing 
with  the  subject  of  elache)  into  the  sanctuary  (ton  naon,  not 
to  hieron,  the  outer  courts)  and  burning  incense  on  the  golden 
altar.  "It  was  the  great  moment  of  Zacharias's  life,  and  his 
heart  was  no  doubt  alert  for  the  supernatural"  (Ragg).  The 
fortunate  lot  was  "a  white  stone"  to  which  Rev.  2:17  may 
refer.  Burn  incense  (tou  thumiasai).  Here  only  in  the  N.T. 
Occurs  on  inscriptions.  Hobart  finds  it  used  by  medical 
writers  for  fumigating  herbs.  "Ascending  the  steps  to  the 
Holy  Place,  the  priests  spread  the  coals  on  the  golden  altar, 
and  arranged  the  incense,  and  the  chief  operating  priest 
was  then  left  alone  within  the  Holy  Place  to  await  the 
signal  of  the  president  to  burn  the  incense.    It  was  prob- 


IO        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

ably  at  this  time  that  the  angel  appeared  to  Zacharias" 
(Vincent). 

IO.  Were  praying  without  (en  proseuchomenon  exo).  Peri- 
phrastic imperfect  indicative  picturing  the  posture  of  the 
people  while  the  clouds  of  incense  rose  on  the  inside  of  the 
sanctuary. 

ii.  Appeared  (ophthe).  First  aorist  passive  indicative. 
It  is  the  form  used  by  Paul  of  the  resurrection  appearances 
of  Jesus  (I  Cor.  15 15—8).  There  is  no  use  in  trying  to  explain 
away  the  reality  of  the  angel.  We  must  choose  between  ad- 
mitting an  objective  appearance  and  a  myth  (Plummer). 

13.  Is  heard  (eisekousthe) .  First  aorist  passive  indicative. 
A  sort  of  timeless  aorist,  "was  heard"  when  made,  and  so 
"is  heard"  now.  Probably  the  prayer  was  for  a  son  in  spite 
of  the  great  age  of  Elisabeth,  though  the  Messianic  redemp- 
tion is  possible  also.  John  (Ibanen).  The  word  means  that 
God  is  gracious.  The  mention  of  the  name  should  have 
helped  Zacharias  to  believe.  The  message  of  the  angel 
(verses  13  to  17)  takes  on  a  metrical  form  when  turned  into 
Hebrew  (Ragg)  and  it  is  a  prose  poem  in  Greek  and  English 
like  1:30-33,  35-37,  42~45>  46~55>  68-70;  2:10-12,  14,  29-32, 
34-35.  Certainly  Luke  has  preserved  the  earliest  Christian 
hymns  in  their  oldest  sources.  He  is  the  first  critic  of  the 
sources  of  the  Gospels  and  a  scholarly  one. 

14.  Gladness  (agalliasis).  Only  in  the  LXX  and  N.T. 
so  far  as  known.  A  word  for  extreme  exultation.  Rejoice 
(charesontai) .  Second  future  passive  indicative.  The  com- 
ing of  a  prophet  will  indeed  be  an  occasion  for  rejoicing. 

15.  Strong  drink  (sikera).  A  Hebrew  word  transliterated 
into  Greek,  an  intoxicating  drink.  Here  only  in  the  N.T. 
John  was  to  be  a  personal  "dry"  or  Nazarite  (Num.  6:3). 
Shall  not  drink  (ou  me  piei).  Strong  prohibition,  double 
negative  and  second  aorist  subjunctive.  The  Holy  Ghost 
(pneumatos  hagiou).  The  Holy  Spirit  in  contrast  to  the 
physical  excitement  of  strong  drink  (Plummer).    Luke  uses 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  II 

this  phrase  53  times,  12  in  the  Gospel,  Mark  and  John  4 
each,  Matthew  5  times.  Even  from  his  mother's  womb  (eti 
ek  koilias  metros  autou).    A  manifest  Hebraism.    Cf.  verse  41. 

17.  Before  his  face  {enopion  autou).  Not  in  the  ancient 
Greek,  but  common  in  the  papyri  as  in  LXX  and  N.T.  It 
Is  a  vernacular  Koine  word,  adverb  used  as  preposition  from 
adjective  enopios,  and  that  from  ho  en  dpi  on  (the  one  who 
is  in  sight).  Autou  here  seems  to  be  "the  Lord  their  God"  in 
verse  16  since  the  Messiah  has  not  yet  been  mentioned, 
though  he  was  to  be  actually  the  Forerunner  of  the  Messiah. 
In  the  spirit  and  power  of  Elijah  {en  pneumati  kai  dunamei 
Eleia).  See  Isa.  40:1-11;  Mai.  3:1-5.  John  will  deny  that  he 
is  actually  Elijah  in  person,  as  they  expected  (John  1 :2i),  but 
Jesus  will  call  him  Elijah  in  spirit  (Mark  9:12  =  Matt.  17:12). 
Hearts  of  fathers  {kardias  pateron).  Paternal  love  had  died 
out.  This  is  one  of  the  first  results  of  conversion,  the  revival 
of  love  in  the  home.  Wisdom  {phronesei).  Not  sophia,  but  a 
word  for  practical  intelligence.  Prepared  (kateskeuasmenon). 
Perfect  passive  participle,  state  of  readiness  for  Christ.  This 
John  did.  This  is  a  marvellous  forecast  of  the  character  and 
career  of  John  the  Baptist,  one  that  should  have  caught  the 
faith  of  Zacharias. 

18.  Whereby  {kata  ti).  According  to  what.  It  was  too 
good  to  be  true  and  Zacharias  demanded  proof  and  gives  the 
reason  (for,  gar)  for  his  doubt.  He  had  prayed  for  this  bless- 
ing and  was  now  sceptical  like  the  disciples  in  the  house  of 
Mary  about  the  return  of  Peter  (Acts  12:141.). 

19.  Gabriel  {Gabriel).  The  Man  of  God  (Dan.  8:6;  9:21). 
The  other  angel  whose  name  is  given  in  Scripture  is  Michael 
(Dan.  10:13,  21;  Jude  9;  Rev.  12:7).  The  description  of  him- 
self is  a  rebuke  to  the  doubt  of  Zacharias. 

20.  Thou  shalt  be  silent  {esei  siopon).  Volitive  future 
periphrastic.  Not  able  to  speak  {me  dunamenos  lalesai). 
Negative  repetition  of  the  same  statement.  His  dumbness 
will  continue  "until"  {achri  hes  hemer as},  the  events  come  to 


12        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

pass  "because"  (anth*  hon).    The  words  were  to  become 
reality  in  due  season  (kairon,  not  chronos,  time). 

21.  Were  waiting  (en  prosdokbn).  Periphrastic  imperfect 
again.  An  old  Greek  verb  for  expecting.  Appears  in  papyri 
and  inscriptions.  It  denotes  mental  direction  whether  hope 
or  fear.  They  marvelled  (ethaumazon) .  Imperfect  tense, 
were  wondering.  The  Talmud  says  that  the  priest  remained 
only  a  brief  time  in  the  sanctuary.  While  he  tarried  (en  toi 
chronizein).    See  verse  8  for  the  same  idiom. 

22.  Perceived  (epegnbsan).  Second  aorist  indicative. 
Clearly  knew  because  he  was  not  able  to  pronounce  the 
benediction  from  the  steps  (Num.  6:24-26).  Continued 
making  signs  (en  dianeubn).  Periphrastic  imperfect  again. 
He  nodded  and  beckoned  back  and  forth  (dia,  between). 
Further  proof  of  a  vision  that  caused  his  dumbness. 

23.  Ministration  (leitourgias).  Our  word  liturgy.  A 
common  word  in  ancient  Greek  for  public  service,  work  for 
the  people  (lebs  ergon).  It  is  common  in  the  papyri  for  the 
service  of  the  Egyptian  priesthood  as  we  see  it  in  the  LXX 
of  Hebrew  priests  (see  also  Heb.  8:6;  9:21;  II  Cor.  9:12; 
Phil.  2:17,  30). 

24.  Conceived  (sunelaben).  Luke  uses  this  word  eleven 
times  and  it  occurs  only  five  other  times  in  the  N.T.  It  is 
a  very  old  and  common  Greek  word.  He  alone  in  the  N.T. 
has  it  for  conceiving  offspring  (1:24,  31,  36;  2:21)  though 
James  1:15  uses  it  of  lust  producing  sin.  Hobart  (Medical 
Language  of  Luke,  p.  91)  observes  that  Luke  has  almost  as 
many  words  for  pregnancy  and  barrenness  as  Hippocrates 
(en  gastri  echein,  21 :23 ;  egkuos,  2 :5 ;  steira,  1 :y;  ateknos,  20:28). 
Hid  (periekruben).  Only  here  in  the  N.T.,  but  in  late  KoinS 
writers.  Usually  considered  second  aorist  active  indicative 
from  perikrupto,  though  it  may  be  the  imperfect  indicative 
of  a  late  form  perikrubo.  If  it  is  aorist  it  is  the  constative 
aorist.  The  preposition  peri  makes  it  mean  completely  (on 
all  sides)  hid. 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  13 

25.  My  reproach  {oneidos  mou).  Keenly  felt  by  a  Jewish 
wife  because  the  husband  wanted  an  heir  and  because  of 
the  hope  of  the  Messiah,  and  because  of  the  mother's  long- 
ing for  a  child. 

26.  Was  sent  (apestale).  Second  aorist  passive  indicative 
of  apostello  from  which  apostle  comes.  The  angel  Gabriel 
is  God's  messenger  to  Mary  as  to  Zacharias  (1:19). 

27.  Betrothed  (emnesteumenen) .  Perfect  passive  participle. 
Betrothal  usually  lasted  a  year  and  unfaithfulness  on  the 
part  of  the  bride  was  punished  with  death  (Deut.  23:24^). 

28.  Highly  favoured  (kecharitomene).  Perfect  passive  par- 
ticiple of  charitoo  and  means  endowed  with  grace  (charis), 
enriched  with  grace  as  in  Eph.  1 :6,  non  ut  mater  gratiae,  sed 
ut  filia  gratiae  (Bengel).  The  Vulgate  gratiae  plena  "is 
right,  if  it  means  'full  oi_gr^ce^which  thou  hast  received^ ; 
wrong,  if  it  means  full  of  grace  which  thou  hast  to  bestow ' " 
(Plummer).  The  oldest  MSS.  do  not  have  "Blessed  art 
thou  among  women"  here,  but  in  verse  42. 

29.  Cast  in  her  mind  (dielogizeto).  Imperfect  indicative. 
Note  aorist  dietarachthe.  Common _verb__for_  reckoning _up_ 
difiejcentJ^asoJia.    She  was  both  upset  and  puzzled. 

30.  Favour  (charin).  Grace.  Same  root  as  chair 0  (re- 
joice) and  charitoo  in  verse  28.  To  find  favour  is  a  common 
O.T.  phrase.  Charis  is  a  very  ancient  and  common  word 
with  a  variety  of  applied  meanings.  They  all  come  from  the 
notion  of  sweetness,  charm,  loveliness,  joy,  delight,  like 
words  of  grace,  Luke  4:22,  growing  grace,  Eph.  4:29,  with 
grace,  Col.  4:6.  The  notion  of  kindness  is  in  it  also,  especially 
of  God  towards  men  as  here.  It  is  a  favourite  word  for 
Christianity,  the  Gospel  of  the  grace  of  God  (Acts  20:24) 
in  contrast  with  law  or  works  (John  1:16).  Gratitude  is 
expressed  also  (Luke  6:32),  especially  to  God  (Rom.  6:17). 
With  God  (para  toi  thebi).    Beside  God. 

31.  Conceive  in  thy  womb  (sullempsei  en  gastri).  Adding 
en  gastri  to  the  verb  of  1:24.    Same  idiom  in  Isa.  7:14  of 


' 


14        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Immanuel.    Jesus  (Iesoun).    As  to  Joseph  in  Matt.  1:21,  but 
without  the  explanation  of  the  meaning.     See  on  Matthew. 

32.  The  Son  of  the  Most  High  (huios  Hupsistou).  There 
is  no  article  in  the  Greek,  but  the  use  of  Most  High  in  verse 
35  clearly  of  God  as  here.  In  Luke  6:35  we  find  "sons  of 
the  Most  High"  (huioi  Hupsistou)  so  that  we  cannot  insist 
on  deity  here,  though  that  is  possible.  The  language  of 
II  Sam.  7:14  and  Isa.  9:7  is  combined  here. 

33.  Shall  be  no  end  (ouk  estai  telos).  Luke  reports  the 
perpetuity  of  this  Davidic  kingdom  over  the  house  of  Jacob 
with  n°  Pauline  interpretatjojiLoi the_spiritual  Israel  though 
that  was  the  true  meaning  as  Luke  knew.  Joseph  was  of 
the  house  of  David  (Luke  1  \2j)  and  Mary  also  apparently 
(Luke  2:5). 

35.  Shall  overshadow  thee  (episkiasei).  A  figure  of  a  cloud 
coming  upon  her.  Common  in  ancient  Greek  in  the  sense  of 
obscuring  and  with  accusative  as  of  Peter's  shadow  in  Acts 
5:15.  But  we  have  seen  it  used  of  the  shining  bright  cloud 
at  the  Transfiguration  of  Jesus  (Matt.  17:5  =  Mark  9:7  = 
Luke  9:34).  Here  it  is  like  the  Shekinah  glory  which  sug- 
gests it  (Ex.  40:38)  where  the  cloud  of  glory  represents  the 
presence  and  power  of  God.  Holy,  the  Son  of  God  (Hagion 
huios  theou).  Here  again  the  absence  of  the  article  makes  it 
possible  for  it  to  mean  "Son  of  God."  See  Matt.  5:9.  But 
this  title,  like  the  Son  of  Man  {Ho  huios  tou  anthrbpou)  was 
a  recognized  designation  of  the  Messiah.  Jesus  did  not 
often  call  himself  Son  of  God  (Matt.  27:43),  but  it  is  as- 
sumed in  his  frequent  use  of  the  Father,  the  Son  (Matt. 
11:27;  Luke  10:21;  John  5:191!.).  It  is  the  title  used  by  the 
Father  at  the  baptism  (Luke  3 :22)  and  on  the  Mount  of 
Transfiguration  (Luke  9:35).  The  wonder  of  Mary  would 
increase  at  these  words.  The  Miraculous  Conception  or 
Virgin  Birth  of  Jesus  is  thus  plainly  set  forth  in  Luke  as  in 
Matthew.  The  fact  that  Luke  was  a  physician  gives  added 
interest  to  his  report. 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  15 

36.  Kinswoman  (suggenis).  Not  necessarily  cousin,  but 
simply  relative. 

37.  No  word  {ouk  rhema).  Rhema  brings  out  the  single 
item  rather  than  the  whole  content  (logos).    So  in  verse  38. 

39.  Arose  (anastasa).  Luke  is  very  fond  of  this  word, 
sixty  times  against  twenty-two  in  the  rest  of  the  N.T. 
Into  the  hill  country  (eis  ten  orinen).  Luke  uses  this  adjective 
twice  in  this  context  (here  and  1 165)  instead  of  to  oros,  the 
mountains.  It  is  an  old  word  and  is  in  the  LXX,  but  nowhere 
else  in  the  N.T.  The  name  of  the  city  where  Zacharias 
lived  is  not  given  unless  Judah  here  means  Juttah  (Josh. 
15:55).    Hebron  was  the  chief  city  of  this  part  of  Judea. 

40.  Saluted_  (espasato).  Her  first  glance  at  Elisabeth 
showed  the  truth  of  the  angel's  message.  The  two  mothers 
had  a  bond  of  sympathy. 

41.  Leaped  (eskirtesen).  A  common  enough  incident  with 
unborn  children  (Gen.  25:22),  but  Elisabeth  wasfilled-jadth 
the  Holy  Spirit  to  understand  what  had  happened  to  Mary. 

42.  With  a  loud  cry  (kraugei  megalei).  A  moment  of 
ecstatic  excitement.  Blessed  art  thou  (eulogemene) .  Perfect 
passive  participle.  A  Hebraistic  equivalent  for  the  superla- 
tive. 

43.  The  mother  of  my  Lord  (he  meter  tou  Kuriou  mou). 
See  Psa.  110:1.  Only  by  the  help  of  the  Holy  Spirit  could 
Elisabeth  know  that  Mary  was  to  be  the  mother  of  the  Mes- 
siah. 

45.  For  (hoti).  It  is  not  certain  whether  hotihere  is  "that" 
or  "because."  It  makes  good  sense  either  way.  See  also 
7:16.  This  is  the  first  beatitude  in  the  New  Testament  and 
it  is  similar  to  the  last  one  in  the  Gospels  spoken  to  Thomas 
to  discourage  his  doubt  (John  20:29).  Elisabeth  wishes 
Mary  to  have  full  faith  in  the  prophecy  of  the  angel.  This 
song  of  Elisabeth  is  as  real  poetry  as  is  that  of  Mary  (1 147- 
55)  and  Zacharias  (1:68-70).  All  three  spoke  under  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.    These  are  the  first  New  Testa- 


l6        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

ment  hymns  and  they  are  very  beautiful.  Plummer  notes 
four  strophes  in  Mary's  Magnificat  (46-48,  49  and  50,  51-53, 
54  and  55).  Every  idea  here  occurs  in  the  Old  Testament, 
showing  that  Mary's  mind  was  full  of  the  spiritual  message 
of  God's  word. 

46.  Doth  magnify  (megalunei).  Latin,  magnificat.  Har- 
nack  argues  that  this  is  also  the  song  of  Elisabeth  because 
a  few  Latin  MSS.  have  it  so,  but  Mary  is  correct.  She 
draws  her  material  from  the  O.T.  and  sings  in  the  noblest 
strain. 

47.  Hath  rejoiced  (egalliasen).  This  is  aorist  active  indica- 
tive. Greek  tenses  do  not  correspond  to  those  in  English. 
The  verb  agalliao  is  a  Hellenistic  word  from  the  old  Greek 
agallo.  It  means  to  exult.  See  the  substantive  agalliasis  in 
Luke   1 114,  44.     Mary  is  not  excited  like  Elisabeth,  but 

,  ^breathes  a  spirit  of  composed  rapture.  My  spirit  (to  pneuma 
moil).  One  need  not  press  unduly  the  difference  between 
"soul"  (psuche)  in  verse  46  and  "spirit"  here.  Bruce  calls 
them  synonyms  in  parallel  clauses.  Vincent  argues  that 
the  soul  is  the  principle  of  individuality  while  the  spirit  is 
the  point  of  contact  between  God  and  man.  It  is  doubtful, 
however,  if  the  trichotomous  theory  of  man  (body,  soul, 
and  spirit)  is  to  be  insisted  on.  It  is  certain  that  we  have  an 
inner  spiritual  nature  for  which  various  words  are  used  in 
J  Mark  12:30.  Even  the  distinction  between  intellect,  emo- 
tions, and  will  is  challenged  by  some  psychologists.  God  my 
Saviour  (toi  theoi  tbi  soteri  mou).  Article  with  each  sub- 
stantive. God  is  called  Saviour  in  the  O.T.  (Deut.  32:15, 
Psa.  24:5595:1). 

48.  The  low  estate  {ten  tapeinosin).  The  bride  of  a  car- 
penter and  yet  to  be  the  mother  of  the  Messiah.  Literal 
sense  here  as  in  1 152.  Shall  call  me  blessed  (makariousin  me). 
So-called  Attic  future  of  an  old  verb,  to  felicitate.  Elisabeth 
had  already  given  her  a  beatitude  (makaria,  1 145).  Another 
occurs  in  1 1 127.    But  this  is  a  very  different  thing  from  the 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  17 

worship  of  Mary  (Mariolatry)  by  Roman  Catholics.     See 
my  The  Mother  of  Jesus:  Her  Problems  and  Her  Glory. 

50.  Fear  (phoboumenois).  Dative  of  the  present  middle 
participle.  Here  it  is  reverential  fear  as  in  Acts  10:2;  Col. 
3 :22.  The  bad  sense  of  dread  appears  in  Matt.  21 46  Mark 
6:20,   Luke    12:4. 

51.  Showed  strength  (epoiesen  kratos).  "Made  might" 
(WyclifT).  A  Hebrew  conception  as  in  Psa.  118:15.  Phim- 
mer  notes  six  aorist  indicatives  in  this  sentence  (51-63), 
neither  corresponding  to  our  English  idiom,  which  translates 
here  by  "hath"  each  time.  Imagination  (dianoiai).  Intel- 
lectual insight,  moral  understanding. 

52.  Princes  {dunastas).  Our  word  dynasty  is  from  this 
word.    It  comes  from  dunamai,  to  be  able. 

54.  Hath  holpen  {antelabeto).  Second  aorist  middle  indica- 
tive. A  very  common  verb.  It  means  to  lay  hold  of  with  a 
view  to  help  or  succour.  Servant  (paidos).  Here  it  means 
"servant,"  not  "son"  or  "child,"  its  usual  meaning. 

58.  Had  magnified  (emegalunen).  Aorist  active  indicative. 
Same  verb  as  in  verse  46.  Rejoiced  with  her  (sunechairon 
auiei) .  Imperfect  tense  and_pictures  the  continual  joy  of 
the  neighbours,  accented  also  by  sun-  (cf.  Phil.  2:18)  in  its 
mutual  aspect. 

59.  Would  have  called  (ekaloun).  Conative  imperfect, 
tried  to  call. 

62.  Made  signs  (eneneuon).  Imperfect  tense,  repeated 
action  as  usual  when  making  signs.  In  1:22  the  verb  used 
of  Zacharias  is  dianeuon.  What  he  would  have  him  called 
(to  ti  an  theloi  kaleisthai  auto) .  Note  article  to  with  the  indi- 
rect question,  accusative  of  general  reference.  The  optative 
with  an  is  here  because  it  was  used  in  the  direct  question 
(cf.  Acts  17:18),  and  is  simply  retained  in  the  indirect. 
What  would  he  wish  him  to  be  called?  (if  he  could  speak),  a 
conclusion  of  the  fourth-class  condition. 

63.  Tablet  (pinakidion) .    Diminutive  of  pinakis.    In  Aris- 


1 8        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

totle  and  the  papyri  for  writing  tablet,  probably  covered 
with  wax.  Sometimes  it  was  a  little  table,  like  Shakespeare's 
"the  table  of  my  memory"  (Hamlet,  i.  5).  It  was  used 
also  of  a  physician's  note-book.  Wrote,  saying  {egrapsen 
legon).     Hebrew  way  of  speaking  (II  Kings  10:6). 

64.  Immediately  (parachrema).  Nineteen  times  in  the 
N.T.,  seventeen  in  Luke.  Opened  (aneoichthe).  First  aorist 
passive  indicative  with  double  augment.  The  verb  suits 
"mouth,"  but  not  "tongue"  {gloss a).  It  is  thus  a  zeugma 
with  tongue.    Loosed  or  some  such  verb  to  be  supplied. 

65.  Fear  {phobos).  Not  terror,  but  religious  awe  because 
of  contact  with  the  supernatural  as  in  the  case  of  Zacharias 
(1:12).  Were  noised  abroad  {dielaleito) .  Imperfect  passive. 
Occurs  in  Polybius.  In  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Luke  6:11. 
It  was  continuous  talk  back  and  forth  between  {did)  the 
people. 

66.  What  then  {ti  ard).  With  all  these  supernatural 
happenings  they  predicted  the  marvellous  career  of  this 
child.  Note  Ti,  what,  not  Tis,  who.  Cf.  Acts  12:18.  They 
laid  them  up  {ethento,  second  aorist  middle  indicative)  as 
Mary  did  (2:19).  The  hand  of  the  Lord  {cheir  Kuriou). 
Luke's  explanation  in  addition  to  the  supernatural  events. 
The  expression  occurs  only  in  Luke's  writing  (Acts  11:21, 
13:11). 

67.  Prophesied  {epropheteusen).  Under  the  guidance  of 
the  Holy  Spirit.  This  Benedictus  {Eulogetos,  Blessed)  of 
Zacharias  (68  to  79)  may  be  what  is  referred  to  in  verse  64 
"he  began  to  speak  blessing  God"  {eulogbn).  Nearly  every 
phrase  here  is  found  in  the  O.T.  (Psalms  and  Prophets). 
He,  like  Mary,  was  full  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  had  caught 
the  Messianic  message  in  its  highest  meaning. 

68.  Hath  visited  {epeskepsato).  An  old  Greek  word  with 
a  Hebraic  colouring  to  look  into  with  a  view  to  help.  The 
papyri  have  plenty  of  examples  of  the  verb  in  the  sense  of 
inspecting,  examining.    Redemption  {lutrbsin)  here  originally 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  19 

referred  to  political  redemption,  but  with  a  moral  and  spirit- 
ual basis  (verses  75,  Jj). 

69.  Horn  of  salvation  (keras  soterias).  A  common  meta- 
phor in  the  O.T.  (I  Sam.  2:10;  II  Sam.  23:3,  etc.).  It  rep- 
resents strength  like  the  horns  of  bulls.    Cf.  Psa.  132:17. 

70.  Since  the  world  began  {ap>  aidnos).  Better  "from  of 
old"  (Weymouth,  American  Revision). 

73.  The  oath  which  he  sware  {horkon  hon  omosen).  Ante- 
cedent attracted  to  case  of  the  relative.  The  oath  appears 
in  Gen.  22:16-18.  The  oppression  of  the  Gentiles  seems  to 
be  in  the  mind  of  Zacharias.  It  is  not  certain  how  clearly 
he  grasped  the  idea  of  the  spiritual  Israel  as  Paul  saw  it  in 
Galatians  and  Romans. 

74.  Delivered  (rhusthentas) .  First  aorist  passive  participle 
of  an  old  verb,  rhuomai.  The  accusative  case  appears,  where 
the  dative  could  have  been  used  to  agree  with  hemin,  be- 
cause of  the  infinitive  latreuein  (verse  74)  to  serve  (from 
latros,  for  hire).  But  Plato  uses  the  word  of  service  for  God 
so  that  the  bad  sense  does  not  always  exist. 

75.  In  holiness  and  righteousness  (en  hosioteti  kai  dikai- 
osunei).  Not  a  usual  combination  (Eph.  4:24;  Tit.  1:8; 
I  Thess.  2:10).  The  Godward  and  the  manward  aspects  of 
conduct  (Bruce).  Hosios,  the  eternal  principles  of  right, 
dikaios,  the  rule  of  conduct  before  men. 

76.  Yea  and  thou  (kai  su  de).  Direct  address  to  the  child 
with  forecast  of  his  life  (cf.  1:13-17).  Prophet  (prophetes). 
The  word  here  directly  applied  to  the  child.  Jesus  will 
later  call  John  a  prophet  and  more  than  a  prophet.  The 
Lord  (Kuriou).    Jehovah  as  in  1:16. 

77.  Knowledge  of  salvation  (gnosin  soterias).  ''This  is 
the  aim  and  end  of  the  work  of  the  Forerunner"  (Plummer). 

78.  Tender  mercy  (splagchna  eleous).  Bowels  of  mercy 
literally  (I  Peter.  3  :8;  James  3  :ii).  Revised  margin  has  it, 
hearts  of  mercy.  The  day  spring  from  on  high  (anatole  ex 
hupsous).    Literally,  rising  from  on  high,  like  the  rising  sun 


20        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

or  stars  (Isa.  60:19).  The  word  is  used  also  of  a  sprouting 
plant  or  branch  (Jer.  23:5;  Zech.  6:12),  but  that  does  not 
suit  here.    Shall  visit  (epeskepsetai),  correct  text,  cf.  1 :68. 

79.  To  shine  upon  {epiphanai) .  First  aorist  active  infini- 
tive of  epiphainb  (liquid  verb).  An  old  verb  to  give  light, 
to  shine  upon,  like  the  sun  or  stars.  See  also  Acts  27:20; 
Tit.  2:11;  3:4.  The  shadow  of  death  (skidi  thanatou).  See 
Psa.  107:10,  where  darkness  and  shadow  of  death  are  com- 
bined as  here.  Cf.  also  Isa.  9:1.  See  on  Matt.  4:16.  To 
guide  (tou  kateuthunai) .  Genitive  of  the  articular  infinitive 
of  purpose.  The  light  will  enable  them  in  the  dark  to  see 
how  to  walk  in  a  straight  path  that  leads  to  "the  way  of 
peace."  We  are  still  on  that  road,  but  so  many  stumble 
for  lack  of  light,  men  and  nations. 

80.  Grew  (euxane).  Imperfect  active,  was  growing. 
Waxed  strong  {ekrataiouto).  Imperfect  again.  The  child 
kept  growing  in  strength  of  body  and  spirit.  His  shewing 
{anadeixeos  autou).  Here  alone  in  the  N.T.  It  occurs  in 
Plutarch  and  Polybius.  The  verb  appears  in  a  sacrificial 
sense.  The  boy,  as  he  grew,  may  have  gone  up  to  the  pass- 
over  and  may  have  seen  the  boy  Jesus  (Luke  2:42-52),  but 
he  would  not  know  that  he  was  to  be  the  Messiah.  So  these 
two  boys  of  destiny  grew  on  with  the  years,  the  one  in  the 
desert  hills  near  Hebron  after  Zacharias  and  Elisabeth  died, 
the  other,  the  young  Carpenter  up  in  Nazareth,  each  wait- 
ing for  "his  shewing  unto  Israel." 


CHAPTER  II 

1.  Decree  from  Caesar  Augustus  {dogma  para  Kaisaros 
Augoustou) .  Old  and  common  word  from  dokeo,  to  think, 
form  an  opinion.  No  such  decree  was  given  by  Greek  or 
Roman  historians  and  it  was  for  long  assumed  by  many 
scholars  that  Luke  was  in  error.  But  papyri  and  inscrip- 
tions have  confirmed  Luke  on  every  point  in  these  crucial 
verses  2:1-7.  See  W.  M.  Ramsay's  books  {Was  Christ  Born 
at  Bethelehem?  Luke  the  Physician.  The  Bearing  of  Recent 
Discovery  on  the  Trustworthiness  of  the  N.T.).  The  World 
{ten  oikoumenen).  Literally,  the  inhabited  {land,  gen).  In- 
habited by  the  Greeks,  then  by  the  Romans,  then  the  whole 
world  (Roman  world,  the  world  ruled  by  Rome).  So  Acts 
11:28;  17:6.  Should  be  enrolled  {apographesthai).  It  was  a 
census,  not  a  taxing,  though  taxing  generally  followed  and 
was  based  on  the  census.  This  word  is  very  old  and  com- 
mon. It  means  to  write  or  copy  off  for  the  public  records, 
to  register. 

2.  The  first  enrolment  {apographs  prbte).  A  definite  allu- 
sion by  Luke  to  a  series  of  censuses  instituted  by  Augustus, 
the  second  of  which  is  mentioned  by  him  in  Acts  5:37.  This 
second  one  is  described  by  Josephus  and  it  was  supposed  by 
some  that  Luke  confused  the  two.  But  Ramsay  has  shown 
that  a  periodical  fourteen-year  census  in  Egypt  is  given  in 
dated  papyri  back  to  a.d.  20.  The  one  in  Acts  5:37  would 
then  be  a.d.  6.  This  is  in  the  time  of  Augustus.  The  first 
would  then  be  B.C.  8  in  Egypt.  If  it  was  delayed  a  couple 
of  years  in  Palestine  by  Herod  the  Great  for  obvious  rea- 
sons, that  would  make  the  birth  of  Christ  about  B.C.  6  which 
agrees  with  the  other  known  data.  When  Quirinius  {Kure- 
niou).     Genitive  absolute.    Here  again  Luke  has  been  at- 

21 


22        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

tacked  on  the  ground  that  Quirinius  was  only  governor  of 
Syria  once  and  that  was  a.d.  6  as  shown  by  Josephus  {Ant. 
XVIII.  I.  i).  But  Ramsay  has  proven  by  inscriptions  that 
Quirinius  was  twice  in  Syria  and  that  Luke  is  correct  here 
also.  See  summary  of  the  facts  in  my  Luke  the  Historian  in 
the  Light  of  Research,  pp.  118-29. 

3.  Each  to  his  own  city  {hekastos  eis  ten  heautou  polin).  A 
number  of  papyri  in  Egypt  have  the  heading  enrolment  by 
household  {apograph?  katy  oikian).  Here  again  Luke  is 
vindicated.  Each  man  went  to  the  town  where  his  family 
register  was  kept. 

5.  To  enrol  himself  with  Mary  {apograpsasthai  sun  Ma- 
riam).  Direct  middle.  "With  Mary"  is  naturally  taken 
with  the  infinitive  as  here.  If  so,  that  means  that  Mary's 
family  register  was  in  Bethlehem  also  and  that  she  also  be- 
longed to  the  house  of  David.  It  is  possible  to  connect 
"with  Mary"  far  back  with  "went  up"  {anebe)  in  verse  4, 
but  it  is  unnatural  to  do  so.  There  is  no  real  reason  for 
doubting  that  Mary  herself  was  a  descendant  of  David  and 
that  is  the  obvious  way  to  understand  Luke's  genealogy  of 
Jesus  in  Luke  3:23-38).  The  Syriac  Sinaitic  expressly  says 
that  both  Joseph  and  Mary  were  of  the  house  and  city  of 
David.  Betrothed  {emnesteumenen).  Same  verb  as  in  1:27, 
but  here  it  really  means  "married"  or  "espoused"  as  Matt. 
1 :24f.  shows.  Otherwise  she  could  not  have  travelled  with 
Joseph.  Great  with  child  {enkubi).  Only  here  in  N.T. 
Common  Greek  word. 

6.  That  she  should  be  delivered  {tou  tekein  auten).  For  the 
bearing  the  child  as  to  her.  A  neat  use  of  the  articular  infini- 
tive, second  aorist  active,  with  the  accusative  of  general 
reference.    From  tikto,  common  verb. 

7.  Her  firstborn  {ton  prbtotokon).  The  expression  natu- 
rally means  that  she  afterwards  had  other  children  and  we 
read  of  brothers  and  sisters  of  Jesus.  There  is  not  a  par- 
ticle of  evidence  for  the  notion  that  Mary  refused  to  bear 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  23 

other  children  because  she  was  the  mother  of  the  Messiah. 
Wrapped  in  swaddling  clothes  {esparganbsen).  From  spar- 
ganon,  a  swathing  band.  Only  here  and  verse  12  in  the  N.T., 
but  in  Euripides,  Aristotle,  Hippocrates,  Plutarch.  Fre- 
quent in  medical  works.  In  a  manger  {en  phatnei).  In  a 
crib  in  a  stall  whether  in  a  cave  (Justin  Martyr)  or  connected 
with  the  inn  we  do  not  know.  The  cattle  may  have  been 
out  on  the  hills  or  the  donkeys  used  in  travelling  may  have 
been  feeding  in  this  stall  or  another  near.  In  the  inn  {en  tbi 
katalumati) .  A  lodging-house  or  khan,  poor  enough  at  best, 
but  there  was  not  even  room  in  this  public  place  because  of 
the  crowds  for  the  census.  See  the  word  also  in  Luke  22:11 
and  Mark  14:14  with  the  sense  of  guest-room  (cf.  I  Kings 
1:13).  It  is  the  Hellenistic  equivalent  for  katagogeion  and  ap- 
pears also  in  one  papyrus.  See  Ex.  4:24.  There  would  some- 
times be  an  inner  court,  a  range  or  arches,  an  open  gallery 
round  the  four  sides.  On  one  side  of  the  square,  outside 
the  wall,  would  be  stables  for  the  asses  and  camels,  buffa- 
loes and  goats.  Each  man  had  to  carry  his  own  food  and 
bedding. 

8.  Abiding  in  the  field  {agraulountes).  From  agros,  field 
and  aule,  court.  The  shepherds  were  making  the  field  their 
court.  Plutarch  and  Strabo  use  the  word.  Keeping  watch 
{phulassontes  phulakas).  Cognate  accusative.  They  were 
bivouacking  by  night  and  it  was  plainly  mild  weather.  In 
these  very  pastures  David  had  fought  the  lion  and  the  bear 
to  protect  the  sheep  (I  Sam.  17:341.).  The  plural  here 
probably  means  that  they  watched  by  turns.  The  flock 
may  have  been  meant  for  the  temple  sacrifices.  There  is 
no  way  to  tell. 

9.  Stood  by  them  {epeste  autois).  Ingressive  aorist  active 
indicative.  Stepped  by  their  side.  The  same  word  in 
Acts  12:7  of  the  angel  there.  Paul  uses  it  in  the  sense  of 
standing  by  in  Acts  22:20.  It  is  a  common  old  Greek  word, 
ephisiemi.     Were  sore  afraid  {ephobethesan  phobon  megan). 


24        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

First  aorist  passive  indicative  with  cognate  accusative  (the 
passive  sense  gone),  they  feared  a  great  fear. 

10.  /  bring  you  good  tidings  of  great  joy  (euaggelizomai 
humin  char  an  megalen).  Wy  cliff,  "I  evangelize  to  you  a 
great  joy."  The  active  verb  euaggelizo  occurs  only  in  late 
Greek  writers,  LXX,  a  few  papyri  examples,  and  the  N.T. 
The  middle  (deponent)  appears  from  Aristophanes  on. 
Luke  and  Paul  employ  both  substantive  euaggelion  and  verb 
euaggelizo  very  frequently.  It  is  to  Paul's  influence  that  we 
owe  their  frequency  and  popularity  in  the  language  of 
Christendom  (George  Milligan,  The  Epistles  to  the  Thes- 
salonians,  p.  143).  The  other  Gospels  do  not  have  the  verb 
save  Matt.  11:5  and  that  in  a  quotation  (Isa.  61:1). 

11.  Is  born  (etechthe).  First  aorist  passive  indicative  from 
tikto.  Was  born.  Saviour  (sbter).  This  great  word  is  com- 
mon in  Luke  and  Paul  and  seldom  elsewhere  in  the  N.T. 
(Bruce).  The  people  under  Rome's  rule  came  to  call  the  em- 
peror "Saviour"  and  Christians  took  the  word  and  used  it 
of  Christ.  See  inscriptions  (Deissmann,  Light  from  the  An- 
cient East,  p.  344).  Christ  the  Lord  (Christos  Kurios).  This 
combination  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  N.T.  and  it  is  not 
clear  what  it  really  means.  Luke  is  very  fond  of  Kurios 
(Lord)  where  the  other  Gospels  have  Jesus.  It  may  mean 
" Christ  the  Lord,"  "Anointed  Lord,"  "Messiah,  Lord," 
"The  Messiah,  the  Lord,"  "An  Anointed  One,  a  Lord,"  or 
"Lord  Messiah."  It  occurs  once  in  the  LXX  (Lam.  4:20) 
and  is  in  Ps.  of  Sol.  17:36.  Ragg  suggests  that  our  phrase 
"the  Lord  Jesus  Christ"  is  really  involved  in  "A  Saviour 
(Jesus)  which  is  Christ  the  Lord."  See  on  Matt.  1:1  for 
Christ  and  Matt.  21:3  for  Lord. 

13.  Host  (stratias).  A  military  term  for  a  band  of  soldiers 
common  in  the  ancient  Greek.  Bengel  says :  "  Here  the  army 
announces  peace."  Praising  (ainountbn).  Construction  ac- 
cording to  sense  (plural,  though  stratias  is  singular). 

14.  Among  men  in  whom  he  is  well  ^ eased  (en  anthropois 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  25 

eudokias).  The  Textus  Receptus  (Authorized  Version  also 
has  eudokia,  but  the  genitive  eudokias  is  undoubtedly  cor- 
rect, supported  by  the  oldest  and  best  uncials.  (Aleph,  A 
B  D  W).  C  has  a  lacuna  here.  Plummer  justly  notes  how 
in  this  angelic  hymn  Glory  and  Peace  correspond,  in  the 
highest  and  on  earth,  to  God  and  among  men  of  goodwill. 
It  would  be  possible  to  connect  "on  earth"  with  "the  high- 
est" and  also  to  have  a  triple  division.  There  has  been  much 
objection  raised  to  the  genitive  eudokias,  the  correct  text. 
But  it  makes  perfectly  good  sense  and  better  sense.  As  a 
matter  of  fact  real  peace  on  earth  exists  only  among  those 
who  are  the  subjects  of  God's  goodwill,  who  are  character- 
ized by  goodwill  toward  God  and  man.  This  word  eudokia 
we  have  already  had  in  Matt.  1 1 126.  It  does  not  occur  in  the 
ancient  Greek.  The  word  is  confined  to  Jewish  and  Chris- 
tian writings,  though  the  papyri  furnish  instances  of  eudoke- 
sis.    Wycliff  has  it  "to  men  of  goodwill." 

15.  Said  to  one  another  (elaloun  pros  allelous).  Imperfect 
tense,  inchoative,  "began  to  speak,"  each  to  the  other.  It 
suggests  also  repetition,  they  kept  saying,  Now  (de).  A 
particle  of  urgency.  This  thing  (to  rhema  touto).  A  Hebrais- 
tic and  vernacular  use  of  rhema  (something  said)  as  some- 
thing done.  See  on  Luke  1:65.  The  ancient  Greek  used 
logos  in  this  same  way. 

16.  With  haste  (speusantes).  Aorist  active  participle  of 
simultaneous  action.  Found  (aneuran).  Second  aorist  ac- 
tive indicative  of  a  common  Greek  verb  aneurisko,  but  only 
in  Luke  in  the  N.T.  The  compound  ana  suggests  a  search 
before  finding. 

17.  Made  known  (egnorisan).  Toothers  (verse  18)  besides 
Joseph  and  Mary.  The  verb  is  common  from  Aeschylus  on, 
from  the  root  of  ginosko  (to  know).  It  is  both  transitive  and 
intransitive  in  the  N.T. 

19.  Kept  (suneterei).  Imperfect  active.  She  kept  on  keep- 
ing together  (sun-)  all  these  things.    They  were  meat  and 


26        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

drink  to  her.  She  was  not  astonished,  but  rilled  with  holy- 
awe.  The  verb  occurs  from  Aristotle  on.  She  could  not 
forget.  But  did  not  Mary  keep  also  a  Baby  Book?  And  may 
not  Luke  have  seen  it?  Pondering  (sunballousa).  An  old 
Greek  word.  Placing  together  for  comparison.  Mary  would 
go  over  each  detail  in  the  words  of  Gabriel  and  of  the  shep- 
herds and  compare  the  sayings  with  the  facts  so  far  developed 
and  brood  over  it  all  with  a  mother's  high  hopes  and  joy. 

21.  His  name  was  called  Jesus  (kai  eklethe  to  onoma  autou 
Iesous).  The  kai  is  left  untranslated  or  has  the  sense  of 
"then"  in  the  apodosis.  The  naming  was  a  part  of  the  cere- 
mony of  circumcision  as  is  shown  also  in  the  case  of  John  the 
Baptist  (Luke  1:59-66). 

22.  The  days  of  their  purification  (hai  hemerai  tou  katharis- 
mou  autbn).  The  old  manuscripts  have  "their"  {autbn)  in- 
stead of  "her"  (autes)  of  the  later  documents.  But  it  is  not 
clear  whether  "their"  refers  to  Mary  and  Joseph  as  is  true 
of  "they  brought"  or  to  Mary  and  the  child.  The  mother 
was  Levitically  unclean  for  forty  days  after  the  birth  of  a  son 
(Lev.  12:1-8).  To  present  him  to  the  Lord  (parastesai  tbi 
Kuribi).  Every  first-born  son  was  thus  redeemed  by  the 
sacrifice  (Ex.  13:2-12)  as  a  memorial  of  the  sparing  of  the 
Israelitish  families  (Num.  18:1 5f.).  The  cost  was  about  two 
dollars  and  a  half  in  our  money. 

23.  In  the  law  of  the  Lord  {en  nombi  Kuriou).  No  articles, 
but  definite  by  preposition  and  genitive.  Vincent  notes  that 
"law"  occurs  in  this  chapter  five  times.  Paul  (Gal.  4:4)  will 
urge  that  Jesus  "was  made  under  the  law"  as  Luke  here  ex- 
plains. The  law  did  not  require  that  the  child  be  brought  to 
Jerusalem.  The  purification  concerned  the  mother,  the 
presentation  the  son. 

24.  A  pair  of  turtledoves,  or  two  young  pigeons  {Zeugos 
trugonbn  e  duo  nossous  peristerbn).  The  offspring  of  the  poor, 
costing  about  sixteen  cents,  while  a  lamb  would  cost  nearly 
two  dollars.    The  "young  of  pigeons"  is  the  literal  meaning. 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  27 

25.  Devout  (eulabes).  Used  only  by  Luke  (Acts  2:5;  8:2; 
22:12)  in  the  N.T.  Common  in  ancient  Greek  from  Plato  on. 
It  means  taking  hold  well  or  carefully  (eu  and  labein)  and  so 
reverently,  circumspectly.  Looking  for  the  consolation  of 
Israel  (prosdechomenos  paraklesin  tou  Israel).  Old  Greek  verb 
to  admit  to  one's  presence  (Luke  15:2)  and  then  to  expect 
as  here  and  of  Anna  in  verse  38.  Paraklesin  here  means  the 
Messianic  hope  (Isa.  11:10;  40:1),  calling  to  one's  side  for 
cheer.  Upon  him  (<?/>'  auton).  This  is  the  explanation  of  his 
lively  Messianic  hope.  It  was  due  to  the  Holy  Spirit.  Sim- 
eon and  Anna  are  representatives  of  real  piety  in  this  time 
of  spiritual  dearth  and  deadness. 

26.  It  had  been  revealed  unto  him  {en  autbi  kechrematisme- 
non).  Periphrastic  past  perfect  passive  indicative.  Com- 
mon Greek  verb.  First  to  transact  business  from  chrema 
and  that  from  chraomai,  to  use,  make  use  of;  then  to  do  busi- 
ness with  public  officials,  to  give  advice  (judges,  rulers, 
kings),  then  to  get  the  advice  of  the  Delphic  and  other  or- 
acles (Diodorus,  Plutarch).  The  LXX  and  Josephus  use  it 
of  God's  commands.  A  Fayum  papyrus  of  257  B.C.  has  the 
substantive  chremastismos  for  a  divine  response  (cf.  Rom. 
11:4).  See  Deissmann,  Light  From  the  Ancient  East,  p.  153. 
Before  (prin  e).  Classic  Greek  idiom  after  a  negative  to  have 
subjunctive  as  here  (only  example  in  the  N.T.)  or  the  opta- 
tive after  past  tense  as  in  Acts  25:16  (subjunctive  changed 
to  optative  in  indirect  discourse).  Elsewhere  in  the  N.T. 
the  infinitive  follows  prin  as  in  Matt.  1:18. 

27.  When  the  parents  brought  in  the  child  Jesus  (en  toi 
eisagagein  tous  goneis  to  paidion  lesoun).  A  neat  Greek  and 
Hebrew  idiom  difficult  to  render  into  English,  very  common 
in  the  LXX;  In  the  bringing  the  Child  Jesus  as  to  the  parents. 
The  articular  infinitive  and  two  accusatives  (one  the  object, 
the  other  accusative  of  general  reference).  After  the  custom 
of  the  law  (kata  to  eithismenon  tou  nomou).  Here  the  perfect 
passive  participle  eithismenon,  neuter  singular  from  ethizo 


28        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

(common  Greek  verb,  to  accustom)  is  used  as  a  virtual  sub- 
stantive like  to  ethos  in  1 :8.  Luke  alone  in  the  N.T.  uses 
either  word  save  ethos  in  John  19:40,  though  eidtha  from  etho, 
occurs  also  in  Matt.  27:15;  Mark  10:1. 

28.  Then  he  {kai  autos).  Kai  as  in  2:21.  Autos,  emphatic 
subject,  he  after  the  parents.  Arms  {agkalas).  Old  Greek 
word,  here  only  in  the  N.T.  It  means  the  curve  or  inner 
angle  of  the  arm. 

29.  Now  lettest  thou  {nun  apolueis).  Present  active  indic- 
ative, Thou  art  letting.  The  Nunc  Dimittis,  adoration  and 
praise.  It  is  full  of  rapture  and  vivid  intensity  (Plummer) 
like  the  best  of  the  Psalms.  The  verb  apoluo  was  common 
for  the  manumission  of  slaves  and  Simeon  here  calls  himself 
"thy  slave  {doulon  sou),  Lord  {Despota,  our  despot)."  See 
II  Pet.  2:1. 

31.  Of  all  the  peoples  {panton  ton  laon).  Not  merely  Jews. 
Another  illustration  of  the  universality  of  Luke's  Gospel  seen 
already  in  1  :jo  in  the  hymn  of  Zacharias.  The  second 
strophe  of  the  song  according  to  Plummer  showing  what  the 
Messiah  will  be  to  the  world  after  having  shown  what  the 
Messiah  is  to  Simeon. 

32.  Revelation  to  the  Gentiles  (apokalupsin  ethnon).  Ob- 
jective genitive.  The  Messiah  is  to  be  light  {phos)  for  the 
Gentiles  in  darkness  (1:70)  and  glory  {doxa)  for  Israel  (cf. 
Rom.  9:1-5;  Isa.  49:6).  The  word  ethnos  originally  meant 
just  a  crowd  or  company,  then  a  race  or  nation,  then  the  na- 
tions other  than  Israel  (the  people,  ho  laos)  or  the  people  of 
God.  The  word  Gentile  is  Latin  from  gens,  a  tribe  or  nation. 
But  the  world-wide  mission  of  the  Messiah  comes  out  clearly 
in  these  early  chapters  in  Luke. 

33.  His  father  and  his  mother  {ho  pater  autou  kai  he  meter). 
Luke  had  already  used  "parents"  in  2:27.  He  by  no  means 
intends  to  deny  the  Virgin  Birth  of  Jesus  so  plainly  stated  in 
1 :34~ 38.  He  merely  employs  here  the  language  of  ordinary 
custom.    The  late  MSS.  wrongly  read  "and  Joseph"  instead 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  29 

of  "his  father."  Were  marvelling  (en  thaumazontes).  The 
masculine  gender  includes  the  feminine  when  both  are  re- 
ferred to.  But  en  is  singular,  not  esan,  the  normal  imperfect 
plural  in  this  periphrastic  imperfect.  This  is  due  to  the  wide 
space  between  copula  and  participle.  The  copula  en  agrees 
in  number  with  ho  pater  while  the  participle  coming  last 
agrees  with  both  ho  pater  kai  he  meter  (cf.  Matt.  17:3 ;  22:40). 
If  one  wonders  why  they  marvelled  at  Simeon's  words  after 
what  they  had  heard  from  Gabriel,  Elisabeth,  and  the  Shep- 
herds, he  should  bear  in  mind  that  every  parent  is  astonished 
and  pleased  at  the  fine  things  others  see  in  the  child.  It  is  a 
mark  of  unusual  insight  for  others  to  see  so  much  that  is 
obvious  to  the  parent.  Simeon's  prophecy  had  gone  beyond 
the  angel's  outline  and  it  was  surprising  that  he  should  know 
anything  about  the  child's  destiny. 

34.  Is  set  for  the  falling  and  the  rising  up  of  many  in  Israel 
(Keitai  eis  pibsin  kai  anastasin  pollon  en  tbi  Israel) .  Present 
indicative  of  the  old  defective  verb  appearing  only  in  present 
and  imperfect  in  the  N.T.  Sometimes  it  is  used  as  the  passive 
of  tithemi  as  here.  The  falling  of  some  and  the  rising  up  of 
others  is  what  is  meant.  He  will  be  a  stumbling-block  to  some 
(Isa.  8:14;  Matt.  21:42,  44;  Rom.  9:33;  I  Pet.  2:i6f.)  who  love 
darkness  rather  than  light  (John  3  :i9),  he  will  be  the  cause  of 
rising  for  others  (Rom.  6:4,  9;  Eph.  2:6).  "Judas  despairs, 
Peter  repents:  one  robber  blasphemes,  the  other  confesses" 
(Plummer).  Jesus  is  the  magnet  of  the  ages.  He  draws 
some,  he  repels  others.  This  is  true  of  all  epoch-making  men 
to  some  extent.  Spoken  against  (antilegomenon) .  Present 
passive  participle,  continuous  action.  It  is  going  on  today. 
Nietzsche  regarded  Jesus  Christ  as  the  curse  of  the  race  be- 
cause he  spared  the  weak. 

35.  A  sword  (rhomphaia).  A  large  sword,  properly  a  long 
Thracian  javelin.  It  occurs  in  the  LXX  of  Goliath's  sword 
(I  Sam.  17:51).  How  little  Mary  understood  the  meaning 
of  Simeon's  words  that  seemed  so  out  of  place  in  the  midst 


30        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

of  the  glorious  things  already  spoken,  a  sharp  thorn  in  their 
roses,  a  veritable  bitter-sweet.  But  one  day  Mary  will  stand 
by  the  Cross  of  Christ  with  this  Thracian  javelin  clean 
through  her  soul,  stabat  Mater  Dolorosa  (John  19:25).  It  is 
only  a  parenthesis  here,  and  a  passing  cloud  perhaps  passed 
over  Mary's  heart  already  puzzled  with  rapture  and  ecstasy. 
May  be  revealed  (apokaluphthosin) .  Unveiled.  First  aorist 
passive  subjunctive  after  hopos  an  and  expresses  God's  pur- 
pose in  the  mission  of  the  Messiah.  He  is  to  test  men's 
thoughts  (dialogismoi)  and  purposes.  They  will  be  com- 
pelled to  take  a  stand  for  Christ  or  against  him.  That  is  true 
today. 

36.  One  Anna  a  prophetess  (Hanna  prophetis).  The  word 
prophetis  occurs  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Rev.  2:20.  In 
old  Greek  writers  it  means  a  woman  who  interprets  oracles. 
The  long  parenthesis  into  verse  37  tells  of  her  great  age. 
Montefiore  makes  it  106  as  she  was  15  when  married,  mar- 
ried 7  years,  a  widow  84. 

37.  Which  departed  not  (he  ouk  aphistato).  Imperfect  in- 
dicative middle.  She  kept  on  not  leaving.  The  Spirit  kept 
her  in  the  temple  as  he  led  Simon  to  the  temple  (Plummer). 
The  case  of  "the  temple"  (tou  hierou)  is  ablative.  Night 
and  day  (nukta  kai  hemeran).  Accusative  of  duration  of 
time,  all  night  and  all  day.  She  never  missed  a  service  in 
the  temple. 

38.  Coming  up  (epistasa).  Second  aorist  active  participle. 
The  word  often  has  the  notion  of  coming  suddenly  or  bursting 
in  as  of  Martha  in  Luke  10:40.  But  here  it  probably  means 
coming  up  and  standing  by  and  so  hearing  Simeon's  wonder- 
ful words  so  that  her  words  form  a  kind  of  footnote  to  his. 
Gave  thanks  (anthomologeito).  Imperfect  middle  of  a  verb 
(anthomologeo)  in  common  use  in  Greek  writers  and  in  the 
LXX  though  here  alone  in  the  N.T.  It  had  the  idea  of  a 
mutual  agreement  or  of  saying  something  before  one  (anti). 
Anna  was  evidently  deeply  moved  and  repeated  her  thanks- 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  31 

giving  and  kept  speaking  (elalei,  imperfect  again)  "to  all 
them  that  were  looking  for  (prosdechomenois,  as  in  1:35  of 
Simeon)  the  redemption  of  Jerusalem  (lutrdsin  Ierousalem)." 
There  was  evidently  a  group  of  such  spirits  that  gathered 
in  the  temple  either  men  around  her  and  Simeon  or  whom 
she  met  from  time  to  time.  There  was  thus  a  nucleus  of  old 
saints  in  Jerusalem  prepared  for  the  coming  of  the  Messiah 
when  he  at  last  appears  as  the  Messiah  in  Jerusalem  (John 
2  and  3).  These  probably  all  passed  away.  But  they  had  a 
happy  hour  of  hope  and  joy.  The  late  MSS.  have  "in  Jeru- 
salem" but  "of  Jerusalem"  is  correct.  What  they  meant  by 
the  "redemption  of  Jerusalem"  is  not  clear,  whether  political 
or  spiritual  or  both.  Simeon  was  looking  for  the  consolation 
of  Israel  (2:25)  and  Zacharias  (1:68)  sang  of  redemption  for 
Israel  (Isa.  40:2). 

39.  To  their  own  city  Nazareth  (eis  polin  heautbn  Nazaret). 
See  on  Matt.  2 123  about  Nazareth.  Luke  tells  nothing  of  the 
flight  to  Egypt  and  the  reason  for  the  return  to  Nazareth 
instead  of  Bethlehem,  the  place  of  the  birth  of  Jesus  as  told 
in  Matt.  2:13-23.  But  then  neither  Gospel  gives  all  the  de- 
tails of  this  period.  Luke  has  also  nothing  about  the  visit 
of  the  wise  men  (Matt.  2:1-12)  as  Matthew  tells  nothing  of 
the  shepherds  and  of  Simeon  and  Anna  (Luke  2 :8-28) .  The 
two  Gospels  supplement  each  other. 

40.  The  child  grew  (euxane).  Imperfect  indicative  of  a 
very  ancient  verb  (auxano).  This  child  grew  and  waxed 
strong  (ekrataiouto,  imperfect  middle),  a  hearty  vigorous  little 
boy  (paidion).  Both  verbs  Luke  used  in  1 :8o  of  the  growth 
of  John  the  Baptist  as  a  child.  Then  he  used  also  pneumati, 
in  spirit.  Here  in  addition  to  the  bodily  development  Luke 
has  "filled  with  wisdom"  {pleroumenon  sophidi).  Present 
passive  participle,  showing  that  the  process  of  filling  with 
wisdom  kept  pace  with  the  bodily  growth.  If  it  were  only 
always  true  with  others !  We  need  not  be  troubled  over  this 
growth  in  wisdom  on  the  part  of  Jesus  any  more  than  over 


32        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

his  bodily  growth.  "The  intellectual,  moral,  and  spiritual 
growth  of  the  Child,  like  the  physical,  was  real.  His  was  a 
perfect  humanity  developing  perfectly,  unimpeded  by  hered- 
itary or  acquired  defects.  It  was  the  first  instance  of  such  a 
growth  in  history.  For  the  first  time  a  human  infant  was 
realizing  the  ideal  of  humanity"  (Plummer).  The  grace  of 
God  {charts  theou).     In  full  measure. 

41.  Every  year  (kat1  etos).  This  idiom  only  here  in  the 
N.T.,  a  common  Greek  construction.  Every  male  was  orig- 
inally expected  to  appear  at  the  passover,  pentecost,  and 
tabernacles  (Ex.  23:14-17;  34:23;  Deut.  16:16).  But  the 
Dispersion  rendered  that  impossible.  But  pious  Palestinian 
Jews  made  a  point  of  going  at  least  to  the  passover.  Mary 
went  with  Joseph  as  a  pious  habit,  though  not  required  by 
law  to  go. 

42.  Twelve  years  old  (etbn  dbdeka).  Predicate  genitive. 
Luke  does  not  say  that  Jesus  had  not  been  to  Jerusalem  be- 
fore, but  at  twelve  a  Jewish  boy  became  a  "son  of  the  law" 
and  began  to  observe  the  ordinances,  putting  on  the  phy- 
lacteries as  a  reminder.  They  went  up  {anabainontbn  autbn). 
Genitive  absolute  with  present  active  participle,  a  loose  con- 
struction here,  for  the  incident  narrated  took  place  after  they 
had  gone  up,  not  while  they  were  gong  up.  "On  their  usual 
going  up"  (Plummer). 

43.  When  they  had  fulfilled  the  days  (teleibsantbn  tas  he- 
meras).  Genitive  absolute  again,  but  aorist  participle  (effec- 
tive aorist).  "The  days "  may  mean  the  full  seven  days  (Ex. 
I2:i5f.;  Lev.  23:6-8;  Deut.  16:3),  or  the  two  chief  days  after 
which  many  pilgrims  left  for  home.  As  they  were  returning  (en 
tbi  hupostrephein  antous).  The  articular  infinitive  with  en, 
a  construction  that  Luke  often  uses  (1:21;  2:27).  The  boy, 
Jesus  (Iesous  ho  pais).  More  exactly,  "Jesus  the  boy."  In 
verse  40  it  was  "the  child  "  (to  paidion),  here  it  is  "the  boy" 
(ho  pais,  no  longer  the  diminutive  form).  It  was  not  dis- 
obedience on  the  part  of  "the  boy"  that  made  him  remain 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  33 

behind,  but  intense  interest  in  the  services  of  the  temple; 
"involuntary  preoccupation"  (Bruce)  held  him  fast. 

44.  In  the  company  {en  tei  sunodiai).  The  caravan  going 
together  on  the  road  or  way  {sun,  hodos),  a  journey  in  com- 
pany, then  by  metonymy  the  company  itself.  A  common 
Greek  word  (Plutarch,  Strabo,  etc.).  The  women  usually 
went  ahead  and  the  men  followed.  Joseph  may  have  thought 
Jesus  was  with  Mary  and  Mary  that  he  was  with  Joseph. 
"The  Nazareth  caravan  was  so  long  that  it  took  a  whole  day 
to  look  through  it"  (Plummer).  They  sought  for  him  {aneze- 
toun  auton).  Imperfect  active.  Common  Greek  verb.  Note 
force  of  ana.  They  searched  up  and  down,  back  and  forth,  a 
thorough  search  and  prolonged,  but  in  vain. 

45.  Seeking  for  him  {anazetountes  auton).  Present  par- 
ticiple of  the  same  verb.  This  was  all  that  was  worth  while 
now,  finding  the  lost  boy. 

46.  After  three  days  {meta  hemeras  treis).  One  day  out, 
one  day  back,  and  on  the  third  day  finding  him.  In  the 
temple  {en  toi  hieroi).  Probably  on  the  terrace  where  mem- 
bers of  the  Sanhedrin  gave  public  instruction  on  sabbaths 
and  feast-days,  so  probably  while  the  feast  was  still  going  on. 
The  rabbis  probably  sat  on  benches  in  a  circle.  The  listen- 
ers on  the  ground,  among  whom  was  Jesus  the  boy  in  a  rap- 
ture of  interest.  Both  hearing  them  and  asking  them  questions 
{kai  akouonta  auton  kai  eperotonta  autous).  Paul  sat  at  the 
feet  of  Gamaliel  (Acts  22:3).  Picture  this  eager  boy  alive 
with  interest.  It  was  his  one  opportunity  in  a  theological 
school  outside  of  the  synagogue  to  hear  the  great  rabbis  ex- 
pound the  problems  of  life.  This  was  the  most  unusual  of 
all  children,  to  be  sure,  in  intellectual  grasp  and  power. 
But  it  is  a  mistake  to  think  that  children  of  twelve  do  not 
think  profoundly  concerning  the  issues  of  life.  What  father 
or  mother  has  ever  been  able  to  answer  a  child's  questions? 

47.  Were  amazed  {existanto).  Imperfect  indicative  middle, 
descrirjtive  of  their  continued  and  repeated  astonishment. 


34        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Common  verb  existemi  meaning  that  they  stood  out  of 
themselves  as  if  their  eyes  were  bulging  out.  The  boy  had 
a  holy  thirst  for  knowledge  (Plummer),  and  he  used  a  boy's 
way  of  learning.  At  his  understanding  (epi  tei  sunesei). 
Based  on  (epi),  the  grasp  and  comprehension  from  suniemi, 
comparing  and  combining  things.  Cf.  Mark.  12:33.  His 
answers  (tais  apokrisesin  autou).  It  is  not  difficult  to  ask 
hard  questions,  but  this  boy  had  astounding  answers  to 
their  questions,  revealing  his  amazing  intellectual  and 
spiritual  growth. 

48.  They  were  astonished  (exeplagesan).  Second  aorist 
passive  indicative  of  an  old  Greek  word  (ekplesso),  to  strike 
out,  drive  out  by  a  blow.  Joseph  and  Mary  "were  struck 
out"  by  what  they  saw  and  heard.  Even  they  had  not 
fully  realized  the  power  in  this  wonderful  boy.  Parents 
often  fail  to  perceive  the  wealth  of  nature  in  their  children. 

49.  Son  (teknon).  Child,  literally.  It  was  natural  for 
Mary  to  be  the  first  to  speak.  Why  (Ti).  The  mother's 
reproach  of  the  boy  is  followed  by  a  confession  of  negligence 
on  her  part  and  of  Joseph  (sorrowing,  odunomenoi).  Thy 
father  (ho  pater  sou).  No  contradiction  in  this.  Alford  says: 
"Up  to  this  time  Joseph  had  been  so  called  by  the  holy 
child  himself,  but  from  this  time  never."  Sought  (ezetoumen) . 
Imperfect  tense  describing  the  long  drawn  out  search  for 
three  days.  How  is  it  that  (Ti  hoti).  The  first  words  of 
Jesus  preserved  to  us.  This  crisp  Greek  idiom  without 
copula  expresses  the  boy's  amazement  that  his  parents 
should  not  know  that  there  was  only  one  possible  place  in 
Jerusalem  for  him.  /  must  be  (dei  einai  me).  Messianic 
consciousness  of  the  necessity  laid  on  him.  Jesus  often  uses 
dei  (must)  about  his  work.  Of  all  the  golden  dreams  of  any 
boy  of  twelve  here  is  the  greatest.  In  my  Father's  house 
(en  tois  ton  patros  mou).  Not  "about  my  Father's  business," 
but  "in  my  Father's  house"  (cf.  Gen.  41:51).  Common 
Greek  idiom.    And  note  "my,"  not  "our."    When  the  boy 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  35 

first  became  conscious  of  his  peculiar  relation  to  the  Father 
in  heaven  we  do  not  know.  But  he  has  it  now  at  twelve 
and  it  will  grow  within  him  through  the  years  ahead  in 
Nazareth. 

50.  They  understood  not  (ou  sunekan).  First  aorist  active 
indicative  (one  of  the  k  aorists).  Even  Mary  with  all  her 
previous  preparation  and  brooding  was  not  equal  to  the 
dawning  of  the  Messianic  consciousness  in  her  boy.  "My 
Father  is  God,"  Jesus  had  virtually  said,  "and  I  must 
be  in  His  house."  Bruce  observes  that  a  new  era  has  come 
when  Jesus  calls  God  "Father,"  not  Despotes.  "Even 
we  do  not  yet  fully  understand"  (Bruce)  what  Jesus  the 
boy  here  said. 

51.  He  was  subject  unto  them  {en  hupotassomenos  autois). 
Periphrastic  imperfect  passive.  He  continued  subject  unto 
them,  this  wondrous  boy  who  really  knew  more  than  parents 
and  rabbis,  this  gentle,  obedient,  affectionate  boy.  The 
next  eighteen  years  at  Nazareth  (Luke  3  :23)  he  remained 
growing  into  manhood  and  becoming  the  carpenter  of 
Nazareth  (Mark  6:3)  in  succession  to  Joseph  (Matt.  13:55) 
who  is  mentioned  here  for  the  last  time.  Who  can  tell  the 
wistful  days  when  Jesus  waited  at  Nazareth  for  the  Father 
to  call  him  to  his  Messianic  task?  Kept  {dieter  ei).  Imperfect 
active.  Ancient  Greek  word  {diatereo),  but  only  here  and 
Acts  15:29  in  the  N.T.  though  in  Gen.  37:11.  She  kept 
thoroughly  {did)  all  these  recent  sayings  (or  things,  rhemata). 
In  2:19  suneterei  is  the  word  used  of  Mary  after  the  shepherds 
left.  These  she  kept  pondering  and  comparing  all  the 
things.  Surely  she  has  a  full  heart  now.  Could  she  foresee 
how  destiny  would  take  Jesus  out  beyond  her  mother's 
reach  ? 

52.  Advanced  in  wisdom  and  stature  {proekopten  tei  sophidi 
kai  helikiai).  Imperfect  active,  he  kept  cutting  his  way 
forward  as  through  a  forest  or  jungle  as  pioneers  did.  He 
kept  growing  in  stature  {helikia  may  mean  age,  as  in  12:25, 


36        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

but  stature  here)  and  in  wisdom  (more  than  mere  knowl- 
edge). His  physical,  intellectual,  moral,  spiritual  develop- 
ment was  perfect.  "At  each  stage  he  was  perfect  for  that 
stage"  (Plummer).  In  favour  (chariti).  Or  grace.  This  is 
ideal  manhood  to  have  the  favour  of  God  and  men. 


CHAPTER  III 

1.  Now  in  the  fifteenth  year  {en  etei  de  pentekaidekatbi). 
Tiberius  Caesar  was  ruler  in  the  provinces  two  years  before 
Augustus  Caesar  died.  Luke  makes  a  six-fold  attempt  here 
to  indicate  the  time  when  John  the  Baptist  began  his  minis- 
try. John  revived  the  function  of  the  prophet  (Ecce  Homo, 
p.  2)  and  it  was  a  momentous  event  after  centuries  of  pro- 
phetic silence.  Luke  begins  with  the  Roman  Emperor,  then 
mentions  Pontius  Pilate  Procurator  of  Judea,  Herod  Antipas, 
Tetrarch  of  Galilee  (and  Perea),  Philip,  Tetrarch  of  Iturea 
and  Trachonitis,  Lysanias,  Tetrarch  of  Abilene  (all  with  the 
genitive  absolute  construction)  and  concludes  with  the 
high-priesthood  of  Annas  and  Caiaphas  (son-in-law  and  suc- 
cessor of  Annas).  The  ancients  did  not  have  our  modern 
system  of  chronology,  the  names  of  rulers  as  here  being  the 
common  way.  Objection  has  been  made  to  the  mention  of 
Lysanias  here  because  Josephus  (Ant.  XXVII.  1)  tells 
of  a  Lysanias  who  was  King  of  Abila  up  to  b.c.  36  as  the  one 
referred  to  by  Luke  with  the  wrong  date.  But  an  inscription 
has  been  found  on  the  site  of  Abilene  with  mention  of 
"Lysanias  the  tetrarch"  and  at  the  time  to  which  Luke 
refers  (see  my  Luke  the  Historian  in  the  Light  of  Research, 
pp.  1671.).    So  Luke  is  vindicated  again  by  the  rocks. 

2.  The  Word  of  God  came  unto  John  (egeneto  rhema  theou 
epi  Ioanen).  The  great  epoch  marked  by  egeneto  rather 
than  en.  Rhema  theou  is  some  particular  utterance  of  God 
(Plummer),  common  in  LXX,  here  alone  in  the  N.T.  Then 
John  is  introduced  as  the  son  of  Zacharias  according  to 
Chapter  I.  Matthew  describes  him  as  the  Baptist,  Mark 
as  the  Baptizer.  No  other  Gospel  mentions  Zacharias. 
Mark  begins  his  Gospel  here,  but  Matthew  and  Luke  have 

37 


38        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

two  Infancy  Chapters  before.  Luke  alone  tells  of  the 
coming  of  the  word  to  John.  All  three  Synoptics  locate 
him  "in  the  wilderness"  (en  tei  eremoi)  as  here,  Mark  1:4; 
Matt.  3:1  (adding  "of  Judea"). 

3.  All  the  region  round  about  Jordan  (pas an  perichoron 
tou  Iordanou).  The  wilderness  was  John's  abode  (1:80)  so 
that  he  began  preaching  where  he  was.  It  was  the  plain 
(Gen.  13  :iof.)  or  valley  of  the  Jordan,  El  Ghor,  as  far  north 
as  Succoth  (II  Chron.  4:17).  Sometimes  he  was  on  the 
eastern  bank  of  the  Jordan  (John  10:40),  though  usually 
on  the  west  side.  His  baptizing  kept  him  near  the  river. 
The  baptism  of  repentance  unto  remission  of  sins  (baptisma 
metanoias  eis  aphesin  hamartion).  The  same  phrase  as  in 
Mark  1 14,  which  see  for  discussion  of  these  important  words. 
The  word  remission  (aphesis)  "occurs  in  Luke  more  fre- 
quently than  in  all  the  other  New  Testament  writers  com- 
bined" (Vincent).  In  medical  writers  it  is  used  for  the  re- 
laxing of  disease. 

4.  As  it  is  written  (hos  gegraptai).  The  regular  formula  for 
quotation,  perfect  passive  indicative  of  grapho.  Isaiah  the 
prophet  (Esaiou  tou  prophetou).  The  same  phrase  in  Mark 
1:2  (correct  text)  and  Matt.  3:3.  Mark,  as  we  have  seen, 
adds  a  quotation  from  Mai.  3:1  and  Luke  gives  verses  4 
and  5  of  Isa.  40  not  in  Matthew  or  Mark  (Luke  3:5  and 
6).    See  Matt.  3:3  and  Mark  1:3  for  discussion  of  Luke  4:4. 

5.  Valley  (pharagx).  Here  only  in  the  N.T.,  though  in  the 
LXX  and  ancient  Greek.  It  is  a  ravine  or  valley  hedged  in 
by  precipices.  Shall  be  filled  (plerothesetai).  Future  passive 
indicative  of  pleroo.  In  1845  when  the  Sultan  visited  Brusa 
the  inhabitants  were  called  out  to  clear  the  roads  of  rocks 
and  to  fill  up  the  hollows.  Oriental  monarchs  often  did  this 
very  thing.  A  royal  courier  would  go  ahead  to  issue  the 
call.  So  the  Messiah  sends  his  herald  (John)  before  him  to 
prepare  the  way  for  him.  Isaiah  described  the  preparation 
for  the  Lord's  triumphal  march  and  John  used  it  with  great 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  39 

force.  Hill  (bounos).  Called  a  Cyrenaic  word  by  Herodotus, 
but  iater  Greek  writers  use  it  as  does  the  LXX.  Brought 
low  (tapeinbthesetai) .  Future  passive  indicative  of  tapeinob. 
Literal  meaning  here  of  a  verb  common  in  the  metaphorical 
sense.  Crooked  (skolia).  Common  word,  curved,  opposite  of 
orthos  or  euthus,  straight. 

6.  All  flesh  {pas a  sarx).  Used  in  the  N.T.  of  the  human 
race  alone,  though  in  the  LXX  brutes  are  included.  The 
salvation  of  God  (to  soterion  tou  theou).  The  saving  act  of 
God.  This  phrase  aptly  describes  Luke's  Gospel  which  has 
in  mind  the  message  of  Christ  for  all  men.  It  is  the  universal 
Gospel. 

7.  To  the  multitude  that  went  out  (tots  exporeuomenois  och- 
lois).  Plural,  Multitudes.  The  present  participle  also  notes 
the  repetition  of  the  crowds  as  does  elegen  (imperfect),  he 
used  to  say.  Matt.  3  :j  to  10  singles  out  the  message  of 
John  to  the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees,  which  see  for  discussion 
of  details.  Luke  gives  a  summary  of  his  preaching  to  the 
crowds  with  special  replies  to  these  inquiries:  the  multitudes, 
10  and  11,  the  publicans  12  and  13,  the  soldiers  14.  To  be 
baptized  of  him  (baptisthenai  hup'  autou).  This  is  the  purpose 
of  their  coming.  Matt.  3:7  has  simply  "to  his  baptism." 
John's  metaphors  are  from  the  wilderness  (vipers,  fruits,  axe, 
slave  boy  loosing  sandals,  fire,  fan,  thrashing-floor,  garner, 
chaff,  stones).  Who  warned  you?  (tis  hepedeixen  humin;). 
The  verb  is  like  our  "suggest"  by  proof  to  eye,  ear,  or  brain 
(Luke  6:47;  12:5;  Acts  9:16;  20:35;  Matt.  3:7).  Nowhere 
else  in  the  N.T.  though  common  ancient  word  (hupodeik- 
numi,  show  under,  point  out,  give  a  tip  or  private  hint). 

10.  Asked  (eperbtbn).  Imperfect  tense,  repeatedly  asked. 
What  then  must  we  do?(ti  oun  poiesbmen;).  Deliberative 
aorist  subjunctive.  More  exactly,  What  then  are  we  to  do. 
What  then  shall  we  do?  Same  construction  in  verses  12  and 
14.  The  oun  refers  to  the  severe  things  already  said  by 
John  (Luke  3  7"9)- 


40        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

11.  Coats  (chitonas).  The  inner  and  less  necessary  under- 
garment. The  outer  indispensable  himation  is  not  mentioned. 
Note  the  specific  and  different  message  to  each  class.  John 
puts  his  finger  on  the  weaknesses  of  the  people  right  before 
him. 

12.  Also  publicans  (kai  telonai).  We  have  had  the  word 
already  in  Matthew  (5:46;  9:10;  11:19;  18:17;  2l:3lf.)  and 
Mark  (1 1  :i 5f.)«  It  is  sometimes  coupled  with  harlots  and 
other  sinners,  the  outcasts  of  society.  The  word  is  made  up 
from  telos,  tax,  and  oneomai,  to  buy,  and  is  an  old  one.  The 
renter  or  collector  of  taxes  was  not  popular  anywhere,  but 
least  of  all  when  a  Jew  collected  taxes  for  the  Romans  and 
did  it  by  terrible  graft  and  extortions.  Extort  (prassete). 
The  verb  means  only  to  do  or  practice,  but  early  the  tax- 
collectors  learned  how  to  "do"  the  public  as  regular  "blood- 
suckers."   Lucian  links  them  with  crows  and  sycophants. 

14.  Soldiers  also  (kai  strateuomenoi).  Men  on  service, 
militantes  rather  than  milites  (Plummer).  So  Paul  in  II 
Tim.  2:4.  An  old  word  like  stratiotes,  soldier.  Some  of  these 
soldiers  acted  as  police  to  help  the  publicans.  But  they 
were  often  rough  and  cruel.  Do  violence  to  no  man  (medena 
diaseisete).  Here  only  in  the  N.T.,  but  in  the  LXX  and 
common  in  ancient  Greek.  It  means  to  shake  (seismic  dis- 
turbance, earthquake)  thoroughly  (dia)  and  so  thoroughly 
to  terrify,  to  extort  money  or  property  by  intimidating  (3 
Mace.  7:21).  The  Latin  employs  concutere,  so.  It  was  a 
process  of  blackmail  to  which  Socrates  refers  (Xenophon, 
Memorabilia,  ii.  9,  1).  This  was  a  constant  temptation  to 
soldiers.  Might  does  not  make  right  with  Jesus.  Neither 
exact  anything  wrongfully  (mede  sukophantesete).  In  Athens 
those  whose  business  it  was  to  inform  against  any  one  whom 
they  might  find  exporting  figs  out  of  Attica  were  called  fig- 
showers  or  sycophants  (sukophantai) .  From  sukon,  fig,  and 
phaino,  show.  Some  modern  scholars  reject  this  explana- 
tion since  no  actual  examples  of  the  word  meaning  merely 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  41 

a  fig-shower  have  been  found.  But  without  this  view  it  is 
all  conjectural.  From  the  time  of  Aristophanes  on  it  was 
used  for  any  malignant  informer  or  calumniator.  These 
soldiers  were  tempted  to  obtain  money  by  informing  against 
the  rich,  blackmail  again.  So  the  word  comes  to  mean  to 
accuse  falsely.  The  sycophants  came  to  be  a  regular  class 
of  informers  or  slanderers  in  Athens.  Socrates  is  quoted  by 
Xenophon  as  actually  advising  Crito  to  employ  one  in  self- 
defence,  like  the  modern  way  of  using  one  gunman  against 
another.  Demosthenes  pictures  a  sycophant  as  one  who 
"glides  about  the  market  like  a  scorpion,  with  his  venomous 
sting  all  ready,  spying  out  whom  he  may  surprise  with  mis-> 
fortune  and  ruin  and  from  whom  he  can  most  easily  extort 
money,  by  threatening  him  with  an  action  dangerous  in  its 
consequences"  (quoted  by  Vincent).  The  word  occurs  only 
in  Luke  in  the  N.T.,  here  and  in  Luke  19:8  in  the  confession 
of  Zaccheus.  It  occurs  in  the  LXX  and  often  in  the  old 
Greek.  Be  content  with  your  wages  (arkeisthe  tois  opsoniois 
humon).  Discontent  with  wages  was  a  complaint  of  mercen- 
ary soldiers.  This  word  for  wages  was  originally  anything 
cooked  {opson,  cooked  food),  and  bought  (from  oneomai,  to 
buy).  Hence,  "rations,"  "pay,"  wages.  Opsarion,  diminu- 
tive of  opson,  was  anything  eaten  with  bread  like  broiled  fish. 
So  opsonion  comes  to  mean  whatever  is  bought  to  be  eaten 
with  bread  and  then  a  soldier's  pay  or  allowance  (Polybius, 
and  other  late  Greek  writers)  as  in  I  Cor.  9:7.  Paul  uses 
the  singular  of  a  preacher's  pay  (II  Cor.  11 :8)  and  the  plural 
of  the  wages  of  sin  (Rom.  6:23)  =  death  (death  is  the  diet 
of  sin). 

15.  Were  in  expectation  (prosdokontos) .  Genitive  absolute 
of  this  striking  verb  already  seen  in  1 :2I.  Reasoned  (dialbgi- 
zomenon).  Genitive  absolute  again.  John's  preaching  about 
the  Messiah  and  the  kingdom  of  God  stirred  the  people 
deeply  and  set  them  to  wondering.  Whether  haply  he  were 
the  Christ  (mepote  autos  eie  ho  Christos).    Optative  eie  in  in- 


42        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

direct  question  changed  from  the  indicative  in  the  direct 
(Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  103 1).  John  wrought  no  miracles 
and  was  not  in  David's  line  and  yet  he  moved  people  so 
mightily  that  they  began  to  suspect  that  he  himself  (autos) 
was  the  Messiah.  The  Sanhedrin  will  one  day  send  a  formal 
committee  to  ask  him  this  direct  question  (John  1  :ig) . 

16.  He  that  is  mightier  than  I  {ho  ischuroteros  mou).  Like 
Mark  1:7,  "the  one  mightier  than  I."  Ablative  case  {mou) 
of  comparison.  John  would  not  turn  aside  for  the  flattery 
of  the  crowd.  He  was  able  to  take  his  own  measure  in  com- 
parison with  the  Messiah  and  was  loyal  to  him  (see  my  John 
the  Loyal).  Compare  Luke  3:16  with  Mark  i:yi.  and  Matt. 
3:1  if.  for  discussion  of  details.  Luke  has  "fire"  here  after 
"baptize  with  the  Holy  Ghost"  as  Matt.  3:11,  which  see. 
This  bold  Messianic  picture  in  the  Synoptic  Gospels  shows 
that  John  saw  the  Messiah's  coming  as  a  judgment  upon 
the  world  like  fire  and  the  fan  of  the  thrashing-floor,  and 
with  unquenchable  fire  for  the  chaff  (Luke  3:i7=Matt. 
3:12).  But  he  had  the  spiritual  conception  also,  the  bap- 
tism in  the  Holy  Spirit  which  will  characterize  the  Messiah's 
Mission  and  so  will  far  transcend  the  water  baptism  which 
marked  the  ministry  of  John. 

18.  Many  other  exhortations  {polla  men  oun  kai  hetera). 
Literally,  many  and  different  things  did  John  evangelize, 
euaggelizeto,  to  the  people.  Luke  has  given  a  bare  sample 
of  the  wonderful  messages  of  the  Baptist.  Few  as  his 
words  preserved  are  they  give  a  definite  and  powerful  con- 
ception of  his  preaching. 

19.  Reproved  {elegchomenos).  Present  passive  participle 
of  elegcho,  an  old  verb  meaning  in  Homer  to  treat  with  con- 
tempt, then  to  convict  (Matt.  18:15),  to  expose  (Eph.  5:11), 
to  reprove  as  here.  The  substantive  elegchos  means  proof 
(Heb.  1 1:1)  and  elegmos,  censure  (II  Tim.  3:16).  Josephus 
{Ant.  XVIII.  V.  4)  shows  how  repulsive  this  marriage  was 
to  Jewish  feeling.    Evil  things  {poneron).    Incorporated  into 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  43 

the  relative  sentence.  The  word  is  from  ponos,  ported,  toil, 
work,  and  gives  the  active  side  of  evil,  possibly  with  the  no- 
tion of  work  itself  as  evil  or  at  least  an  annoyance.  The 
"evil  eye"  (ophthalmos  poneros  in  Mark  7:22)  was  a  "mis- 
chief working  eye"  (Vincent).  In  Matt.  6:23  it  is  a  dis- 
eased eye.  So  Satan  is  "the  evil  one"  (Matt.  5:37;  6:13, 
etc.).  It  is  a  very  common  adjective  in  the  N.T.  as  in  the 
older  Greek.  Had  done  (epoiesen).  Aorist  active  indica- 
tive, not  past  perfect,  merely  a  summary  constative  aorist, 
he  did. 

20.  Added  (prosetheken).  First  aorist  active  indicative 
(kappa  aorist).  Common  verb  (prostithemi)  in  all  Greek. 
In  N.T.  chiefly  in  Luke  and  Acts.  Hippocrates  used  it  of 
applying  wet  sponges  to  the  head  and  Galen  of  applying 
a  decoction  of  acorns.  There  is  no  evidence  that  Luke  has 
a  medical  turn  to  the  word  here.  The  absence  of  the  con- 
junction hoti  (that)  before  the  next  verb  katekleisen  (shut  up) 
is  asyndeton.  This  verb  literally  means  shut  down,  possibly 
with  a  reference  to  closing  down  the  door  of  the  dungeon, 
though  it  makes  sense  as  a  perfective  use  of  the  preposition, 
like  our  "shut  up"  without  a  strict  regard  to  the  idea  of 
"down."  It  is  an  old  and  common  verb,  though  here  and 
Acts  26:10  only  in  the  N.T.  See  Matt.  14:3  for  further 
statement  about  the  prison. 

21.  When  all  the  people  were  baptised  (en  tot  baptisthenai 
hapanta  ton  laon).  The  use  of  the  articular  aorist  infinitive 
here  with  en  bothers  some  grammarians  and  commenta- 
tors. There  is  no  element  of  time  in  the  aorist  infinitive. 
It  is  simply  punctiliar  action,  literally  "in  the  being  bap- 
tized as  to  all  the  people."  Luke  does  not  say  that  all  the 
people  were  baptized  before  Jesus  came  or  were  baptized 
at  the  same  time.  It  is  merely  a  general  statement  that 
Jesus  was  baptized  in  connexion  with  or  at  the  time  of  the 
baptizing  of  the  people  as  a  whole.  Jesus  also  having  been 
battized  (kai  Iesou  baptisihentos) .     Genitive  absolute  con- 


44        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

struction,  first  aorist  passive  participle.  In  Luke's  sentence 
the  baptism  of  Jesus  is  merely  introductory  to  the  descent 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  the  voice  of  the  Father.  For  the 
narrative  of  the  baptism  see  Mark  1:9  and  Matt.  3:13-16. 
And  praying  (kai  proseuchomenou).  Alone  in  Luke  who  so 
often  mentions  the  praying  of  Jesus.  Present  participle  and 
so  naturally  meaning  that  the  heaven  was  opened  while 
Jesus  was  praying  though  not  necessarily  in  answer  to  his 
prayer.  The  heaven  was  opened  (anebichthenai  ton  our  anon). 
First  aorist  passive  infinitive  with  double  augment,  whereas 
the  infinitive  is  not  supposed  to  have  any  augment.  The 
regular  form  would  be  anoichthenai  as  in  D  (Codex  Bezae). 
So  the  augment  appears  in  the  future  indicative  kateaxei 
(Matt.  12:20)  and  the  second  aorist  passive  subjunctive 
kateagbsin  (John  19:31).  Such  unusual  forms  appear  in  the 
Koine.  This  infinitive  here  with  the  accusative  of  general 
reference  is  the  subject  of  egeneto  (it  came  to  pass).  Matt. 
3:16  uses  the  same  verb,  but  Mark  1:10  has  schizomenous, 
rent  asunder. 

22.  Descended  (katabenai).  Same  construction  as  the  pre- 
ceding infinitive.  The  Holy  Ghost  (to  pneuma  to  hagion).  The 
Holy  Spirit.  Mark  1:10  has  merely  the  Spirit  (to  pneuma) 
while  Matt.  3  :i6  has  the  Spirit  of  God  (pneuma  theou).  In  a 
bodily  form  (sbmatikbi  eidei).  Alone  in  Luke  who  has  also 
"  as  a  dove"  (hbs  peristeran)  like  Matthew  and  Mark.  This 
probably  means  that  the  Baptist  saw  the  vision  that  looked 
like  a  dove.  Nothing  is  gained  by  denying  the  fact  or  possi- 
bility of  the  vision  that  looked  like  a  dove.  God  manifests 
his  power  as  he  will.  The  symbolism  of  the  dove  for  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  intelligible.  We  are  not  to  understand  that  this 
was  the  beginning  of  the  Incarnation  of  Christ  as  the  Cerin- 
thian  Gnostics  held.  But  this  fresh  influx  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
may  have  deepened  the  Messianic  consciousness  of  Jesus 
and  certainly  revealed  him  to  the  Baptist  as  God's  Son. 
And  a  voice  came  out  of  heaven  (kai  phonen  ex  ouranou  ge 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  45 

nesthai).  Same  construction  of  infinitive  with  accusative  of 
general  reference.  The  voice  of  the  Father  to  the  Son  is 
given  here  as  in  Mark  1:11,  which  see,  and  Matt.  3:17  for 
discussion  of  the  variation  there.  The  Trinity  here  mani- 
fest themselves  at  the  baptism  of  Jesus  which  constitutes 
the  formal  entrance  of  Jesus  upon  his  Messianic  ministry. 
He  enters  upon  it  with  the  Father's  blessing  and  approval 
and  with  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  him.  The  deity 
of  Christ  here  appears  in  plain  form  in  the  Synoptic  Gospels. 
The  consciousness  of  Christ  is  as  clear  on  this  point  here  as 
in  the  Gospel  of  John  where  the  Baptist  describes  him  after 
his  baptism  as  the  Son  of  God  (John  1:34). 

23.  Jesus  Himself  (autos  Iesous).  Emphatic  intensive 
pronoun  calling  attention  to  the  personality  of  Jesus  at  this 
juncture.  When  he  entered  upon  his  Messianic  work. 
When  he  began  to  teach  (archomenos) .  The  words  "to 
teach"  are  not  in  the  Greek  text.  The  Authorized  Version 
"began  to  be  about  thirty  years  of  age,"  is  an  impossible 
translation.  The  Revised  Version  rightly  supplies  "  to 
teach"  (didaskein)  after  the  present  participle  archomenos. 
Either  the  infinitive  or  the  participle  can  follow  archomai, 
usually  the  infinitive  in  the  Koine.  It  is  not  necessary  to 
supply  anything  (Acts  1:22).  Was  about  thirty  years  of  age 
{en  hosei  eton  triakonta).  Tyndale  has  it  right  "Jesus  was 
about  thirty  yere  of  age  when  he  beganne."  Luke  does  not 
commit  himself  definitely  to  precisely  thirty  years  as  the 
age  of  Christ.  The  Levites  entered  upon  full  service  at  that 
age,  but  that  proves  nothing  about  Jesus.  God's  prophets 
enter  upon  their  task  when  the  word  of  God  comes  to  them. 
Jesus  may  have  been  a  few  months  under  or  over  thirty  or 
a  year  or  two  less  or  more.  Being  Son  (as  was  supposed)  of 
Joseph,  the  son  of  Heli  (on  huios  hos  enomizeto  Ioseph  tou 
Helei).  For  the  discussion  of  the  genealogy  of  Jesus  see 
on  Matt.  1  n-iy.  The  two  genealogies  differ  very  widely 
and  many  theories  have  been  proposed  about  them.    At 


46        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

once  one  notices  that  Luke  begins  with  Jesus  and  gees 
back  to  Adam,  the  Son  of  God,  while  Matthew  begins  with 
Abraham  and  comes  to  "Joseph  the  husband  of  Mary  of 
whom  was  born  Jesus  who  is  called  Christ"  (1:16).  Matthew 
employs  the  word  "begot"  each  time,  while  Luke  has  the 
article  ton  repeating  huiou  (Son)  except  before  Joseph.  They 
agree  in  the  mention  of  Joseph,  but  Matthew  says  that 
"Jacob  begat  Joseph"  while  Luke  calls  "Joseph  the  son  of 
Heli."  There  are  other  differences,  but' this  one  makes  one 
pause.  Joseph,  of  course,  did  not  have  two  fathers.  If  we 
understand  Luke  to  be  giving  the  real  genealogy  of  Jesus 
through  Mary,  the  matter  is  simple  enough.  The  two  gen- 
ealogies differ  from  Joseph  to  David  except  in  the  cases  of 
Zorobabel  and  Salathiel.  Luke  evidently  means  to  suggest 
something  unusual  in  his  genealogy  by  the  use  of  the  phrase 
"as  was  supposed"  (hos  enomizeto).  His  own  narrative  in 
Luke  1:26-38  has  shown  that  Joseph  was  not  the  actual 
father  of  Jesus.  Plummer  objects  that,  if  Luke  is  giving  the 
genealogy  of  Jesus  through  Mary,  huios  must  be  used  in 
two  senses  here  (son  as  was  supposed  of  Joseph,  and  grand- 
son through  Mary  of  Heli).  But  that  is  not  an  unheard  oi 
thing.  In  neither  list  does  Matthew  or  Luke  give  a  complete 
genealogy.  Just  as  Matthew  uses  "begat"  for  descent,  so 
does  Luke  employ  "son"  in  the  same  way  for  descendant. 
It  was  natural  for  Matthew,  writing  for  Jews,  to  give  the 
legal  genealogy  through  Joseph,  though  he  took  pains  to 
show  in  1:16  and  in  1:18-25  that  Joseph  was  not  the  actual 
father  of  Jesus.  It  was  equally  natural  for  Luke,  a  Greek 
himself  and  writing  for  the  whole  world,  to  give  the  actual 
genealogy  of  Jesus  through  Mary.  It  is  in  harmony  with 
Pauline  universality  (Plummer)  that  Luke  carries  the  gene- 
alogy back  to  Adam  and  does  not  stop  with  Abraham.  It 
is  not  clear  why  Luke  adds  "the  Son  of  God"  after  Adam 
(3:38).  Certainly  he  does  not  mean  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of 
God  only  in  tne  sense  that  Adam  is.    Possibly  he  wishes  to 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  47 

dispose  of  the  heathen  myths  about  the  origin  of  man  and 
to  show  that  God  is  the  Creator  of  the  whole  human  race, 
Father  of  all  men  in  that  sense.  No  mere  animal  origin  of 
man  is  in  harmony  with,  this  conception. 


CHAPTER   IV 

I.  Full  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (pleres  pneumatos  hagiou).  An 
evident  allusion  to  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Spirit  on  Jesus 
at  his  baptism  (Luke  3  :2if.)-  The  distinctness  of  the  Per- 
sons in  the  Trinity  is  shown  there,  but  with  evident  unity. 
One  recalls  also  Luke's  account  of  the  overshadowing  of 
Mary  by  the  Holy  Spirit  (1 :35).  Matt.  4:1  says  that  "Jesus 
was  led  of  the  Spirit"  while  Mark  1  :I2  states  that  the  Spirit 
driveth  him  forth"  which  see  for  discussion.  "Jesus  had 
been  endowed  with  supernatural  power;  and  He  was  tempted 
to  make  use  of  it  in  furthering  his  own  interests  without  re- 
gard to  the  Father's  will"  (Plummer).  Was  led  by  the  Spirit 
(egeto  en  toi  pneumati).  Imperfect  passive,  continuously 
led.  En  may  be  the  instrumental  use  as  often,  for  Matt.  4:1 
has  here  hupo  of  direct  agency.  But  Matthew  has  the 
aorist  passive  anechthe  which  may  be  ingressive  as  he  has 
eis  ten  eremon  (into  the  wilderness)  while  Luke  has  en  toi 
eremoi  (in  the  wilderness).  At  any  rate  Luke  affirms  that 
Jesus  was  now  continuously  under  the  guidance  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  Hence  in  this  same  sentence  he  mentions  the  Spirit 
twice.  During  the  forty  days  (hemeras  tesserakonta).  Ac- 
cusative of  duration  of  time,  to  be  connected  with  "led" 
not  with  "tempted."  He  was  led  in  the  Spirit  during  these 
forty  days  (cf.  Deut.  8:2,  forty  years).  The  words  are  am- 
phibolous also  in  Mark  1 113.  Matt.  4:2  seems  to  imply  that 
the  three  recorded  temptations  came  at  the  close  of  the 
fasting  for  forty  days.  That  can  be  true  and  yet  what  Luke 
states  be  true  also.  These  three  may  be  merely  specimens 
and  so  "representative  of  the  struggle  which  continued 
throughout  the  whole  period"  (Plummer). 

2.  Being  tempted   (peirazomenos).     Present  passive  par- 

48 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  49 

ticiple  and  naturally  parallel  with  the  imperfect  passive 
egeto  (was  led)  in  verse  1.  This  is  another  instance  of  poor 
verse  division  which  should  have  come  at  the  end  of  the 
sentence.  See  on  Matt.  4:1  and  Mark  1:13  for  the  words 
"tempt"  and  "devil."  The  devil  challenged  the  Son  of 
man  though  also  the  Son  of  God.  It  was  a  contest  between 
Jesus,  full  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  the  slanderer  of  men. 
The  devil  had  won  with  Adam  and  Eve.  He  has  hopes  of 
triumph  over  Jesus.  The  story  of  this  conflict  is  given  only 
in  Matt.  4:1-11  and  Luke  4:1-13.  There  is  a  mere  mention 
of  it  in  Mark  1  :i2f.  So  then  here  is  a  specimen  of  the  Logia 
of  Jesus  (Q),  a  non-Ma rkan  portion  of  Matthew  and  Luke, 
the  earliest  document  about  Christ.  The  narrative  could 
come  ultimately  only  from  Christ  himself.  It  is  noteworthy 
that  it  bears  all  the  marks  of  the  high  conception  of  Jesus 
as  the  Son  of  God  found  in  the  Gospel  of  John  and  in  Paul 
and  Hebrews,  the  rest  of  the  New  Testament  in  fact,  for 
Mark,  Matthew,  Luke,  Acts,  Peter,  and  Jude  follow  in  this 
same  strain.  The  point  is  that  modern  criticism  has  revealed 
the  Messianic  consciousness  of  Jesus  as  God's  Son  at  his 
Baptism  and  in  his  Temptations  at  the  very  beginning  of 
his  ministry  and  in  the  oldest  known  documents  about 
Christ  (The  Logia,  Mark's  Gospel).  He  did  eat  nothing  (ouk 
ephagen  ouden).  Second  aorist  (constative)  active  indicative 
of  the  defective  verb  esthio.  Mark  does  not  give  the  fast. 
Matt.  4:2  has  the  aorist  active  participle  nesteusas  which 
usually  means  a  religious  fast  for  purposes  of  devotion.  That 
idea  is  not  excluded  by  Luke's  words.  The  entrance  of 
Jesus  upon  his  Messianic  ministry  was  a  fit  time  for  this 
solemn  and  intense  consecration.  This  mental  and  spiritual 
strain  would  naturally  take  away  the  appetite  and  there  was 
probably  nothing  at  hand  to  eat.  The  weakness  from  the 
absence  of  food  gave  the  devil  his  special  opportunity  to 
tempt  Jesus  which  he  promptly  seized.  When  they  were 
completed  (suntelestheison  autbn).    Genitive  absolute  with  the 


50        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

first  aorist  passive  participle  feminine  plural  because  hemerbn 
(days)  is  feminine.  According  to  Luke  the  hunger  (epeinasen, 
became  hungry,  ingressive  aorist  active  indicative)  came 
at  the  close  of  the  forty  days  as  in  Matt.  4:2. 

3.  The  Son  of God  (huios  tou  theou) .  No  article  as  in  Matt. 
4:3.  So  refers  to  the  relationship  as  Son  of  God  rather  than 
to  the  office  of  Messiah.  Manifest  reference  to  the  words 
of  the  Father  in  Luke  3 :22.  Condition  of  the  first  class  as 
in  Matthew.  The  devil  assumes  that  Jesus  is  Son  of  God. 
This  stone  (tbi  lithbi  toutbi).  Perhaps  pointing  to  a  particular 
round  stone  that  looked  in  shape  and  size  like  a  loaf  of  bread. 
Stanley  (Sinai  and  Palestine,  p.  154)  on  Mt.  Carmel  found 
crystallizations  of  stones  called  "Elijah's  melons."  The 
hunger  of  Jesus  opened  the  way  for  the  diabolic  suggestion 
designed  to  inspire  doubt  in  Jesus  toward  his  Father. 
Matthew  has  "these  stones."  Bread  (artos).  Better  " loaf ." 
For  discussion  of  this  first  temptation  see  on  Matt.  4  .-3 f . 
Jesus  felt  the  force  of  each  of  the  temptations  without  yield- 
ing at  all  to  the  sin  involved.  See  discussion  on  Matthew 
also  for  reality  of  the  devil  and  the  objective  and  subjective 
elements  in  the  temptations.  Jesus  quotes  Deut.  8:3  in 
reply  to  the  devil. 

5.  The  world  (tes  oikoumenes) .  The  inhabited  world.  In 
Matt.  4:8  it  is  tou  kosmou.  In  a  moment  of  time  (en  stigmei 
chronou).  Only  in  Luke  and  the  word  stigme  nowhere  else 
in  the  N.T.  (from  stizo,  to  prick,  or  puncture),  a  point  or 
dot.  In  Demosthenes,  Aristotle,  Plutarch.  Like  our  "sec- 
ond" of  time  or  tick  of  the  clock.  This  panorama  of  all  the 
kingdoms  of  the  world  and  the  glory  of  them  in  a  moment  of 
time  was  mental,  a  great  feat  of  the  imagination  (a  mental 
satanic  "movie"  performance),  but  this  fact  in  no  way 
discredits  the  idea  of  the  actual  visible  appearance  of  Satan 
also.  This  second  temptation  in  Luke  is  the  third  in  Mat- 
thew's order.  Luke's  order  is  geographical  (wilderness, 
mountain,  Jerusalem).     Matthew's  is  climacteric  (hunger, 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  51 

nervous  dread,  ambition).  There  is  a  climax  in  Luke's  order 
also  (sense,  man,  God).  There  is  no  way  to  tell  the  actual 
order. 

6.  All  this  authority  {ten  exousian  tauten  hapasan).  Matt. 
4:9  has  "all  these  things."  Luke's  report  is  more  spe- 
cific. And  the  glory  of  them  {kai  ten  doxan  auibn).  Matt. 
4:8  has  this  in  the  statement  of  what  the  devil  did,  not  what 
he  said.  For  it  hath  been  delivered  unto  me  {hoti  emoi  parade- 
dotai).  Perfect  passive  indicative.  Satan  here  claims  pos- 
session of  world  power  and  Jesus  does  not  deny  it.  It  may 
be  due  to  man's  sin  and  by  God's  permission.  Jesus  calls 
Satan  "the  ruler  of  this  world"  (John  12:31,  14:30,  16:11). 
To  whomsoever  I  will  {hoi  an  thelo).  Present  subjunctive 
with  an  in  an  indefinite  relative  sentence.  This  audacious 
claim,  if  allowed,  makes  one  wonder  whether  some  of  the 
world  rulers  are  not,  consciously  or  unconsciously,  agents  of 
the  devil.  In  several  American  cities  there  has  been  proven 
a  definite  compact  between  the  police  and  the  underworld  of 
crime.  But  the  tone  of  Satan  here  is  one  of  superiority  to 
Jesus  in  world  power.  He  offers  him  a  share  in  it  on  one 
condition. 

7.  Wilt  worship  before  me  {proskuneseis  enopion  emou). 
Matt.  4:9  has  it  more  bluntly  "worship  me."  That  is 
what  it  really  comes  to,  though  in  Luke  the  matter  is  more 
delicately  put.  It  is  a  condition  of  the  third  class  {ean  and 
the  subjunctive).  Luke  has  it  "thou  therefore  if"  {su  oun 
ean),  in  a  very  emphatic  and  subtle  way.  It  is  the  ingressive 
aorist  {proskuneseis),  just  bow  the  knee  once  up  here  in  my 
presence.  The  temptation  was  for  Jesus  to  admit  Satan's 
authority  by  this  act  of  prostration  (fall  down  and  worship), 
a  recognition  of  authority  rather  than  of  personal  merit. 
It  shall  all  be  thine  {estai  sou  pas  a).  Satan  offers  to  turn  over 
all  the  keys  of  world  power  to  Jesus.  It  was  a  tremendous 
grand-stand  play,  but  Jesus  saw  at  once  that  in  that  case 
he  would  be  the  agent  of  Satan  in  the  rule  of  the  world  by 


52        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

bargain  and  graft  instead  of  the  Son  of  God  by  nature  and 
world  ruler  by  conquest  over  Satan.  The  heart  of  Satan's 
program  is  here  laid  bare.  Jesus  here  rejected  the  Jewish 
idea  of  the  Messiah  as  an  earthly  ruler  merely.  "He  rejects 
Satan  as  an  ally,  and  thereby  has  him  as  an  implacable 
enemy"  (Plummer.) 

8.  Thou  shall  worship  (proskuneseis).  Satan  used  this  verb 
to  Jesus  who  turns  it  against  him  by  the  quotation  from 
Deut.  6:13.  Jesus  clearly  perceived  that  one  could  not 
worship  both  Satan  and  God.  He  had  to  choose  whom  he 
would  serve.  Luke  does  not  give  the  words,  "Get  thee 
hence,  Satan"  (Matt.  4:10),  for  he  has  another  temptation 
to  narrate. 

9.  Led  him  (egagen).  Aorist  active  indicative  of  ago. 
Matt.  4:5  has  paralambanei  (dramatic  present).  The  wing  of 
the  temple  {to  pterugion  tou  hierou).  See  on  Matt.  4:5.  It  is 
not  easy  to  determine  precisely  what  it  was.  From  hence  (en- 
teuthen).  This  Luke  adds  to  the  words  in  Matthew,  which 
see.  To  guard  thee  (tou  diaphulaxai  se).  Not  in  Matt.  4:6 
quoted  by  Satan  from  Psa.  91:11  and  12.  Satan  does  not 
misquote  this  Psalm,  but  he  misapplies  it  and  makes  it  mean 
presumptuous  reliance  on  God.  This  compound  verb  is  very 
old,  but  occurs  here  alone  in  the  N.T.  and  that  from  the 
LXX.  Luke  repeats  hoti  (recitative  hoti  after  gegraptai,  is 
written)  after  this  part  of  the  quotation. 

12.  It  is  said  (eiretai).  Perfect  passive  indicative,  stands 
said,  a  favourite  way  of  quoting  Scripture  in  the  N.T.  In 
Matt.  4:7  we  have  the  usual  "it  is  written"  (gegraptai). 
Here  Jesus  quotes  Deut.  6:16.  Each  time  he  uses  Deuter- 
onomy against  the  devil.  The  LXX  is  quoted.  It  is  the 
volitive  future  indicative  with  ouk,  a  common  prohibition. 
Jesus  points  out  to  the  devil  that  testing  God  is  not  trusting 
God  (Plummer). 

13.  Every  temptation  (pantap eir as mon).  These  three  kinds 
exhaust  the  avenues  of  approach  (the  appetites,  the  nerves, 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  53 

the  ambitions).  Satan  tried  them  all.  They  formed  a  cycle 
(Vincent).  Hence  "he  was  in  all  points  tempted  like  as  we 
are"  (Heb.  4:15).  "The  enemy  tried  all  his  weapons,  and 
was  at  all  points  defeated"  (Plummer).  Probably  all  during 
the  forty  days  the  devil  tempted  him,  but  three  are  repre- 
sentatives of  all.  For  a  season  {achri  kairou).  Until  a  good 
opportunity  should  return,  the  language  means.  We  are 
thus  to  infer  that  the  devil  returned  to  his  attack  from  time 
to  time.  In  the  Garden  of  Gethsemane  he  tempted  Jesus 
more  severely  than  here.  He  was  here  trying  to  thwart  the 
purpose  of  Jesus  to  go  on  with  his  Messianic  plans,  to  trip 
him  at  the  start.  In  Gethsemane  the  devil  tried  to  make 
Jesus  draw  back  from  the  culmination  of  the  Cross  with  all 
its  agony  and  horror.  The  devil  attacked  Jesus  by  the  aid 
of  Peter  (Mark  8:33),  through  the  Pharisees  (John  8:4on\), 
besides  Gethsemane  (Luke  22:42,  53). 

14.  Returned  {hup e strep  sen).  Luke  does  not  fill  in  the  gap 
between  the  temptations  in  the  wilderness  of  Judea  and  the 
Galilean  Ministry.  He  follows  the  outline  of  Mark.  It  is 
John's  Gospel  alone  that  tells  of  the  year  of  obscurity 
(Stalker)  in  various  parts  of  the  Holy  Land.  In  the  power  of 
the  Spirit  {en  tei  dunamei  tou  pneumatos).  Luke  in  these  two 
verses  (14  and  15)  gives  a  description  of  the  Galilean  Min- 
istry with  three  marked  characteristics  (Plummer) :  the 
power  of  the  spirit,  rapid  spread  of  Christ's  fame,  use  of  the 
Jewish  synagogues.  Luke  often  notes  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  in  the  work  of  Christ.  Our  word  dynamite  is 
this  same  word  dunamis  (power) .  A  fame  {pheme) .  An  old 
Greek  word  found  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Matt.  9:26. 
It  is  from  phemi,  to  say.  Talk  ran  rapidly  in  every  direction. 
It  assumes  the  previous  ministry  as  told  by  John. 

15.  And  he  taught  {kai  autos  edidasken) .  Luke  is  fond  of 
this  mode  of  transition  so  that  it  is  not  certain  that  he  means 
to  emphasize  "he  himself"  as  distinct  from  the  rumour  about 
him.     It  is  the  imperfect  tensea  descriptive  of  the  habit  of 


54        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Jesus.  The  synagogues  were  an  open  door  to  Jesus  before 
the  hostility  of  the  Pharisees  was  aroused.  Being  glorified 
(doxazomenos) .  Present  passive  participle,  durative  action 
like  the  imperfect  edidasken.  General  admiration  of  Jesus 
everywhere.  He  was  the  wonder  teacher  of  his  time.  Even 
the  rabbis  had  not  yet  learned  how  to  ridicule  and  oppose 
Jesus. 

16.  Where  he  had  been  brought  up  (hou  en  tethrammenos). 
Past  perfect  passive  periphrastic  indicative,  a  state  of  com- 
pletion in  past  time,  from  trepho,  a  common  Greek  verb. 
This  visit  is  before  that  recorded  in  Mark  6:i-6  =  Matt. 
13:54-58  which  was  just  before  the  third  tour  of  Galilee. 
Here  Jesus  comes  back  after  a  year  of  public  ministry  else- 
where and  with  a  wide  reputation  (Luke  4:15).  Luke  may 
have  in  mind  2:51,  but  for  some  time  now  Nazareth  had  not 
been  his  home  and  that  fact  may  be  implied  by  the  past 
perfect  tense.  As  his  custom  was  (kata  to  eibthos  autoi).  Sec- 
ond perfect  active  neuter  singular  participle  of  an  old  etho 
(Homer),  to  be  accustomed.  Literally  according  to  what 
was  customary  to  him  (autoi,  dative  case).  This  is  one  of 
the  flashlights  on  the  early  life  of  Jesus.  He  had  the  habit  of 
going  to  public  worship  in  the  synagogue  as  a  boy,  a  habit 
that  he  kept  up  when  a  grown  man.  If  the  child  does  not 
form  the  habit  of  going  to  church,  the  man  is  almost  certain 
not  to  have  it.  We  have  already  had  in  Matthew  and  Mark 
frequent  instances  of  the  word  synagogue  which  played  such 
a  large  part  in  Jewish  life  after  the  restoration  from  Babylon. 
Stood  up  (aneste).  Second  aorist  active  indicative  and  in- 
transitive. Very  common  verb.  It  was  the  custom  for  the 
reader  to  stand  except  when  the  Book  of  Esther  was  read 
at  the  feast  of  Purim  when  he  might  sit.  It  is  not  here 
stated  that  Jesus  had  been  in  the  habit  of  standing  up  to  read 
here  or  elsewhere.  It  was  his  habit  to  go  to  the  synagogue 
for  worship.  Since  he  entered  upon  his  Messianic  work  his 
habit  was  to  teach  in  the  synagogues  (Luke  4:15).    This  was 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  55 

apparently  the  first  time  that  he  had  done  so  in  Nazareth. 
He  may  have  been  asked  to  read  as  Paul  was  in  Antioch  in 
Pisidia  (Acts  13:15)-  The  ruler  of  the  synagogue  for  that 
day  may  have  invited  Jesus  to  read  and  speak  because  of  his 
now  great  reputation  as  a  teacher.  Jesus  could  have  stood  up 
voluntarily  and  appropriately  because  of  his  interest  in  his 
home  town.  To  read  (anagnbnai).  Second  aorist  active 
infinitive  of  anaginosko,  to  recognize  again  the  written  charac- 
ters and  so  to  read  and  then  to  read  aloud.  It  appears  first 
in  Pindar  in  the  sense  of  read  and  always  so  in  the  N.T. 
This  public  reading  aloud  with  occasional  comments  may 
explain  the  parenthesis  in  Matt.  24:15  (Let  him  that  readeth 
understand). 

.  17.  Was  delivered  (epedothe).  First  aorist  passive  indica- 
tive of  epididomi,  to  give  over  to,  a  common  verb.  At  the 
proper  stage  of  the  service  "the  attendant"  or  "minister" 
(huperetes,  under  rower)  or  "beadle"  took  out  a  roll  of  the 
law  from  the  ark,  unwrapped  it,  and  gave  it  to  some  one  to 
read.  On  sabbath  days  some  seven  persons  were  asked  to 
read  small  portions  of  the  law.  This  was  the  first  lesson  or 
Parashah.  This  was  followed  by  a  reading  from  the  prophets 
and  a  discourse,  the  second  lesson  or  Haphtarah.  This  last 
is  what  Jesus  did.  The  book  of  the  prophet  Isaiah  (biblion  ton 
prophetou  Esaiou).  Literally,  "  a  roll  of  the  prophet  Isaiah." 
Apparently  Isaiah  was  handed  to  Jesus  without  his  asking 
for  it.  But  certainly  Jesus  cared  more  for  the  prophets  than 
for  the  ceremonial  law.  It  was  a  congenial  service  that  he 
was  asked  to  perform.  Jesus  used  Deuteronomy  in  his 
temptations  and  now  Isaiah  for  this  sermon.  The  Syriac 
Sinaitic  manuscript  has  it  that  Jesus  stood  up  after  the  at- 
tendant handed  him  the  roll.  Opened  {anoixas).  Really  it 
was  unrolled  (anaptuxas)  as  Aleph  D  have  it.  But  the  more 
general  term  anoixas  (from  anoigo,  common  verb)  is  probably 
genuine.  Anaptussb  does  not  occur  in  the  N.T.  outside  of 
this  passage  if  genuine.    Found  the  place  (heuren  ton  topon). 


56        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Second  aorist  active  indicative.  He  continued  to  unroll 
(rolling  up  the  other  side)  till  he  found  the  passage  desired. 
It  may  have  been  a  fixed  lesson  for  the  day  or  it  may  have 
been  his  own  choosing.  At  any  rate  it  was  a  marvellously 
appropriate  passage  (Isa.  61  :i  and  2  with  one  clause  omitted 
and  some  words  from  58:6).  It  is  a  free  quotation  from  the 
Septuagint.  Where  it  was  written  (hou  en  gegrammenon). 
Periphrastic  pluperfect  passive  again  as  in  4:16. 

18.  Anointed  me  {echrisen  me).  First  aorist  active  indica- 
tive of  the  verb  chrib  from  which  Christ  (Christos)  is  derived, 
the  Anointed  One.  Isaiah  is  picturing  the  Jubilee  year  and 
the  release  of  captives  and  the  return  from  the  Babylonian 
exile  with  the  hope  of  the  Messiah  through  it  all.  Jesus  here 
applies  this  Messianic  language  to  himself.  "The  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  is  upon  me"  as  was  shown  at  the  baptism  (Luke 
3:21)  where  he  was  also  "anointed"  for  his  mission  by  the 
Father's  voice  (3:22).  To  the  poor  (ptochois).  Jesus  singles 
this  out  also  as  one  of  the  items  to  tell  John  the  Baptist  in 
prison  (Luke  7:22).  Our  word  Gospel  is  a  translation  of  the 
Greek  Euaggelion,  and  it  is  for  the  poor.  He  hath  sent  me 
(apestalken  me).  Change  of  tense  to  perfect  active  indicative. 
He  is  now  on  that  mission  here.  Jesus  is  God's  Apostle  to 
men  (John  17:3,  Whom  thou  didst  send).  Proclaim  (ke- 
ruxai).  As  a  herald  like  Noah  (II  Pet.  2:5).  To  the  captives 
(aichmalotois).  Prisoners  of  war  will  be  released  (aichme, 
a  spear  point,  and  halotos,  from  haliskomai,  to  be  captured). 
Captured  by  the  spear  point.  Common  word,  but  here  only 
in  the  N.T.  Set  at  liberty  (aposteilai) .  First  aorist  active 
infinitive  of  apostello.  Same  verb  as  apestalken,  above. 
Brought  in  here  from  Isa.  58 :6.  Plummer  suggests  that  Luke 
inserts  it  here  from  memory.  But  Jesus  could  easily  have 
turned  back  the  roll  and  read  it  so.  Them  that  are  bruised 
(tethrausmenous).  Perfect  passive  participle  of  thraub,  an 
old  verb,  but  here  only  in  the  N.T.  It  means  to  break  in 
pieces,  broken  in  heart  and  often  in  body  as  well.    One  loves 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  57 

to  think  that  Jesus  felt  it  to  be  his  mission  to  mend  broken 
hearts  like  pieces  of  broken  earthenware,  real  rescue-mission 
work.  Jesus  mends  them  and  sets  them  free  from  their  lim- 
itations. 

19.  The  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord  (eniauton  Kuriou 
dekton).  He  does  not  mean  that  his  ministry  is  to  be  only 
one  year  in  length  as  Clement  of  Alexandria  and  Origen 
argued.  That  is  to  turn  figures  into  fact.  The  Messianic 
age  has  come,  Jesus  means  to  say.  On  the  first  day  of  the 
year  of  Jubilee  the  priests  with  sound  of  trumpet  proclaimed 
the  blessings  of  that  year  (Lev.  25:8-17).  This  great  pas- 
sage justly  pictures  Christ's  conception  of  his  mission  and 
message. 

20.  He  closed  the  book  {ptuxas  to  biblion).  Aorist  active 
participle  of  ptusso.  Rolled  up  the  roll  and  gave  it  back  to 
the  attendant  who  had  given  it  to  him  and  who  put  it  away 
again  in  its  case.  Sat  down  (ekathisen).  Took  his  seat  there 
as  a  sign  that  he  was  going  to  speak  instead  of  going  back 
to  his  former  seat.  This  was  the  usual  Jewish  attitude  for 
public  speaking  and  teaching  (Luke  5:3;  Matt.  5:1;  Mark 
4:1;  Acts  16:13).  Were  fastened  on  him  (esan  atenizontes 
autoi).  Periphrastic  imperfect  active  and  so  a  vivid  descrip- 
tion. Literally,  the  eyes  of  all  in  the  synagogue  were  gazing 
fixedly  upon  him.  The  verb  atenizo  occurs  in  Aristotle  and 
the  Septuagint.  It  is  from  the  adjective  atenes  and  that 
from  teino,  to  stretch,  and  copulative  or  intensive  a,  not  a 
privative.  The  word  occurs  in  the  N.T.  here  and  in  22:56, 
ten  times  in  Acts,  and  in  II  Cor.  3  :yt  13.  Paul  uses  it  of  the 
steady  eager  gaze  of  the  people  at  Moses  when  he  came  down 
from  the  mountain  when  he  had  been  communing  with  God. 
There  was  something  in  the  look  of  Jesus  here  that  held  the 
people  spellbound  for  the  moment,  apart  from  the  great 
reputation  with  which  he  came  to  them.  In  small  measure 
every  effective  speaker  knows  what  it  is  to  meet  the  eager 
expectations  of  an  audience. 


58        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

21.  And  he  began  to  say  (erxato  de  legein).  Aorist  ingressive 
active  indicative  and  present  infinitive.  He  began  speaking. 
The  moment  of  hushed  expectancy  was  passed.  These  may- 
or may  not  be  the  first  words  uttered  here  by  Jesus.  Often 
the  first  sentence  is  the  crucial  one  in  winning  an  audience. 
Certainly  this  is  an  arresting  opening  sentence.  Hath  been 
fulfilled  (peplerotai).  Perfect  passive  indicative,  stands  ful- 
filled. "Today  this  scripture  (Isa.  61:1,  2,  just  read)  stands 
fulfilled  in  your  ears."  It  was  a  most  amazing  statement 
and  the  people  of  Nazareth  were  quick  to  see  the  Messianic 
claim  involved.  Jesus  could  only  mean  that  the  real  year  of 
Jubilee  had  come,  that  the  Messianic  prophecy  of  Isaiah 
had  come  true  today,  and  that  in  him  they  saw  the  Messiah 
of  prophecy.  There  are  critics  today  who  deny  that  Jesus 
claimed  to  be  the  Messiah.  To  be  able  to  do  that,  they  must 
reject  the  Gospel  of  John  and  all  such  passages  as  this  one. 
And  it  is  no  apocalyptic  eschatological  Messiah  whom  Jesus 
here  sets  forth,  but  the  one  who  forgives  sin  and  binds  up 
the  broken-hearted.  The  words  were  too  good  to  be  true 
and  to  be  spoken  here  at  Nazareth  by  one  of  their  own  towns- 


men 


22.  Bare  him  witness  (emarturoun) .  Imperfect  active, 
perhaps  inchoative.  They  all  began  to  bear  witness  that  the 
rumours  were  not  exaggerations  (4:14)  as  they  had  supposed, 
but  had  foundation  in  fact  if  this  discourse  or  its  start  was  a 
fair  sample  of  his  teaching.  The  verb  martureo  is  a  very  old 
and  common  one.  It  is  frequent  in  Acts,  Paul's  Epistles, 
and  the  Johannine  books.  The  substantive  martur  is  seen 
in  our  English  martyr,  one  who  witnesses  even  by  his  death 
to  his  faith  in  Christ.  And  wondered  {kai  ethaumazon). 
Imperfect  active  also,  perhaps  inchoative  also.  They  began 
to  marvel  as  he  proceeded  with  his  address.  This  verb  is  an 
old  one  and  common  in  the  Gospels  for  the  attitude  of  the 
people  towards  Jesus.  At  the  words  of  grace  (epi  tois  logois 
tes  charitos).    See  on  Luke  1 130,  2:52  for  this  wonderful  word 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  59 

charts  so  full  of  meaning  and  so  often  in  the  N.T.  The  gen- 
itive case  (case  of  genus  or  kind)  here  means  that  the  words 
that  came  out  of  the  mouth  of  Jesus  in  a  steady  stream 
(present  tense,  ekporeuomenois)  were  marked  by  fascination 
and  charm.  They  were  "winning  words"  as  the  context 
makes  plain,  though  they  were  also  "gracious"  in  the  Pauline 
sense  of  "grace."  There  is  no  necessary  antithesis  in  the 
ideas  of  graceful  and  gracious  in  these  words  of  Jesus.  Is 
not  this  Joseph's  son?  {Ouchi  huios  estin  Ioseph  houtos;). 
Witness  and  wonder  gave  way  to  bewilderment  as  they  be- 
gan to  explain  to  themselves  the  situation.  The  use  of  ouchi 
intensive  form  of  ouk  in  a  question  expects  the  answer 
"yes."  Jesus  passed  in  Nazareth  as  the  son  of  Joseph  as 
Luke  presents  him  in  3  123.  He  does  not  stop  here  to  correct 
this  misconception  because  the  truth  has  been  already  amply 
presented  in  1:28-38,  2:49.  This  popular  conception  of 
Jesus  as  the  son  of  Joseph  appears  also  in  John  1 145.  The 
puzzle  of  the  people  was  due  to  their  previous  knowledge  of 
Jesus  as  the  carpenter  (Mark  6:3;  the  carpenter's  son,  Matt. 
J3 :55)*  -^or  him  now  to  appear  as  the  Messiah  in  Nazareth 
where  he  had  lived  and  laboured  as  the  carpenter  was  a  phe- 
nomenon impossible  to  credit  on  sober  reflection.  So  the 
mood  of  wonder  and  praise  quickly  turned  with  whispers  and 
nods  and  even  scowls  to  doubt  and  hostility,  a  rapid  and 
radical  transformation  of  emotion  in  the  audience. 

23.  Doubtless  {pantos).  Adverb.  Literally,  at  any  rate, 
certainly,  assuredly.  Cf.  Acts  21:22,  28:4.  This  parable 
{ten  parabolen  tauten).  See  discussion  on  Matt.  13.  Here 
the  word  has  a  special  application  to  a  crisp  proverb  which 
involves  a  comparison.  The  word  physician  is  the  point  of 
comparison.  Luke  the  physician  alone  gives  this  saying  of 
Jesus.  The  proverb  means  that  the  physician  was  expected 
to  take  his  own  medicine  and  to  heal  himself.  The  word 
parabole  in  the  N.T.  is  confined  to  the  Synoptic  Gospels 
except  Heb.  9:9,  11:19.    This  use  for  a  proverb  occurs  also 


60        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

in  Luke  5:36,  6:39.  This  proverb  in  various  forms  appears 
not  only  among  the  Jews,  but  in  Euripides  and  Aeschylus 
among  the  Greeks,  and  in  Cicero's  Letters.  Hobart  quotes 
the  same  idea  from  Galen,  and  the  Chinese  used  to  demand 
it  of  their  physicians.  The  point  of  the  parable  seems  to  be 
that  the  people  were  expecting  him  to  make  good  his  claim 
to  the  Messiahship  by  doing  here  in  Nazareth  what  they 
had  heard  of  his  doing  in  Capernaum  and  elsewhere.  "Es- 
tablish your  claims  by  direct  evidence"  (Easton).  This  same 
appeal  (Vincent)  was  addressed  to  Christ  on  the  Cross  (Matt. 
27:40,  42).  There  is  a  tone  of  sarcasm  towards  Jesus  in 
both  cases.  Heard  done  (ekousamen  genomena) .  The  use 
of  this  second  aorist  middle  participle  genomena  after  ekousa- 
men is  a  neat  Greek  idiom.  It  is  punctiliar  action  in  indirect 
discourse  after  this  verb  of  sensation  or  emotion  (Robertson, 
Grammar,  pp.  1040-42,  1122-24).  Do  also  here  (poieson  kai 
hode).  Ingressive  aorist  active  imperative.  Do  it  here  in 
thy  own  country  and  town  and  do  it  now.  Jesus  applies  the 
proverb  to  himself  as  an  interpretation  of  their  real  atti- 
tude towards  himself. 

24.  And  he  said  (eipen  de).  Also  in  1:13.  The  interjection 
of  these  words  here  by  Luke  may  indicate  a  break  in  his  ad- 
dress, though  there  is  no  other  indication  of  an  interval  here. 
Perhaps  they  only  serve  to  introduce  solemnly  the  new 
proverb  like  the  words  Verily  I  say  unto  you  {amen  lego 
humin).  This  proverb  about  the  prophet  having  no  honour 
in  his  own  country  Jesus  had  already  applied  to  himself  ac- 
cording to  John  4:44.  Both  Mark  6:4  and  Matt.  13  157  give 
it  in  a  slightly  altered  form  on  the  last  visit  of  Jesus  to  Naz- 
areth. The  devil  had  tempted  Jesus  to  make  a  display  of 
his  power  to  the  people  by  letting  them  see  him  floating  down 
from  the  pinnacle  of  the  temple  (Luke  4:9-11). 

25.  Three  years  and  six  months  (ete  tria  kai  menas  hex). 
Accusative  of  duration  of  time  without  epi  (doubtful).  The 
same  period  is  given  in  James  5:17,  the  popular  Jewish  way 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  6l 

of  speaking.    In  I  Kings  18:1  the  rain  is  said  to  have  come 
in  the  third  year.    But  the  famine  probably  lasted  still  longer. 

26.  Unto  Zarephath  {eis  Sarepta).  The  modern  village 
Surafend  on  the  coast  road  between  Tyre  and  Sidon.  Unto 
a  woman  that  was  a  widow  {pros  gunaika  cheran).  Literally, 
unto  a  woman  a  widow  (like  our  vernacular  widow  woman). 
This  is  an  illustration  of  the  proverb  from  the  life  of  Elijah 
(I  Kings  17:8  and  9).  This  woman  was  in  the  land  of  Sidon 
or  Phoenicia,  a  heathen,  where  Jesus  himself  will  go  later. 

27.  In  the  time  of  EHsha  the  prophet  (epi  Elisaiou  tou 
prophetou).  This  use  of  epi  with  the  genitive  for  "in  the 
time  of"  is  a  good  Greek  idiom.  The  second  illustration  of 
the  proverb  is  from  the  time  of  Elisha  and  is  another  heathen, 
Naaman  the  Syrian  {Naiman  ho  Syros).  He  was  the  lone 
leper  that  was  cleansed  by  Elisha  (II  Kings  5:1,  14). 

28.  They  were  all  filled  with  wrath  (eplesthesan  pantes 
thumou).  First  aorist  passive  indicative  of  the  common 
verb  pimplemi  followed  by  the  genitive  case.  The  people 
of  Nazareth  at  once  caught  on  and  saw  the  point  of  these 
two  Old  Testament  illustrations  of  how  God  in  two  cases 
blessed  the  heathen  instead  of  the  Jewish  people.  The 
implication  was  evident.  Nazareth  was  no  better  than 
Capernaum  if  as  good.  He  was  under  no  special  obligation 
to  do  unusual  things  in  Nazareth  because  he  had  been  reared 
there.  Town  pride  was  insulted  and  it  at  once  exploded  in 
a  burst  of  rage. 

29.  They  rose  up  and  cast  him  forth  {anastantes  exebalon) . 
Second  aorist  ingressive  active  participle  and  second  aorist 
effective  active  indicative.  A  movement  towards  lynching 
Jesus.  Unto  the  brow  of  the  hill  (heos  ophruos  tou  orous). 
Eyebrow  (ophrus),  in  Homer,  then  any  jutting  prominence. 
Only  here  in  the  N.T.  Hippocrates  speaks  of  the  eyebrow 
hanging  over.  Was  built  (oikodometo) .  Past  perfect  indica- 
tive, stood  built.  That  they  might  throw  him  down  headlong 
(hoste  katakremnisai  auton).     Neat  Greek  idiom  with  hoste 


62        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

for  intended  result,  "so  as  to  cast  him  down  the  precipice." 
The  infinitive  alone  can  convey  the  same  meaning  (Matt. 
2:2;  20:28;  Luke  2:23).  Kremnos  is  an  overhanging  bank 
or  precipice  from  kremannumi,  to  hang.  Kata  is  down.  The 
verb  occurs  in  Xenophon,  Demosthenes,  LXX,  Josephus. 
Here  only  in  the  N.T.  At  the  southwest  corner  of  the  town 
of  Nazareth  such  a  cliff  today  exists  overhanging  the  Maro- 
nite  convent.  Murder  was  in  the  hearts  of  the  people.  By 
pushing  him  over  they  hoped  to  escape  technical  guilt. 

30.  He  went  his  way  (eporeueto).  Imperfect  tense,  he 
was  going  on  his  way. 

31.  Came  down  {katelthen).  Mark  1:21  has  the  historical 
present,  they  go  into  (eisporeuontai) .  Capernaum  (Tell 
Hum)  is  now  the  headquarters  of  the  Galilean  ministry, 
since  Nazareth  has  rejected  Jesus.  Luke  4:31-37  is  parallel 
with  Mark  1 :2i-28  which  he  manifestly  uses.  It  is  the  first 
of  Christ's  miracles  which  they  give.  Was  teaching  them  {en 
didaskbn  autous).  Periphrastic  imperfect.  Mark  has  edi- 
dasken  first  and  then  en  didaskbn.  "Them"  here  means  the 
people  present  in  the  synagogue  on  the  sabbath,  construction 
according  to  sense  as  in  Mark  1 :22. 

32.  Rest  of  the  sentence  as  in  Mark,  which  see,  except 
that  Luke  omits  "and  not  as  their  scribes"  and  uses  hoti  en 
instead  of  hbs  echbn. 

33.  Which  had  {echbn).  Mark  has  en.  A  spirit  of  an  un- 
clean demon  {pneuma  daimoniou  akathartou).  Mark  has 
"unclean  spirit."  Luke's  phrase  here  is  unique  in  this 
combination.  Plummer  notes  that  Matthew  has  daimonion 
ten  times  and  akatharton  twice  as  an  epithet  of  pneuma; 
Mark  has  daimonion  thirteen  times  and  akatharton  eleven 
times  as  an  epithet  of  pneuma.  Luke's  Gospel  uses  daimo- 
nion twenty-two  times  and  akatharton  as  an  epithet,  once  of 
daimonion  as  here  and  once  of  pneuma.  In  Mark  the  man 
is  in  {en)  the  power  of  the  unclean  spirit,  while  here  the  man 
"has"  a  spirit  of  an  unclean  demon.     With  a  loud  voice 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  63 

(phonei  megalei).     Not  in  Mark.     Really  a  scream  caused 
by  the  sudden  contact  of  the  demon  with  Jesus. 

34.  Ah!  (Ea).  An  interjection  frequent  in  the  Attic 
poets,  but  rare  in  prose.  Apparently  second  person  singular 
imperative  of  eao,  to  permit.  It  is  expressive  of  wonder, 
fear,  indignation.  Here  it  amounts  to  a  diabolical  screech. 
For  the  rest  of  the  verse  see  discussion  on  Mark  1 124  and 
Matt.  8 129.  The  muzzle  (phimos)  occurs  literally  in  I  Cor. 
9:9,  I  Tim.  5:18,  and  metaphorically  here  and  Mark  1:25, 
4:39,  Matt.   22:12. 

35.  Had  thrown  him  down  in  the  midst  (rhipsan  auton  eis 
to  meson).  First  aorist  (effective)  participle  of  rhipto,  an 
old  verb  with  violent  meaning,  to  fling,  throw,  hurl  off  or 
down.  Having  done  him  no  hurt  {meden  blapsan  auton). 
Luke  as  a  physician  carefully  notes  this  important  detail 
not  in  Mark.  Blapto,  to  injure,  or  hurt,  occurs  in  the  N.T. 
only  here  and  in  Mark  16:18,  though  a  very  common  verb 
in  the  old  Greek. 

36.  Amazement  came  iegeneto  thambos).  Mark  has  etham- 
bethesan.  They  spake  together  one  with  another  (sunelaloun 
pros  allelous).  Imperfect  indicative  active  and  the  recipro- 
cal pronoun.  Mark  has  simply  the  infinitive  sunzetein 
(question).  For  (hoti).  We  have  here  an  ambiguous  hoti 
as  in  1:45,  which  can  be  either  the  relative  "that"  or  the 
casual  hoti  "because"  or  "for,"  as  the  Revised  Version  has 
it.  Either  makes  good  sense.  Luke  adds  here  dunamei 
{with  power)  to  Mark's  "authority"  (exousian).  And  they 
come  out  (exerchontai).  So  Luke  where  Mark  has  "and  they 
obey  him"  (kai  upakouousin  autoi). 

37*  Went  forth  a  rumour  {exeporeueto  echos).  Imperfect 
middle,  kept  on  going  forth.  Our  very  word  echo  in  this 
word.  Late  Greek  form  for  echo  in  the  old  Greek.  Used 
for  the  roar  of  the  waves  on  the  shore.  So  in  Luke  21:25. 
Vivid  picture  of  the  resounding  influence  of  this  day's  work 
in  the  synagogue,  in  Capernaum. 


64        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

38.  He  rose  up  {anastas).  Second  aorist  active  participle 
of  anistemi,  a  common  verb.  B.  Weiss  adds  here  "from  the 
teacher's  seat."  Either  from  his  seat  or  merely  leaving  the 
synagogue.  This  incident  of  the  healing  of  Peter's  mother- 
in-law  is  given  in  Mark  1:29-34  and  Matt.  8:14-17,  which 
see  for  details.  Into  the  house  of  Simon  (eis  ten  oikian  Si- 
mbnos).  "Peter's  house"  (Matt.  8:14).  "The  house  of 
Simon  and  Andrew"  (Mark  1:29).  Paul's  reference  to 
Peter's  wife  (I  Cor.  9:5)  is  pertinent.  They  lived  together 
in  Capernaum.  This  house  came  also  to  be  the  Capernaum 
home  of  Jesus.  Simon's  wife's  mother  {penthera  tou  Simbnos). 
The  word  penthera  for  mother-in-law  is  old  and  well  estab- 
lished in  usage.  Besides  the  parallel  passages  (Mark  1 :30; 
Matt.  8:14;  Luke  4:38)  it  occurs  in  the  N.T.  only  in  Luke 
12:53.  The  corresponding  word  pentheros,  father-in-law, 
occurs  in  John  18:13  alone  in  the  N.T.  Was  holden  with  a 
great  fever  {en  sunechomene  puretbi  megalbi).  Periphrastic 
imperfect  passive,  the  analytical  tense  accenting  the  continu- 
ous fever,  perhaps  chronic  and  certainly  severe.  Luke  em- 
ploys this  verb  nine  times  and  only  three  others  in  the  N.T. 
(Matt.  4:24  passive  with  diseases  here;  II  Cor.  5:14  active; 
Phil.  1:23  passive).  In  Acts  28:8  the  passive  "with  dysen- 
tery" is  like  the  construction  here  and  is  a  common  one 
in  Greek  medical  writers  as  in  Greek  literature  gener- 
ally. Luke  uses  the  passive  with  "fear,"  Luke  8:37,  the 
active  for  holding  the  hands  over  the  ears  (Acts  7:57)  and 
for  pressing  one  or  holding  together  (Luke  8:45;  19:43; 
22:63),  tne  direct  middle  for  holding  oneself  to  preach- 
ing (Acts  18:5).  It  is  followed  here  by  the  instrumental 
case.  Hobart  {Medical  Language  of  Luke,  p.  3)  quotes 
Galen  as  dividing  fevers  into  "great"  {megaloi)  and  "small" 
{smikroi). 

39.  He  stood  over  her  {epistas  epanb  autes).  Second  aorist 
active  participle.  Only  in  Luke.  Surely  we  are  not  to  take 
Luke  to  mean  that  Jesus  here  took  the  exorcist's  position 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  65 

and  was  rebuking  a  malignant  personality.  The  attitude 
of  Jesus  is  precisely  that  of  any  kindly  sympathetic  physi- 
cian. Mark  1:31  and  Matt.  8:15  mention  the  touch  of  her 
hand  rather  than  the  tender  look  over  her  head.  Rebuked 
(epetimesen).  Only  in  Luke.  Jesus  bade  the  fever  leave 
her  as  he  spoke  to  the  wind  and  the  waves  and  Luke  uses 
this  same  verb  (8:24).  Rose  up  and  ministered  (anastasa 
diekonei).  Second  aorist  active  participle  as  in  verse  38, 
but  inchoative  imperfect  tense  diekonei,  from  diakoneb  (note 
augment  of  compound  verb).  She  rose  up  immediately, 
though  a  long  high  fever  usually  leaves  one  very  weak.  The 
cure  was  instantaneous  and  complete.  She  began  to  minis- 
ter at  once  and  kept  it  up. 

40.  When  the  sun  was  setting  (dunontos  tou  heliou).  Geni- 
tive absolute  and  present  participle  (duno,  late  form  of  duo) 
picturing  the  sunset  scene.  Even  Mark  1:32  has  here  the 
aorist  indicative  edusen  (punctiliar  active).  It  was  not  only 
cooler,  but  it  was  the  end  of  the  sabbath  when  it  was  not  re- 
garded as  work  (Vincent)  to  carry  a  sick  person  (John  5:10). 
And  also  by  now  the  news  of  the  cure  of  the  demoniac  of 
Peter's  mother-in-law  had  spread  all  over  the  town.  Had 
(eichon).  Imperfect  tense  including  all  the  chronic  cases. 
With  divers  diseases  (nosois  poikilais).  Instrumental  case. 
For  "divers"  say  "many  coloured"  or  "variegated."  See  on 
Matt.  4:24;  Mark  1 134.  Brought  (egagon).  Constative  sum- 
mary second  aorist  active  indicative  like  Matt.  8:16,  pros- 
enegkan,  where  Mark  1 132  has  the  imperfect  epheron,  brought 
one  after  another.  He  laid  his  hands  on  every  one  of  them  and 
healed  them  {ho  de  heni  hekastbi  auton  las  chciras  tpititheis 
ether apeuen  autous).  Note  the  present  active  participle 
epititheis  and  the  imperfect  active  etherapeuen,  picturing  the 
healing  one  by  one  with  the  tender  touch  upon  each  one. 
Luke  alone  gives  this  graphic  detail  which  was  more  than  a 
mere  ceremonial  laying  on  of  hands.  Clearly  the  cures  of 
Jesus  reached  the  physical,  mental,  and  spiritual  planes  of 


66        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

human  nature.    He  is  Lord  of  life  and  acted  here  as  Master 
of  each  case  as  it  came. 

41.  Came out(exercheto, singular, or exerchonto, plural).  Im- 
perfect tense,  repetition,  from  one  after  another.  Thou  art 
the  Son  of  God  (Su  ei  ho  huios  tou  theou).  More  definite 
statement  of  the  deity  of  Jesus  than  the  witness  of  the  demo- 
niac in  the  synagogue  (Luke  4:34  =  Mark  1:24),  like  the 
words  of  the  Father  (Luke  3  122)  and  more  so  than  the  con- 
dition of  the  devil  (Luke  4:3,  9).  In  the  Canterbury  Revi- 
sion "devils"  should  always  be  "demons"  (daimonia)  as 
here.  Suffered  them  not  to  speak  (ouk  eia  auta  lalein).  Im- 
perfect third  singular  active  of  eao,  very  old  and  common 
verb  with  syllabic  augment  ei.  The  tense  accents  the  con- 
tinued refusal  of  Jesus  to  receive  testimony  to  his  person 
and  work  from  demons.  Cf.  Matt.  8:4  to  the  lepers.  Be- 
cause they  knew  (hoti  eideisan).  Causal,  not  declarative, 
hoti.  Past  perfect  of  the  second  perfect  oida.  That  he  was 
the  Christ  (ton  Christon  auton  einai).  Infinitive  in  indirect 
assertion  with  the  accusative  of  general  reference.  Ton 
Christon  =the  Anointed,  the  Messiah. 

42.  When  it  was  day  (genomenes  hemeras).  Genitive  abso- 
lute with  aorist  middle  participle.  Mark  1:35  notes  it  was 
"a  great  while  before  day"  (which  see  for  discussion)  when 
Jesus  rose  up  to  go  after  a  restless  night.  No  doubt,  be- 
cause of  the  excitement  of  the  previous  sabbath  in  Caper- 
naum. He  went  out  to  pray  (Mark  1:35).  Sought  after 
him  (epezetoun  auton).  Imperfect  active  indicative.  The 
multitudes  kept  at  it  until  "they  came  unto  him"  (elthon 
heos  atitou,  auiibt  active  indicative).  They  accomplished 
their  purpose,  heos  autou,  right  up  to  him.  Would  have 
stayed  him  (kateichon  auton).  Better,  They  tried  to  hinder 
him.  The  conative  imperfect  active  of  katecho,  an  old  and 
common  verb.  It  means  either  to  hold  fast  (Luke  8:15),  to 
take,  get  possession  of  (Luke  14:9)  or  to  hold  back,  to  re- 
tain, to  restrain  (Philem.  13;  Rom.  1:18;  7:6;  II  Thess.  2:6; 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  67 

Luke  4:42).  In  this  passage  it  is  followed  by  the  ablative 
case.  That  he  should  not  go  from  them  (tou  me  poreuesthai 
ap*  autbn).  Literally,  "from  going  away  from  them."  The 
use  of  me  (not)  after  kateichon  is  the  neat  Greek  idiom  of  the 
redundant  negative  after  a  verb  of  hindering  like  the  French 
ne  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  1171). 

43.  /  must  (me  dei).  Jesus  felt  the  urge  to  go  with  the 
work  of  evangelism  "to  the  other  cities  also,"  to  all,  not  to 
a  favoured  few.  For  therefore  was  I  sent  (hoti  epi  touto 
apestalen).  "A  phrase  of  Johannine  ring"  (Ragg).  Second 
aorist  passive  indicative  of  apostellb.  Christ  is  the  great 
Apostle  of  God  to  men. 

44.  Was  preaching  (en  kerusson).  Periphrastic  imperfect 
active,  describing  his  first  tour  of  Galilee  in  accord  with  the 
purpose  just  stated.  One  must  fill  in  details,  though  Mark 
1:39  and  Matt.  8:23-25  tell  of  the  mass  of  work  done  on 
this  campaign. 


CHAPTER  V 

I.  Pressed  upon  him  {epikeisthai).  Luke  in  this  paragraph 
(5:1-11;  Mark  1:16-20;  Matt.  4:18-22)  does  not  follow  the 
chronology  of  Mark  as  he  usually  does.  It  seems  reasonably 
clear  that  the  renewed  call  of  the  four  fishermen  came  before 
the  first  tour  of  Galilee  in  Luke  4:42-44.  It  is  here  assumed 
that  Luke  is  describing  in  his  own  way  the  incident  given  in 
Mark  and  Matthew  above.  Luke  singles  out  Simon  in  a 
graphic  way.  This  verb  epikeisthai  is  an  old  one  and  means  to 
lie  upon,  rest  upon  as  of  a  stone  on  the  tomb  (John  11 138)  or 
of  fish  on  the  burning  coals  (John  21:9).  So  it  is  used  of  a 
tempest  (Acts  27:20)  and  of  the  urgent  demands  for  Christ's 
crucifixion  (Luke  23:23).  Here  it  vividly  pictures  the  eager 
crowds  around  Jesus.  En  tbi  epikeisthai  is  a  favourite  idiom 
with  Luke  as  we  have  already  seen,  en  with  the  articular 
infinitive  in  the  locative  case.  That  (kai).  Kai  does  not 
technically  mean  the  declarative  conjunction  "that,"  but 
it  is  a  fair  rendering  of  the  somewhat  awkward  idiom  of  Luke 
to  a  certain  extent  imitating  the  Hebrew  use  of  wav.  Was 
standing  {en  hestos).  Periphrastic  second  past  perfect  of 
histemi  which  here  is  equal  to  a  practical  imperfect.  By  the 
lake  {para  ten  limnen).  The  use  of  the  accusative  with  para, 
alongside,  after  a  verb  of  rest  used  to  be  called  the  pregnant 
use,  came  and  was  standing.  But  that  is  no  longer  necessary, 
for  the  accusative  as  the  case  of  extension  is  the  oldest  of  the 
cases  and  in  later  Greek  regains  many  of  the  earlier  uses  of 
the  other  cases  employed  for  more  precise  distinctions.  See 
the  same  idiom  in  verse  2.  We  need  not  here  stress  the 
notion  of  extension.  "With  characteristic  accuracy  Luke 
never  calls  it  a  sea,  while  the  others  never  call  it  a  lake" 
(Plummer). 

68 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  69 

2.  Two  boats  (ploia  duo).  Some  MSS.  have  ploiaria,  little 
boats,  but  ploia  was  used  of  boats  of  various  sizes,  even  of 
ships  like  nees.  The  fishermen  {hoi  haleeis).  It  is  an  old 
Homeric  word  that  has  come  back  to  common  use  in  the 
Koine.  It  means  "sea-folk"  from  hals,  sea.  Were  washing 
(eplunon).  Imperfect  active,  though  some  MSS.  have  aorist 
eplunan.  Vincent  comments  on  Luke's  use  of  five  verbs  for 
washing:  this  one  for  cleaning,  apomasso  for  wiping  the  dust 
from  one's  feet  (10:11),  ekmasso  of  the  sinful  woman  wiping 
Christ's  feet  with  her  hair  (7 :38,  44),  apoloub  of  washing  away 
sins  (symbolically,  of  course)  as  in  Acts  22:16,  and  loud  of 
washing  the  body  of  Dorcas  (Acts  9:37)  and  the  stripes  of 
the  prisoners  (Acts  16:33).  On  "nets"  see  on  Matt.  4:20, 
Mark  1:18. 

3.  To  put  out  a  little  {epanagagein  oligon).  Second  aorist 
infinitive  of  the  double  compound  verb  ep-an-ago,  found  in 
Xenophon  and  late  Greek  writers  generally.  Only  twice  in 
the  N.T.  In  Matt.  21:18  in  the  sense  of  leading  back  or 
returning  and  here  in  the  sense  of  leading  a  ship  up  upon  the 
sea,  to  put  out  to  sea,  a  nautical  term.  Taught  (edikasken). 
Imperfect  active,  picturing  Jesus  teaching  from  the  boat  in 
which  he  was  seated  and  so  safe  from  the  jam  of  the  crowd. 
"Christ  uses  Peter's  boat  as  a  pulpit  whence  to  throw  the  net 
of  the  Gospel  over  His  hearers"  (Plummer). 

4.  Had  left  speaking  {epausato  lalon).  He  ceased  speaking 
(aorist  middle  indicative  and  present  active  participle, 
regular  Greek  idiom).  Put  out  into  the  deep  (epanagage  eis 
to  bathos).  The  same  double  compound  verb  as  in  verse  3, 
only  here  second  aorist  active  imperative  second  person 
singular.  Let  down  (chalasate).  Peter  was  master  of  the 
craft  and  so  he  was  addressed  first.  First  aorist  active  im- 
perative second  person  plural.  Here  the  whole  crew  are 
addressed.  The  verb  is  the  regular  nautical  term  for  lowering 
cargo  or  boats  (Acts  27:17,  30).  But  it  was  used  for  lowering 
anything  from  a  higher  place  (Mark  2:4;  Acts  9:25;  II  Cor. 


70        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

11:33).     For  a  catch   (eis  agran).     This  purpose  was   the 
startling  thing  that  stirred  up  Simon. 

5.  Master  {epistata).  Used  only  by  Luke  in  the  N.T.  and 
always  in  addresses  to  Christ  (8:24,  45;  9:33,  49;  17:13). 
Common  in  the  older  writers  for  superintendent  or  overseer 
(one  standing  over  another).  This  word  recognizes  Christ's 
authority.  We  toiled  (kopias  antes).  This  verb  is  from  kopos 
(work,  toil)  and  occurs  from  Aristophanes  on.  It  used  to  be 
said  that  the  notion  of  weariness  in  toil  appears  only  in  the 
LXX  and  the  N.T.  But  Deissmann  (Light  from  the  Ancient 
East,  pp.  3  I2f.)  cites  examples  from  inscriptions  on  tomb- 
stones quite  in  harmony  with  the  use  in  the  N.T.  Peter's 
protest  calls  attention  also  to  the  whole  night  of  fruitless 
toil.  But  at  thy  word  (epi  de  toi  rhemati  sou).  On  the  base 
of  epi.  Acquiescence  to  show  his  obedience  to  Christ  as 
"Master,"  but  with  no  confidence  whatsoever  in  the  wisdom 
of  this  particular  command.  Besides,  fishing  in  this  lake  was 
Peter's  business  and  he  really  claimed  superior  knowledge 
on  this  occasion  to  that  of  Jesus. 

6.  They  inclosed  (sunekleisan).  Effective  aorist  active 
indicative  with  perfective  compound  sun.  They  shut  to- 
gether. Were  breaking  (dieresseto) .  Imperfect  passive  singular 
(diktua  being  neuter  plural).  This  is  the  late  form  of  the  old 
verb  diaregnumi.  The  nets  were  actually  tearing  in  two 
(dia-)  and  so  they  would  lose  all  the  fish. 

7.  They  beckoned  (kateneusan).  Possibly  they  were  too  far 
away  for  a  call  to  be  understood.  Simon  alone  had  been 
ordered  to  put  out  into  the  deep.  So  they  used  signs.  Unto 
their  partners  (tois  metechois).  This  word  metochos,  from 
metecho,  to  have  with,  means  participation  with  one  in  common 
blessings  (Heb.  3:1,  14;  6:4;  12:8).  While  koinbnos  (verse 
10  here  of  James  and  John  also)  has  the  notion  of  personal 
fellowship,  partnership.  Both  terms  are  here  employed  of 
the  two  pairs  of  brothers  who  have  a  business  company  under 
Simon's    lead.      Help    them    (sullabesthai).      Second    aorist 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  71 

middle  infinitive.  Take  hold  together  with  and  so  to  help. 
Paul  uses  it  in  Phil.  4:3.  It  is  an  old  word  that  was  some- 
times employed  for  seizing  a  prisoner  (Luke  22:54)  and  for 
conception  icon-capio)  by  a  woman  (Luke  1:24).  So  that 
they  began  to  sink  {hoste  buthizesthai  autd).  Consecutive  use 
of  hoste  and  the  infinitive  (present  tense,  inchoative  use, 
beginning  to  sink).  An  old  verb  from  buthos.  In  the  N.T. 
only  here  and  I  Tim.  6:9. 

8.  Fell  down  at  Jesus''  knees  (prosepesen  tois  gonasin  Iesou). 
Just  like  Peter,  from  extreme  self-confidence  and  pride 
(verse  5)  to  abject  humilation.  But  his  impulse  here  was 
right  and  sincere.  His  confession  was  true.  He  was  a  sinful 
man. 

9.  For  he  was  amazed  (thambos  gar  perieschen).  Literally, 
For  a  wonder  held  him  round.  Aorist  active  indicative.  It 
held  Peter  fast  and  all  the  rest. 

10.  Thou  shalt  catch  men  (esei  zogron).  Periphrastic  future 
indicative,  emphasizing  the  linear  idea.  The  old  verb 
Zogreo  means  to  catch  alive,  not  to  kill.  So  then  Peter  is  to 
be  a  catcher  of  men,  not  of  fish,  and  to  catch  them  alive  and 
for  life,  not  dead  and  for  death.  The  great  Pentecost  will 
one  day  prove  that  Christ's  prophecy  will  come  true.  Much 
must  happen  before  that  great  day.  But  Jesus  foresees  the 
possibilities  in  Simon  and  he  joyfully  undertakes  the  task 
of  making  a  fisher  of  men  out  of  this  poor  fisher  of  fish. 

11.  They  left  all,  and  followed  him  (aphentes  panta  ekolou- 
thesan).  Then  and  there.  They  had  already  become  his 
disciples.  Now  they  leave  their  business  for  active  service 
of  Christ.  The  conduct  of  this  group  of  business  men  should 
make  other  business  men  to  pause  and  see  if  Jesus  is  calling 
them  to  do  likewise. 

12.  Behold  (kai  idou).  Quite  a  Hebraistic  idiom,  this  use 
of  kai  after  egeneto  (almost  like  hoti)  with  idou  (interjection) 
and  no  verb.  Full  of  leprosy  (pleres  lepras).  Mark  1 140  and 
Matt.  8:2  have  simply  "a  leper"  which  see.     Evidently  a 


72        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

bad  case  full  of  sores  and  far  advanced  as  Luke  the  physician 
notes.  The  law  (Lev.  I3:i2f.)  curiously  treated  advanced 
cases  as  less  unclean  than  the  earlier  stages.  Fell  on  his  face 
(peson  epi  prosopon).  Second  aorist  active  participle  of 
pipto,  common  verb.  Mark  I  40  has  "kneeling"  (gonupetbn) 
and  Matt.  8:40  "worshipped"  (prosekunei).  All  three  atti- 
tudes were  possible  one  after  the  other.  All  three  Synoptics 
quote  the  identical  language  of  the  leper  and  the  identical 
answer  of  Jesus.  His  condition  of  the  third  class  turned  on 
the  "will"  (theleis)  of  Jesus  who  at  once  asserts  his  will 
(thelo)  and  cleanses  him.  All  three  likewise  mention  the 
touch  (hepsato,  verse  13)  of  Christ's  hand  on  the  unclean 
leper  and  the  instantaneous  cure. 

14.  To  tell  no  man  (medeni  eipein).  This  is  an  indirect 
command  after  the  verb  "charged"  (pareggeilen).  But 
Luke  changes  (constructio  variata)  to  the  direct  quotation, 
a  common  idiom  in  Greek  and  often  in  Luke  (Acts  1 :4f.). 
Here  in  the  direct  form  he  follows  Mark  1  43  and  Matt.  8:4. 
See  discussion  there  about  the  direction  to  go  to  the  priest 
to  receive  a  certificate  showing  his  cleansing,  like  our  release 
from  quarantine  (Lev.  13:39;  14:2-32).  For  a  testimony 
unto  them  (eis  marturion  autois).  The  use  of  autois  (them) 
here  is  "according  to  sense,"  as  we  say,  for  it  has  no  ante- 
cedent in  the  context,  just  to  people  in  general.  But  this 
identical  phrase  with  absence  of  direct  reference  occurs  in 
Mark  and  Matthew,  pretty  good  proof  of  the  use  of  one  by 
the  other.    Both  Matt.  8  4  and  Luke  5:14  follow  Mark  1  44. 

15.  So  much  the  more  (mdllon).  Mark  1:45  has  only 
"much"  (polla,  many),  but  Mark  tells  more  about  the  effect 
of  this  disobedience.  Went  abroad  (diercheto).  Imperfect 
tense.  The  fame  of  Jesus  kept  going.  Came  together  {suner- 
chonto).  Imperfect  tense  again.  The  more  the  report 
spread,  the  more  the  crowds  came. 

16.  But  he  withdrew  himself  in  the  deserts  and  prayed  (autos 
de  en  hupochorbn  en  tais  eremois  kai  proseuchomenos).    Peri- 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  73 

phrastic  imperfects.  Literally,  "But  he  himself  was  with- 
drawing in  the  desert  places  and  praying."  The  more  the 
crowds  came  as  a  result  of  the  leper's  story,  the  more  Jesus 
turned  away  from  them  to  the  desert  regions  and  prayed 
with  the  Father.  It  is  a  picture  of  Jesus  drawn  with  vivid 
power.  The  wild  enthusiasm  of  the  crowds  was  running 
ahead  of  their  comprehension  of  Christ  and  his  mission  and 
message.  Hupochoreo  (perhaps  with  the  notion  of  slipping 
away  secretly,  hupo-)  is  a  very  common  Greek  verb,  but  in 
the  N.T.  occurs  in  Luke  alone.  Elsewhere  in  the  N.T. 
anachoreo  (to  go  back)  appears. 

17.  That  (kai).  Use  of  kai=hoti  (that)  like  the  Hebrew 
zvav,  though  found  in  Greek  also.  He  (autos).  Luke  some- 
times has  autos  in  the  nominative  as  unemphatic  "he"  as 
here,  not  "he  himself."  Was  teaching  (en  didaskbn).  Peri- 
phrastic imperfect  again  like  our  English  idiom.  Were  sitting 
by  (esan  kathemenoi) .  Periphrastic  imperfect  again.  There 
is  no  "by"  in  the  Greek.  Doctors  of  the  law  (nomodidaskaloi) . 
A  compound  word  formed  after  analogy  of  hierodidaskalos, 
but  not  found  outside  of  the  N.T.  and  ecclesiastical  writers, 
one  of  the  very  few  words  apparently  N.T.  in  usage.  It 
appears  here  and  Acts  5:34  and  I  Tim.  1:7.  It  is  not  likely 
that  Luke  and  Paul  made  the  word,  but  they  simply  used  the 
term  already  in  current  use  to  describe  teachers  and  in- 
terpreters of  the  law.  Our  word  "doctor"  is  Latin  for 
"teacher."  These  "teachers  of  the  law"  are  called  elsewhere 
in  the  Gospels  "scribes"  (grammateis)  as  in  Matthew  and 
Mark  (see  on  Matt.  5 :20;  23  134)  and  Luke  5 :2i ;  19:47;  21  :i ; 
22:2.  Luke  also  employs  nomikos  (one  skilled  in  the  law, 
nomos)  as  in  10:25.  One  thinks  of  our  LL.D.  (Doctors  of 
Civil  and  Canon  Law),  for  both  were  combined  in  Jewish 
law.  They  were  usually  Pharisees  (mentioned  here  for  the 
first  time  in  Luke)  for  which  see  on  Matt.  3  7,  20.  Luke  will 
often  speak  of  the  Pharisees  hereafter.  Not  all  the  "Phar- 
isees" were  "teachers  of  the  law"  so  that  both  terms  often 


74        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

occur  together  as  in  verse  21  where  Luke  has  separate  ar- 
ticles (hoi  grammateis  kai  hoi  Pharisaioi),  distinguishing  be- 
tween them,  though  one  article  may  occur  as  in  Matt.  5 :20 
or  no  article  as  here  in  verse  17.  Luke  alone  mentions  the 
presence  here  of  these  Pharisees  and  doctors  of  the  law 
"which  were  come"  (hoi  esan  eleluthotes,  periphrastic  past 
perfect  active,  had  come).  Out  of  every  village  of  Galilee  and 
Judea  and  Jerusalem  (ek  pases  kbmes  tes  Galilaias  kai 
Ioudaias  kai  Ierousalem).  Edersheim  (Jewish  Social  Life) 
observes  that  the  Jews  distinguished  Jerusalem  as  a  separate 
district  in  Judea.  Plummer  considers  it  hyperbole  in  Luke 
to  use  "every  village."  But  one  must  recall  that  Jesus  had 
already  made  one  tour  of  Galilee  which  stirred  the  Pharisees 
and  rabbis  to  active  opposition.  Judea  had  already  been 
aroused  and  Jerusalem  was  the  headquarters  of  the  definite 
campaign  now  organized  against  Jesus.  One  must  bear  in 
mind  that  John  4:1-4  shows  that  Jesus  had  already  left 
Jerusalem  and  Judea  because  of  the  jealousy  of  the  Pharisees. 
They  are  here  on  purpose  to  find  fault  and  to  make  charges 
against  Jesus.  One  must  not  forget  that  there  were  many 
kinds  of  Pharisees  and  that  not  all  of  them  were  as  bad  as 
these  legalistic  and  punctilious  hypocrites  who  deserved  the 
indictment  and  exposure  of  Christ  in  Matt.  23.  Paul  himself 
is  a  specimen  of  the  finer  type  of  Pharisee  which,  however, 
developed  into  the  persecuting  fanatic  till  Jesus  changed  his 
whole  life.  The  power  of  the  Lord  was  with  him  to  heal  (du- 
namis  Kuriou  en  eis  to  iasthai  auton).  So  the  best  texts.  It 
it  neat  Greek,  but  awkward  English:  "Then  was  the  power 
of  the  Lord  for  the  healing  as  to  him  (Jesus)."  Here  Kuriou 
refers  to  Jehovah.  Dunamis  (dynamite)  is  one  of  the  com- 
mon words  for  "miracles"  (dunameis).  What  Luke  means  is 
that  Jesus  had  the  power  of  the  Lord  God  to  heal  with.  He 
does  not  mean  that  this  power  was  intermittent.  He  simply 
calls  attention  to  its  presence  with  Jesus  on  this  occasion. 
18.    That  was  palsied  (hos  en  paralelumenos).    Periphrastic 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  75 

past  perfect  passive  where  Mark  2:3  and  Matt.  9:2  have 
paralutikon  (our  paralytic).  Luke's  phrase  is  the  technical 
medical  term  (Hippocrates,  Galen,  etc.)  rather  than  Mark's 
vernacular  word  (Ramsay,  Luke  the  Physician,  pp.  57f.). 
They  sought  (ezetoun).    Conative  imperfect. 

19.  By  what  way  they  might  bring  him  in  {poias  eis  enegko- 
sin  auton).  Deliberative  subjunctive  of  the  direct  question 
retained  in  the  indirect.  The  housetop  {to  dbma).  Very  old 
word.  The  flat  roof  of  Jewish  houses  was  usually  reached 
by  outside  stairway.  Cf.  Acts  10:9  where  Peter  went  for 
meditation.  Through  the  tiles  {dia  ton  kerambn).  Common 
and  old  word  for  the  tile  roof.  Mark  2:4  speaks  of  digging 
a  hole  in  this  tile  roof.  Let  him  down  (kathekan  auton). 
First  aorist  {k  aorist)  effective  active  of  kathiemi,  common 
verb.  Mark  2:4  has  historical  present  chalosi,  the  verb 
used  by  Jesus  to  Peter  and  in  Peter's  reply  (Luke  5 :4f.)- 
With  his  couch  {sun  tbi  klinidibi).  Also  in  verse  24.  Diminu- 
tive of  kline  (verse  18)  occurring  in  Plutarch  and  Koine 
writers.  Mark  2:4  has  krabatton  (pallet).  It  doubtless  was 
a  pallet  on  which  the  paralytic  lay.  Into  the  midst  before 
Jesus  {eis  to  meson  emprosthen  tou  Iesou).  The  four  friends 
had  succeeded,  probably  each  holding  a  rope  to  a  corner  of 
the  pallet.  It  was  a  moment  of  triumph  over  difficulties 
and  surprise  to  all  in  the  house  (Peter's  apparently,  Mark 
2:1). 

20.  Their  faith  {ten  pistin  auton).  In  all  three  Gospels. 
Man  {anthrope).  Mark  and  Matthew  have  "child"  or 
"Son"  {teknon).  Are  forgiven  {apheontai).  This  Doric 
form  of  the  perfect  passive  indicative  is  for  the  Attic  aph- 
eintai.  It  appears  also  in  Luke  5 123 ;  7:47,  48;  John  20:23  5  I 
John  2:12.  Mark  2:6  and  Matt.  9:2  have  the  present 
passive  aphientai.  Possibly  this  man's  malady  was  due  to 
his  sin  as  is  sometimes  true  (John  5:14).  The  man  had 
faith  along  with  that  of  the  four,  but  he  was  still  a  paralytic 
when  Jesus  forgave  his  sins. 


76        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

21.  But  God  alone  (ei  me  monos  ho  theos).  Mark  has  heis 
(one)  instead  of  monos  (alone). 

22.  Perceiving  (epignous).  Same  form  (second  aorist  ac- 
tive participle  of  epiginosko,  common  verb  for  knowing 
fully)  in  Mark  2:8.  Reason  ye  (dialogizesthe)  as  in  Mark  2:8. 
Matt.  9:4  has  enthumeisthe . 

24.  He  saith  unto  him  that  was  palsied  (eipen  toi  para- 
lelumenoi).  This  same  parenthesis  right  in  the  midst  of 
the  words  of  Jesus  is  in  Mark  2:11  and  Matt.  9:6,  conclusive 
proof  of  interrelation  between  these  documents.  The  words 
of  Jesus  are  quoted  practically  alike  in  all  three  Gospels, 
the  same  purpose  also  hina  eidete  (second  perfect  active 
subjunctive). 

25.  Whereon  he  lay  (epti  ho  katekeito).  Imperfect,  upon 
which  he  had  been  lying  down.  Luke  uses  this  phrase  in- 
stead of  repeating  klinidion  (verse  24).  Glorifying  God 
{doxazbn  ton  theon).    As  one  can  well  imagine. 

26.  Amazement  (ekstasis).  Something  out  of  its  place,  as 
the  mind.  Here  the  people  were  almost  beside  themselves 
as  we  say  with  the  same  idiom.  See  on  Mark  5  42.  So  they 
kept  glorifying  God  (imperfect  tense,  edoxazon)  and  at  the 
same  time  "were  filled  with  fear"  (eplesthesan  phobou, 
aorist  passive).  Strange  things  (paradoxa) .  Our  very  word 
paradox,  contrary  to  (para)  received  opinion  (doxa).  Plato, 
Xenophon,  and  Polybius  use  it.    Here  alone  in  the  N.T. 

27.  A  publican  named  Levi  (telonen  onomati  Leuein). 
Mark  2:13  has  also  "The  son  of  Alphaeus"  while  Matt. 
9:9  calls  him  "Matthew."  He  had,  of  course,  both  names. 
All  three  use  the  same  words  (epi  to  telbnion)  for  the  place 
of  toll.  See  discussion  of  publican  [telones)  on  Matt.  9:9. 
All  three  Gospels  give  the  command  of  Jesus,  Follow  me 
(akolouthei) . 

28.  He  forsook  all  (katalipon  panta).  This  detail  in  Luke 
alone.  He  left  his  profitable  business  for  the  service  of 
Christ.     Followed  him  {ekolouthei  autoi).     Imperfect  active, 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  77 

perhaps  inchoative.  He  began  at  once  to  follow  him  and 
he  kept  it  up.  Both  Mark  2:14  and  Matt.  9:9  have  the 
aorist  {ekolouthesen),  perhaps  ingressive. 

29.  A  great  feast  {dochen  megalen).  Here  and  in  Luke 
14:13  only  in  the  N.T.  The  word  doche,  from  dechomai, 
means  reception.  Occurs  in  Plutarch  and  LXX.  Levi 
made  Jesus  a  big  reception.  Publicans  and  others  {telonon 
kai  allbn).  Luke  declines  here  to  use  "sinners"  like  Mark 
2:15  and  Matt.  9:10  though  he  does  so  in  verse  30  and  in 
15:1.  None  but  social  outcasts  would  eat  with  publicans 
at  such  a  feast  or  barbecue,  for  it  was  a  very  large  affair. 
Were  sitting  at  meat  with  them  {esan  met*  autbn  katakeimenoi). 
Literally,  were  reclining  with  them  (Jesus  and  the  disciples). 
It  was  a  motley  crew  that  Levi  had  brought  together,  but 
he  showed  courage  as  well  as  loyalty  to  Jesus. 

30.  The  Pharisees  and  their  scribes  {hoi  Pharisaioi  kai  hoi 
grammateis  autbn).  Note  article  with  each  substantive  and 
the  order,  not  "scribes  and  Pharisees,"  but  "the  Pharisees 
and  the  scribes  of  them"  (the  Pharisees).  Some  manuscripts 
omit  "their,"  but  Mark  2:16  (the  scribes  of  the  Pharisees) 
shows  that  it  is  correct  here.  Some  of  the  scribes  were  Sad- 
ducees.  It  is  only  the  Pharisees  who  find  fault  here.  Mur- 
mured {ego gguzon).  Imperfect  active.  Picturesque  onomato- 
poetic  word  that  sounds  like  its  meaning.  A  late  word  used 
of  the  cooing  of  doves.  It  is  like  the  buzzing  of  bees,  like 
tonthorruzo  of  literary  Greek.  They  were  not  invited  to  this 
feast  and  would  not  have  come  if  they  had  been.  But,  not 
being  invited,  they  hang  on  the  outside  and  criticize  the 
disciples  of  Jesus  for  being  there.  The  crowd  was  so  large 
that  the  feast  may  have  been  served  out  in  the  open  court 
at  Levi's  house,  a  sort  of  reclining  garden  party.  The  publi- 
cans and  sinners  {ton  telonon  kai  hamartblbn).  Here  Luke  is 
quoting  the  criticism  of  the  critics.  Note  one  article  making 
one  group  of  all  of  them. 

31.  They  that  are  whole  {hoi  hugiainontes).     Old  Greek 


78        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

word  for  good  health  from  hugies,  sound  in  body.  So  also 
in  Luke  7:10;  15:27;  III  John  2.  This  is  the  usual  word  for 
good  health  used  by  Greek  medical  writers.  Mark  2:17  and 
Matt.  9:12  have  hoi  ischuontes  (those  who  have  strength). 

32.  To  repentance  (eis  metanoian).  Alone  in  Luke  not 
genuine  in  Mark  2:17  and  Matt.  9:12.  Only  sinners  would 
need  a  call  to  repentance,  a  change  of  mind  and  life.  For 
the  moment  Jesus  accepts  the  Pharisaic  division  between 
"righteous"  and  "sinners"  to  score  them  and  to  answer 
their  criticism.  At  the  other  times  he  will  show  that  they 
only  pretend  to  be  "righteous"  and  are  "hypocrites"  in 
reality.  But  Jesus  has  here  blazed  the  path  for  all  soul- 
winners.  The  self-satisfied  are  the  hard  ones  to  win  and 
they  often  resent  efforts  to  win  them  to  Christ. 

33.  Often  (pukna).  Only  in  Luke.  Common  word  for 
thick,  compact,  often.  And  make  supplications  (kai  deeseis 
poiountai).  Only  in  Luke.  But  thine  {hoi  de  soi).  Sharp 
contrast  between  the  conduct  of  the  disciples  of  Jesus  and 
those  of  John  and  the  Pharisees  who  here  appear  together 
as  critics  of  Christ  and  his  disciples  (Mark  2:18;  Matt.  9: 
14),  though  Luke  does  not  bring  that  out  sharply.  It  is 
probable  that  Levi  had  his  reception  for  Jesus  on  one  of  the 
Jewish  fast  days  and,  if  so,  this  would  give  special  edge  to 
their  criticism. 

34.  Can  ye  (me  dunasthe).  So  Luke,  adding  make,  poiesai, 
where  Mark  and  Matthew  have  me  dunantai.  All  three 
have  me  and  expect  the  answer  no. 

35.  Then  in  those  days  (tote  en  ekeinais  tais  hemerais). 
Here  Mark  2:20  has  "then  in  that  day,"  and  Matt.  9:15 
only  "then." 

36.  Also  a  parable  (kai  parabolen).  There  are  three  para- 
bles here  in  the  answer  of  Jesus  (the  bridegroom,  the  patch 
on  the  garment,  the  wineskin).  They  are  not  called  parables 
save  here,  but  they  are  parables  and  Luke's  language  means 
that.     Rendeth   (schisas).     This  in  Luke  alone.     Common. 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  79 

verb.  Used  of  splitting  rocks  (Matt.  27:51).  Our  word 
schism  comes  from  it.  Putteth  it  (epiballei).  So  Matt.  9:16 
when  Mark  2:21  has  epiraptei  (sews  on).  The  word  for 
"piece"  or  "patch"  (epiblema)  in  all  the  three  Gospels  is 
from  the  verb  epiballo,  to  clap  on,  and  is  in  Plutarch,  Arrian, 
LXX,  though  the  verb  is  as  old  as  Homer.  See  on  Matthew 
and  Mark  for  distinction  between  kainos  (fresh),  neos  (new), 
and  palaios  (old).  He  will  rend  the  new  (kai  to  kainon  schisei). 
Future  active  indicative.  So  the  best  MSS.  Will  not  agree 
(ou  sumphonesei).  Future  active  indicative.  So  the  best 
manuscripts  again.  With  the  old  (toi  palaioi).  Associative 
instrumental  case.  Instead  of  this  phrase  in  Luke,  Mark 
2:21  and  Matt.  9:16  have  "a  worse  rent"  (cheiron  schisma). 

38.  Must  be  put  (bleteon).  This  verbal  adjective  in  -teos 
rather  than  -tos  appears  here  alone  in  the  N.T.  though  it  is 
common  enough  in  Attic  Greek.  It  is  a  survival  of  the 
literary  style.  This  is  the  impersonal  use  and  is  transitive 
in  sense  here  and  governs  the  accusative  "new  wine"  (oinon 
neon),  though  the  agent  is  not  expressed  (Robertson,  Gram- 
mar, p.  1097). 

39.  The  old  is  good  (Ho  palaios  chrestos  estin).  So  the  best 
MSS.  rather  that  chrestoteros,  comparative  (better).  West- 
cott  and  Hoit  wrongly  bracket  the  whole  verse,  though 
occurring  in  Aleph,  B  C  L  and  most  of  the  old  documents. 
It  is  absent  in  D  and  some  of  the  old  Latin  MSS.  It  is  the 
philosophy  of  the  obscurantist,  that  is  here  pictured  by 
Christ.  "The  prejudiced  person  will  not  even  try  the  new, 
or  admit  that  it  has  any  merits.  He  knows  that  the  old  is 
pleasant,  and  suits  him;  and  that  is  enough;  he  is  not  going 
to  change"  (Plummer).  This  is  Christ's  picture  of  the 
reactionary  Pharisees. 


CHAPTER  VI 

I.  On  a  sabbath  (en  sabbatbi).  This  is  the  second  sabbath 
on  which  Jesus  is  noted  by  Luke.  The  first  was  Luke  4:31- 
41.  There  was  another  in  John  5:1-47.  There  is  Western 
and  Syrian  (Byzantine)  evidence  for  a  very  curious  reading 
here  which  calls  this  sabbath  "secondfirst"  (deuteroprotoi) . 
It  is  undoubtedly  spurious,  though  Westcott  and  Hort  print 
it  in  the  margin.  A  possible  explanation  is  that  a  scribe 
wrote  "first"  (protoi)  on  the  margin  because  of  the  sabbath 
miracle  in  Luke  6:6-11.  Then  another  scribe  recalled  Luke 
4:31  where  a  sabbath  is  mentioned  and  wrote  "second" 
(deuterbi)  also  on  the  margin.  Finally  a  third  scribe  com- 
bined the  two  in  the  word  deuteroprotoi  that  is  not  found 
elsewhere.  If  it  were  genuine,  we  should  not  know  what  it 
means.  Plucked  (etillon).  Imperfect  active.  They  were 
plucking  as  they  went  on  through  (diaporeuesthai).  Whether 
wheat  or  barley,  we  do  not  know,  not  our  "corn"  (maize). 
Did  eat  (esthion).  Imperfect  again.  See  on  Matt.  I2:if. 
and  Mark  2:23^  for  the  separate  acts  in  supposed  violence 
of  the  sabbath  laws.  Rubbing  them  in  their  hands  (psochontes 
tais  chersin).  Only  in  Luke  and  only  here  in  the  N.T.  This 
was  one  of  the  chief  offences.  "According  to  Rabbinical 
notions,  it  was  reaping,  threshing,  winnowing,  and  prepar- 
ing food  all  at  once"  (Plummer).  These  Pharisees  were 
straining  out  gnats  and  swallowing  camels!  This  verb 
psbchb  is  a  late  one  for  psao,  to  rub. 

3.  Not  even  this  (oude  touto).  This  small  point  only  in 
Luke.  What  (ho).  Literally,  which.  Mark  2:25  and  Matt. 
12:3  have  ti  (what). 

4.  Did  take  (labon).  Second  aorist  active  participle  of 
lambano.     Not  in  Mark  and  Matthew.     See  Matt.  12:1-8 

80 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  8 1 

and  Mark  2:23-28  for  discussion  of  details  about  the  shew- 
bread  and  the  five  arguments  in  defence  of  his  conduct  on 
the  sabbath  (example  of  David,  work  of  the  priests  on  the 
sabbath,  prophecy  of  Hosea  6:6,  purpose  of  the  sabbath  for 
man,  the  Son  of  Man  lord  of  the  sabbath).  It  was  an  over- 
whelming and  crushing  reply  to  these  pettifogging  ceremo- 
nialists  to  which  they  could  not  reply,  but  which  increased 
their  anger.  Codex  D  transfers  verse  5  to  after  verse  10 
and  puts  here  the  following:  "On  the  same  day  beholding 
one  working  on  the  sabbath  he  said  to  him:  Man,  if  you 
know  what  you  are  doing,  happy  are  you;  but  if  you  do  not 
know,  cursed  are  you  and  a  transgressor  of  the  law." 

6.  On  another  sabbath  {en  heteroi  sabbatoi).  This  was 
a  second  (heteron,  as  it  often  means),  but  not  necessarily 
the  next,  sabbath.  This  incident  is  given  by  all  three  synop- 
tics (Mark  3:1-6;  Matt.  12:9-14;  Luke  6:6-11).  See  Matt, 
and  Mark  for  details.  Only  Luke  notes  that  it  was  on  a 
sabbath.  Was  this  because  Luke  as  a  physician  had  to 
meet  this  problem  in  his  own  practise?  Right  hand  (he 
dexia).  This  alone  in  Luke,  the  physician's  eye  for  particu- 
lars. 

7.  The  scribes  and  the  Pharisees  (hoi  grammateis  kai  hoi 
Pharisaioi).  Only  Luke  here  though  Pharisees  named  in 
Matt.  12:14  and  Pharisees  and  Herodians  in  Mark  3:6. 
Watched  him  (pareterounto  auton).  Imperfect  middle,  were 
watching  for  themselves  on  the  side  (para).  Mark  3:2  has 
the  imperfect  active  pareteroun.  Common  verb,  but  the 
proposition  para  gave  an  extra  touch,  watching  either 
assiduously  like  the  physician  at  the  bedside  or  insidiously 
with  evil  intent  as  here.  Would  heal  (therapeusei).  But  the 
present  active  indicative  (therapeuei)  may  be  the  correct 
text  here.  So  Westcott  and  Hort.  That  they  might  find  out 
how  to  accuse  him  (hina  heurosin  kategorein  autou).  Second 
aorist  active  subjunctive  of  heurisko  and- the  infinitive  with  it 
means  to  find  out  how  to  do  a  thing.    They  were  determined 


82        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

to  make  a  case  against  Jesus.  They  felt  sure  that  their 
presence  would  prevent  any  spurious  work  on  the  part  of 
Jesus. 

8.  But  he  knew  their  thoughts  (autos  de  eidei  tous  dialogis- 
mous  autbn).  In  Luke  alone.  Imperfect  in  sense,  second 
past  perfect  in  form  eidei  from  oida.  Jesus,  in  contrast  to 
these  spies  (Plummer),  read  their  intellectual  processes  like 
an  open  book.  His  hand  withered  {peer an  ten  cheira).  Predi- 
cate position  of  the  adjective.  So  in  Mark  3 :3.  Stand  forth 
{stethi).  Luke  alone  has  this  verb,  second  aorist  active 
imperative.  Mark  3 :3  has  Arise  into  the  midst  {egeire  eis 
to  meson).  Luke  has  Arise  and  step  forth  into  the  midst 
{egeire  kai  stethi  eis  to  meson).  Christ  worked  right  out 
in  the  open  where  all  could  see.  It  was  a  moment  of  ex- 
citement when  the  man  stepped  forth  {este)  there  before 
them  all. 

9.  I  ask  you  {eperoto  humas).  They  had  questions  in  their 
hearts  about  Jesus.  He  now  asks  in  addition  {ep9)  an  open 
question  that  brings  the  whole  issue  into  the  open.  A  life 
{psuchen).  So  the  Revised  Version.  The  rabbis  had  a  rule: 
Periculum  vitae  pellit  sabbatum.  But  it  had  to  be  a  Jew  whose 
life  was  in  peril  on  the  sabbath.  The  words  of  Jesus  cut  to 
the  quick.  Or  to  destroy  it  {e  apolesai).  On  this  very  day 
these  Pharisees  were  plotting  to  destroy  Jesus   (verse  7). 

10.  He  looked  round  about  on  them  all  {periblepsamenos). 
First  aorist  middle  participle  as  in  Mark  3 :5,  the  middle 
voice  giving  a  personal  touch  to  it  all.  Mark  adds  "with 
anger"  which  Luke  here  does  not  put  in.  All  three  Gospels 
have  the  identical  command:  Stretch  forth  thy  hand  {ex- 
teinon  ten  cheira  sou).  First  aorist  active  imperative. 
Stretch  out,  clean  out,  full  length.  All  three  Gospels  also 
have  the  first  aorist  passive  indicative  apekatestathe  with  the 
double  augment  of  the  double  compound  verb  apokathistemi. 
As  in  Greek  writers,  so  here  the  double  compound  means 
complete  restoration  to  the  former  state. 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  83 

11.  They  were  filled  with  madness  {eplesthesan  anoias) 
First  aorist  passive  (effective)  with  genitive:  In  5:26  we  saw 
the  people  filled  with  fear.  Here  is  rage  that  is  kin  to  insanity, 
for  anoias  is  lack  of  sense  {a  privative  and  nous,  mind).  An 
old  word,  but  only  here  and  II  Tim.  3  :o,  in  the  N.T.  Communed 
(dielaloun),  imperfect  active,  picturing  their  excited  counsel- 
lings  with  one  another.  Mark  3  :6  notes  that  they  bolted  out 
of  the  synagogue  and  outside  plotted  even  with  the  Herodians 
how  to  destroy  Jesus,  strange  co-conspirators  these  against 
the  common  enemy.  What  they  might  do  to  Jesus  {ti  an 
poiesaien  Iesou).  Luke  puts  it  in  a  less  damaging  way  than 
Mark  3:6  and  Matt.  12:14.  This  aorist  optative  with  an 
is  the  deliberative  question  like  that  in  Acts  17:18  retained 
in  the  indirect  form  here.  Perhaps  Luke  means,  not  that 
they  were  undecided  about  killing  Jesus,  but  only  as  to  the 
best  way  of  doing  it.  Already  nearly  two  years  before  the 
end  we  see  the  set  determination  to  destroy  Jesus.  We  see 
it  here  in  Galilee.  We  have  already  seen  it  at  the  feast  in 
Jerusalem  (John  5:18)  where  "the  Jews  sought  the  more  to 
kill  him."  John  and  the  Synoptics  are  in  perfect  agreement 
as  to  the  Pharisaic  attitude  toward  Jesus. 

12.  He  went  out  into  the  mountains  to  pray  {exelthein  auton 
eis  to  or os  proseuxasthai).  Note  ex-  where  Mark  3:13  has 
goeth  up  (anabainei).  Luke  alone  has  "to  pray"  as  he 
so  often  notes  the  habit  of  prayer  in  Jesus.  He  continued  all 
night  {en  dianuktereuon).  Periphrastic  imperfect  active. 
Here  alone  in  the  N.T.,  but  common  in  the  LXX  and  in  late 
Greek  writers.  Medical  writers  used  it  of  whole  night  vigils. 
In  prayer  to  God  {en  tei  proseuchei  tou  theou).  Objective 
genitive  tou  theou.  This  phrase  occurs  nowhere  else.  Pros- 
euche  does  not  mean  "place  of  prayer"  or  synagogue  as  in 
Acts  16:13,  but  the  actual  prayer  of  Jesus  to  the  Father  all 
night  long.  He  needed  the  Father's  guidance  now  in  the 
choice  of  the  Apostles  in  the  morning. 

13.  When  it  was  day  {hote  egeneto  hemera).     When  day 


84        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

came,  after  the  long  night  of  prayer.  He  chose  from  them 
twelve  (eklexamenos  ap'  autbn  dodeka).  The  same  root 
{leg)  was  used  for  picking  out,  selecting  and  then  for  saying. 
There  was  a  large  group  of  " disciples"  or  "learners"  whom 
he  "called"  to  him  (prosephbnesen) ,  and  from  among  whom 
he  chose  (of  himself,  and  for  himself,  indirect  middle  voice 
(eklexamenos).  It  was  a  crisis  in  the  work  of  Christ.  Jesus 
assumed  full  responsibility  even  for  the  choice  of  Judas  who 
was  not  forced  upon  Jesus  by  the  rest  of  the  Twelve.  "You 
did  not  choose  me,  but  I  chose  you,"  (John  15:16)  where 
Jesus  uses  exelexasthe  and  exelexamen  as  here  by  Luke. 
Whom  also  he  named  apostles  (hous  kai  apostolous  bnomasen). 
So  then  Jesus  gave  the  twelve  chosen  disciples  this  appellation. 
Aleph  and  B  have  these  same  words  in  Mark  3:14  besides  the 
support  of  a  few  of  the  best  cursives,  the  Bohairic  Coptic 
Version  and  the  Greek  margin  of  the  Harclean  Syriac.  West- 
cott  and  Hort  print  them  in  their  text  in  Mark  3:14,  but  it 
remains  doubtful  whether  they  were  not  brought  into  Mark 
from  Luke  6:13  where  they  are  undoubtedly  genuine.  See 
Matt.  10:2  where  the  connection  with  sending  them  out  by 
twos  in  the  third  tour  of  Galilee.  The  word  is  derived  from 
apostello,  to  send  (Latin,  mitto)  and  apostle  is  missionary, 
one  sent.  Jesus  applies  the  term  to  himself  (apesteilas,  John 
17:3)  as  does  Heb.  3:1.  The  word  is  applied  to  others, 
like  Barnabas,  besides  these  twelve  including  the  Apostle 
Paul  who  is  on  a  par  with  them  in  rank  and  authority,  and 
even  to  mere  messengers  of  the  churches  (II  Cor.  8:23).  But 
these  twelve  apostles  stand  apart  from  all  others  in  that  they 
were  all  chosen  at  once  by  Jesus  himself  "that  they  might  be 
with  him  "  (Mark  3  114),  to  be  trained  by  Jesus  himself  and  to 
interpret  him  and  his  message  to  the  world.  In  the  nature 
of  the  case  they  could  have  no  successors  as  they  had  to  be 
personal  witnesses  to  the  life  and  resurrection  of  Jesus  (Acts 
1:22).  The  selection  of  Matthias  to  succeed  Judas  cannot 
be  called  a  mistake,  but  it  automatically  ceased.     For  dis- 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  85 

cussion  of  the  names  and  groups  in  the  list  see  discussion  on 
Matt.  10:1-4  and  Mark  3  :I4~I9. 

16.  Which  was  the  traitor  (hos  egeneto  prodotes).  Who 
became  traitor,  more  exactly,  egeneto,  not  en.  He  gave  no 
signs  of  treachery  when  chosen. 

17.  He  came  down  with  them  (katabas  me?  auibn).  Second 
aorist  active  participle  of  katabaino,  common  verb.  This 
was  the  night  of  prayer  up  in  the  mountain  (Mark  3 1  13 ;  Luke 
6:12)  and  the  choice  of  the  Twelve  next  morning.  The  going 
up  into  the  mountain  of  Matt.  5  :i  may  simply  be  a  summary 
statement  with  no  mention  of  what  Luke  has  explained  or 
may  be  a  reference  to  the  elevation,  where  he  "sat  down" 
(Matt.  5:1),  above  the  plain  or  "level  place"  (epi  topou 
pedinou)  on  the  mountain  side  where  Jesus  "stood"  or 
"stopped"  (este).  It  may  be  a  level  place  towards  the  foot 
of  the  mountain.  He  stopped  his  descent  at  this  level  place 
and  then  found  a  slight  elevation  on  the  mountain  side  and 
began  to  speak.  There  is  not  the  slightest  reason  for  making 
Matthew  locate  this  sermon  on  the  mountain  and  Luke  in  the 
valley  as  if  the  places,  audiences,  and  topics  were  different. 
For  the  unity  of  the  sermon  see  discussion  on  Matt.  5  :if. 
The  reports  in  Matthew  and  Luke  begin  alike,  cover  the  same 
general  ground  and  end  alike.  The  report  in  Matthew  is 
longer  chiefly  because  in  Chapter  5,  he  gives  the  argument 
showing  the  contrast  between  Christ's  conception  of  right- 
eousness and  that  of  the  Jewish  rabbis.  Undoubtedly,  Jesus 
repeated  many  of  the  crisp  sayings  here  at  other  times  as  in 
Luke  12,  but  it  is  quite  gratuitous  to  argue  that  Matthew 
and  Luke  have  made  up  this  sermon  out  of  isolated  sayings 
of  Christ  at  various  times.  Both  Matthew  and  Luke  give 
too  much  that  is  local  of  place  and  audience  for  that  idea. 
Matt.  5:1  speaks  of  "the  multitudes"  and  "his  disciples." 
Luke  6:17  notes  "a  great  multitude  of  his  disciples,  and  a 
great  number  of  the  people  from  all  Judea  and  Jerusalem, 
and  the  sea  coast  of  Tyre  and  Sidon."    They  agree  in  the 


86        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

presence  of  disciples  and  crowds  besides  the  disciples  from 
whom  the  twelve  apostles  were  chosen.  It  is  important  to 
note  how  already  people  were  coming  from  "  the  sea  coast 
of  Tyre  and  Sidon"  "to  hear  him  and  to  be  healed  (iathenai, 
first  aorist  passive  of  iaomai)  of  their  diseases." 

1 8.  With  unclean  spirits  (apo  pneumaton  akatharton) .  In  an 
amphibolous  position  for  it  can  be  construed  with  "  troubled," 

(present  passive  participle  enochloumenoi)  or  with  "were 
healed"  (imperfect  passive,  ether apeuonto).  The  healings 
were  repeated  as  often  as  they  came.  Note  here  both  verbs, 
iaomai  and  therapeuo,  used  of  the  miraculous  cures  of  Jesus. 
Therapeud  is  the  verb  more  commonly  employed  of  regular 
professional  cures,  but  no  such  distinction  is  made  here. 

19.  Sought  to  touch  him  (ezetoun  haptesthai  autou).  Im- 
perfect active.  One  can  see  the  surging,  eager  crowd  pressing 
up  to  Jesus.  Probably  some  of  them  felt  that  there  was  a 
sort  of  virtue  or  magic  in  touching  his  garments  like  the 
poor  woman  in  Luke  8:431.  (Mark  5:23  =  Matt.  9:21).  For 
power  came  forth  from  him  (hoti  dunamis  par'  autou  exercheto). 
Imperfect  middle,  power  was  coming  out  from  him.  This 
is  the  reason  for  the  continual  approach  to  Jesus.  And 
healed  them  all  {kai  iato  pantas).  Imperfect  middle  again. 
Was  healing  all,  kept  on  healing  all.  The  preacher  today 
who  is  not  a  vehicle  of  power  from  Christ  to  men  may 
well  question  why  that  is  true.  Undoubtedly  the  failure  to 
get  a  blessing  is  one  reason  why  many  people  stop  going  to 
church.  One  may  turn  to  Paul's  tremendous  words  in  Phil. 
4:13:  "I  have  strength  for  all  things  in  him  who  keeps  on 
pouring  power  into  me"  (panta  ischub  en  toi  endunamounti 
me).  It  was  at  a  time  of  surpassing  dynamic  spiritual  energy 
when  Jesus  delivered  this  greatest  of  all  sermons  so  far  as 
they  are  reported  to  us.  The  very  air  was  electric  with 
spiritual  power.  There  are  such  times  as  all  preachers 
know. 

20.  And  he  lifted  up  his  eyes  {kai  autos  eparas  tous  opthal- 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  87 

mous  autou).  First  aorist  active  participle  from  epairb. 
Note  also  Luke's  favourite  use  of  kai  autos  in  beginning  a 
paragraph.  Vivid  detail  alone  in  Luke.  Jesus  looked  the 
vast  audience  full  in  the  face.  Matt.  5:2  mentions  that 
"he  opened  his  mouth  and  taught  them"  (began  to  teach 
them,  inchoative  imperfect,  edidasken) .  He  spoke  out  so  that 
the  great  crowd  could  hear.  Some  preachers  do  not  open 
their  mouths  and  do  not  look  up  at  the  people,  but  down  at 
the  manuscript  and  drawl  along  while  the  people  lose  interest 
and  even  go  to  sleep  or  slip  out.  Ye  poor  {hoi  ptochoi).  The 
poor,  but  "yours"  (humetera)  justifies  the  translation  "ye." 
Luke's  report  is  direct  address  in  all  the  four  beatitudes  and 
four  woes  given  by  him.  It  is  useless  to  speculate  why  Luke 
gives  only  four  of  the  eight  beatitudes  in  Matthew  or  why 
Matthew  does  not  give  the  four  woes  in  Luke.  One  can 
only  say  that  neither  professes  to  give  a  complete  report  of 
the  sermon.  There  is  no  evidence  to  show  that  either  saw  the 
report  of  the  other.  They  may  have  used  a  common  source 
like  Q  (the  Logia  of  Jesus)  or  they  may  have  had  separate 
sources.  Luke's  first  beatitude  corresponds  with  Matthew's 
first,  but  he  does  not  have  "in  spirit"  after  "poor."  Does 
Luke  represent  Jesus  as  saying  that  poverty  itself  is  a  bless- 
ing? It  can  be  made  so.  Or  does  Luke  represent  Jesus  as 
meaning  what  is  in  Matthew,  poverty  of  spirit?  The  king- 
dom of  God  {he  basileia  tou  theou).  Matt.  5:3  has  "the 
kingdom  of  heaven"  which  occurs  alone  in  Matthew  though 
he  also  has  the  one  here  in  Luke  with  no  practical  difference. 
The  rabbis  usually  said  "the  kingdom  of  heaven."  They 
used  it  of  the  political  Messianic  kingdom  when  Judaism  of 
the  Pharisaic  sort  would  triumph  over  the  world.  The  idea 
of  Jesus  is  in  the  sharpest  contrast  to  that  conception  here 
and  always.  See  on  Matt.  3 :2  for  discussion  of  the  meaning 
of  the  word  "kingdom."  It  is  the  favourite  word  of  Jesus 
for  the  rule  of  God  in  the  heart  here  and  now.  It  is  both 
present  and  future  and  will  reach  a  glorious  consummation* 


88        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Some  of  the  sayings  of  Christ  have  apocalyptic  and  eschato- 
logical  figures,  but  the  heart  of  the  matter  is  here  in  the 
spiritual  reality  of  the  reign  of  God  in  the  hearts  of  those 
who  serve  him.  The  kingdom  parables  expand  and  enlarge 
upon  various  phases  of  this  inward  life  and  growth. 

21.  Now  {nun).  Luke  adds  this  adverb  here  and  in  the 
next  sentence  after  "weep."  This  sharpens  the  contrast 
between  present  sufferings  and  the  future  blessings.  Filled 
(chortasthesesthe).  Future  passive  indicative.  The  same 
verb  in  Matt.  5 :6.  Originally  it  was  used  for  giving  fodder 
(chortos)  to  animals,  but  here  it  is  spiritual  fodder  or  food 
except  in  Luke  15:16  and  16:21.  Luke  here  omits  "and 
thirst  after  righteousness."  Weep  {klaiontes).  Audible 
weeping.  Where  Matt.  5:4  has  "mourn"  (penthountes). 
Shall  laugh  (gelasete).  Here  Matt.  5:4  has  "shall  be  com- 
forted."   Luke's  words  are  terse. 

22.  When  they  shall  separate  you  (hotan  aphorisosin  humas). 
First  aorist  active  subjunctive,  from  aphorizo,  common  verb 
for  marking  off  a  boundary.  So  either  in  good  sense  or  bad 
sense  as  here.  The  reference  is  to  excommunication  from 
the  congregation  as  well  as  from  social  intercourse.  Cast 
out  your  name  as  evil  {exbalbsin  to  onoma  humon  hbs  poneron). 
Second  aorist  active  subjunctive  of  ekballo,  common  verb. 
The  verb  is  used  in  Aristophanes,  Sophocles,  and  Plato  of 
hissing  an  actor  off  the  stage.  The  name  of  Christian  or 
disciple  or  Nazarene  came  to  be  a  byword  of  contempt 
as  shown  in  the  Acts.  It  was  even  unlawful  in  the  Neronian 
persecution  when  Christianity  was  not  a  religio  licita.  For 
the  Son  of  man's  sake  (heneka  tou  huiou  tou  anthrbpou). 
Jesus  foretold  what  will  befall  those  who  are  loyal  to  him. 
The  Acts  of  the  Apostles  is  a  commentary  on  this  prophecy. 
This  is  Christ's  common  designation  of  himself,  never  of 
others  save  by  Stephen  (Acts  7:56)  and  in  the  Apocalypse 
(Rev.  1:13;  14:14).  But  both  Son  of  God  and  Son  of  man 
apply  to  him  (John  1:50,  52;  Matt.  26:63^).    Christ  was  a 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  89 

real  man  though  the  Son  of  God.    He  is  also  the  representa- 
tive man  and  has  authority  over  all  men. 

23.  Leap  for  joy  (skirtesate).  Old  verb  and  in  LXX,  but 
only  in  Luke  in  the  N.T.  (here  and  1 141,  44).  It  answers  to 
Matthew's  (5:12)  "be  exceeding  glad."  Did  (epoioun). 
Imperfect  active,  the  habit  of  "their  fathers"  (peculiar  to 
both  here).  Matt.  5:12  has  "persecuted."  Thus  they  will 
receive  a  prophet's  reward  (Matt.  1:41). 

24.  But  woe  unto  you  that  are  rich  (Plen  ouai  humin  tois 
plousiois).  Sharp  contrast  {plen).  As  a  matter  of  fact  the 
rich  Pharisees  and  Sadducees  were  the  chief  opposers  of 
Christ  as  of  the  early  disciples  later  (James  5:1-6).  Ye  have 
received  (apechete).  Receipt  in  full  apecho  means  as  the 
papyri  show.  Consolation  (paraklesin).  From  parakaleof 
to  call  to  one's  side,  to  encourage,  to  help,  to  cheer. 

25.  Now  (nun).  Here  twice  as  in  verse  21  in  contrast  with 
future  punishment.  The  joys  and  sorrows  in  these  two 
verses  are  turned  round,  measure  for  measure  reversed. 
The  Rich  Man  and  Lazarus  (Luke  16:19-31)  illustrate  these 
contrasts  in  the  present  and  the  future. 

26.  In  the  same  manner  did  their  fathers  (ta  auta  epoioun 
hoi  pater es  auton).  Literally,  their  fathers  did  the  same 
things  to  the  false  prophets.  That  is  they  spoke  well  (kalos), 
finely  of  false  prophets.  Praise  is  sweet  to  the  preacher  but 
all  sorts  of  preachers  get  it.  Of  you  (humas).  Accusative 
case  after  words  of  speaking  according  to  regular  Greek 
idiom,  to  speak  one  fair,  to  speak  well  of  one. 

27.  But  I  say  unto  you  that  hear  (Alia  humin  lego  tois 
akouousin).  There  is  a  contrast  in  this  use  of  alia  like  that 
in  Matt.  5:44.  This  is  the  only  one  of  the  many  examples 
given  by  Matthew  in  Chapter  5  of  the  sharp  antithesis  be- 
tween what  the  rabbis  taught  and  what  Jesus  said.  Perhaps 
that  contrast  is  referred  to  by  Luke.  If  necessary,  alia 
could  be  co-ordinating  or  paratactic  conjunction  as  in  II  Cor. 
7:11  rather  than  adversative  as  apparently  here.    See  Matt, 


90        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

5 :43f.     Love  of  enemies  is  in  the  O.T.,  but  Jesus  ennobles 
the  word,  agapab,  and  uses  it  of  love  for  one's  enemies. 

28.  That  despitefully  use  you  (ton  epereazontbn  humds). 
This  old  verb  occurs  here  only  in  the  N.T.  and  in  I  Pet.  3  :i6, 
not  being  genuine  in  Matt.  5:44. 

29.  On  the  cheek  (epi  ten  siagona).  Matt.  5 :39  has  "right." 
Old  word  meaning  jaw  or  jawbone,  but  in  the  N.T.  only 
here  and  Matt.  5 139,  which  see  for  discussion.  It  seems  an 
act  of  violence  rather  than  contempt.  Sticklers  for  extreme 
literalism  find  trouble  with  the  conduct  of  Jesus  in  John 
i8:22f.  where  Jesus,  on  receiving  a  slap  in  the  face,  protested 
against  it.  Thy  cloke  (to  himation),  thy  coat  (ton  chitbna). 
Here  the  upper  and  more  valuable  garment  (himation)  is 
first  taken,  the  under  and  less  valuable  chiton  last.  In  A^att. 
5  40  the  process  (apparently  a  legal  one)  is  reversed.  With- 
hold not  (me  kbluseis).  Aorist  subjunctive  in  prohibition 
against  committing  an  act.  Do  not  hinder  him  in  his  rob- 
bing. It  is  usually  useless  anyhow  with  modern  armed 
bandits. 

30.  Ask  them  not  again  (me  apaitei).  Here  the  present 
active  imperative  in  a  prohibition,  do  not  have  the  habit  of 
asking  back.  This  common  verb  only  here  in  the  N.T.,  for 
aitousin  is  the  correct  text  in  Luke  12:20.  The  literary  flavour 
of  Luke's  Koine  style  is  seen  in  his  frequent  use  of  words 
common  in  the  literary  Greek,  but  appearing  nowhere  else 
in  the  N.T. 

31.  As  ye  would  (kathbs  thelete).  In  Matt.  7:12  the  Golden 
Rule  begins:  Panta  hosa  ean  thelete.  Luke  has  "likewise" 
(homoibs)  where  Matthew  has  houibs.  See  on  Matthew  for 
discussion  of  the  saying. 

32.  What  thank  have  ye?  (poia  humin  charts  estin;).  What 
grace  or  gratitude  is  there  to  you?  Matt.  5:46  has  misthon 
(reward). 

33.  Do  good  (agathopoiete) .  Third-class  condition,  ean 
and  present  subjunctive.    This  verb  not  in  old  Greek,  but 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  9 1 

in  LXX.  Even  sinners  (kai  hoi  hamartbloi).  Even  the  sin- 
ners, the  article  distinguishing  the  class.  Matt.  5:46  has 
"even  the  publicans"  and  5:47  "even  the  Gentiles."  That 
completes  the  list  of  the  outcasts  for  "sinners"  includes 
"harlots"  and  all  the  rest. 

34.  If  ye  lend  (ean  danisete).  Third-class  condition,  first 
aorist  active  subjunctive  from  danizo  (old  form  daneizo) 
to  lend  for  interest  in  a  business  transaction  (here  in  active 
to  lend  and  Matt.  5:42  middle  to  borrow  and  nowhere  else 
in  N.T.),  whereas  kichremi  (only  Luke  11 15  in  N.T.)  means 
to  loan  as  a  friendly  act.  To  receive  again  as  much  (hina 
apolabosin  ta  isd).  Second  aorist  active  subjunctive  of 
apolambano,  old  verb,  to  get  back  in  full  like  apecho  in  6:24. 
Literally  here,  "that  they  may  get  back  the  equal"  (prin- 
cipal and  interest,  apparently).  It  could  mean  "equivalent 
services."    No  parallel  in  Matthew. 

35.  But  (plen).  Plain  adversative  like  plen  in  verse  24. 
Never  despairing  {meden  apelpizontes).  Meden  is  read  by 
A  B  L  Bohairic  and  is  the  reading  of  Westcott  and  Hort. 
The  reading  medena  is  translated  "despairing  of  no  man." 
The  Authorized  Version  has  it  "hoping  for  nothing  again," 
a  meaning  for  apelpizo  with  no  parallel  elsewhere.  Field 
(Otium  Nor.  iii.  40)  insists  that  all  the  same  the  context  de- 
mands this  meaning  because  of  apelpizein  in  verse  34,  but 
the  correct  reading  there  is  elpizein,  not  apelpizein.  Here 
Field's  argument  falls  to  the  ground.  The  word  occurs  in 
Polybius,  Diodorus,  LXX  with  the  sense  of  despairing  and 
that  is  the  meaning  here.  D  and  Old  Latin  documents  have 
nihil  desperantes,  but  the  Vulgate  has  nihil  inde  sperantej 
(hoping  for  nothing  thence)  and  this  false  rendering  has 
wrought  great  havoc  in  Europe.  "On  the  strength  of  it 
Popes  and  councils  have  repeatedly  condemned  the  taking 
of  any  interest  whatever  for  loans.  As  loans  could  not  be 
had  without  interest,  and  Christians  were  forbidden  to  take 
it,  money  lending  passed  into  the  hands  of  the  Jews,  and 


92        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

added  greatly  to  the  unnatural  detestation  in  which  Jews 
were  held"  (Plummer).  By  "never  despairing"  or  "giving 
up  nothing  in  despair"  Jesus  means  that  we  are  not  to  despair 
about  getting  the  money  back.  We  are  to  help  the  appar- 
ently hopeless  cases.  Medical  writers  use  the  word  for  des- 
perate or  hopeless  cases.  Sons  of  the  Most  High  (huoi  Hup- 
sistou).  In  1:32  Jesus  is  called  "Son  of  the  Highest"  and 
here  all  real  children  or  sons  of  God  (Luke  20:36)  are  so 
termed.  See  also  1:35,  76  for  the  use  of  "the  Highest"  of 
God.  He  means  the  same  thing  that  we  see  in  Matt.  5  45,  48 
by  "your  Father."  Toward  the  unthankful  and  evil  (epi 
tous  acharistous  kai  ponerous).  God  the  Father  is  kind  to- 
wards the  unkind  and  wicked.  Note  the  one  article  with 
both  adjectives. 

36.  Even  as  your  Father  (kathos  ho  pater  humon).  In  Matt. 
5:48  we  have  hos  ho  pater  humon.  In  both  the  perfection  of 
the  Father  is  placed  as  the  goal  before  his  children.  In 
neither  case  is  it  said  that  they  have  reached  it. 

37.  And  judge  not  (kai  me  krinete).  Me  and  the  present 
active  imperative,  forbidding  the  habit  of  criticism.  The 
common  verb  krino,  to  separate,  we  have  in  our  English  words 
critic,  criticism,  criticize,  dis-criminate.  Jesus  does  not 
mean  that  we  are  not  to  form  opinions,  but  not  to  form  them 
rashly,  unfairly,  like  our  prejudice.  Ye  shall  not  be  judged 
(ou  me  krithete).  First  aorist  passive  subjunctive  with 
double  negative  ou  me,  strong  negative.  Condemn  not 
{me  katadikazete).  To  give  judgment  (dike,  dixazo)  against 
(kata)  one.  Me  and  present  imperative.  Either  cease  doing 
or  do  not  have  the  habit  of  doing  it.  Old  verb.  Ye  shall  not 
be  condemned  (ou  me  katadikasthete).  First  aorist  passive  in- 
dicative again  with  the  double  negative.  Censoriousness  is 
a  bad  habit.  Release  (apoluete).  Positive  command  the 
opposite  of  the  censoriousness  condemned. 

38.  Pressed  down  (pepiesmenon).  Perfect  passive  par- 
ticiple from  piezo,  old  verb,  but  here  alone  in  the  N.T., 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  93 

though  the  Doric  form  piazo,  to  seize,  occurs  several  times 
(John  7:30,  32,  44).  Shaken  together  (sesaleumenon).  Perfect 
passive  participle  again  from  common  verb  saleub.  Running 
over  (huperekchunnomenon).  Present  middle  participle  of 
this  double  compound  verb  not  found  elsewhere  save  in  A  Q 
in  Joel  2 124.  Chuno  is  a  late  form  of  cheb.  There  is  asynde- 
ton here,  no  conjunction  connecting  these  participles.  The 
present  here  is  in  contrast  to  the  two  preceding  perfects. 
The  participles  form  an  epexegesis  or  explanation  of  the 
"good  measure"  {metron  kalon).  Into  your  bosom  (eis  ton 
kolpon  humbn).  The  fold  of  the  wide  upper  garment  bound 
by  the  girdle  made  a  pocket  in  common  use  (Ex.  4:6;  Prov. 
6:27;  Psa.  79:12;  Isa.  65 :6f . ;  Jer.  32:18).  So  Isa.  65:7: 1  will 
measure  their  former  work  unto  their  bosom.  Shall  be  meas- 
ured to  you  again  (antimetrethesetai) .  Future  passive  indica- 
tive of  the  verb  here  only  in  the  N.T.  save  late  MSS.  in 
Matt.  7:2.  Even  here  some  MSS.  have  metrethesetai.  The 
anti  has  the  common  meaning  of  in  turn  or  back,  measured 
back  to  you  in  requital. 

39.  Also  a  parable  (kai  parabolen).  Plummer  thinks 
that  the  second  half  of  the  sermon  begins  here  as  indicated 
by  Luke's  insertion  of  "And  he  spake  (eipen  de)  at  this 
point.  Luke  has  the  word  parable  some  fifteen  times  both 
for  crisp  proverbs  and  for  the  longer  narrative  comparisons. 
This  is  the  only  use  of  the  term  parable  concerning  the  meta- 
phors in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  But  in  both  Matthew 
and  Luke's  report  of  the  discourse  there  are  some  sixteen 
possible  applications  of  the  word.  Two  come  right  together: 
The  blind  leading  the  blind,  the  mote  and  the  beam.  Mat- 
thew gives  the  parabolic  proverb  of  the  blind  leading  the 
blind  later  (15:14).  Jesus  repeated  these  sayings  on  various 
occasions  as  every  teacher  does  his  characteristic  ideas. 
So  Luke  6:40  =  Matt.  10:24,  Luke  6:45  =  Matt.  12:34^ 
Can  {Meti  dunatai).  The  use  of  meti  in  the  question  shows 
that   a   negative   answer   is   expected.     Guide    (hodegein). 


94        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Common  verb  from  hodegos  (guide)  and  this  from  hodos 
(way)  and  hegeomai,  to  lead  or  guide.  Shall  they  not  both 
fall?  (ouchi  amphoteroi  empesountai;).  Ouchi,  a  sharpened 
negative  from  ouk,  in  a  question  expecting  the  answer  Yes. 
Future  middle  indicative  of  the  common  verb  empipto.  Into 
a  pit  ieis  bothunon).    Late  word  for  older  bothros. 

40.  The  disciple  is  not  above  his  master  {ouk  estin  mathetes 
huper  ton  didaskalon).  Literally,  a  learner  (or  pupil)  is 
not  above  the  teacher.  Precisely  so  in  Matt.  10:24  where 
"slave"  is  added  with  "lord."  But  here  Luke  adds:  "But 
everyone  when  he  is  perfected  shall  be  as  his  master" 
{katertismenos  de  pas  estai  hos  ho  didaskalos  autou).  The  state 
of  completion,  perfect  passive  participle,  is  noted  in  katertis- 
menos. The  word  is  common  for  mending  broken  things  or 
nets  (Matt.  4:21)  or  men  (Gal.  6:1).  So  it  is  a  long  process 
to  get  the  pupil  patched  up  to  the  plane  of  his  teacher. 

41.  Mote  (karphos)  and  beam  (dokon).  See  on  Matt.  7:3-5 
for  discussion  of  these  words  in  this  parabolic  proverb  kin  to 
several  of  ours  today. 

42.  Canst  thou  say  (dunasai  legein).  Here  Matt.  7:4  has 
wilt  thou  say  iereis).  Beholdest  not  (ou  blepbn).  Matt.  7:4 
has  "lo"  (idou).  Thou  hypocrite  (hupokrita).  Contrast  to 
the  studied  politeness  of  "brother"  (adelphe)  above.  Power- 
ful picture  of  blind  self-complacence  and  incompetence,  the 
keyword  to  argument  here. 

44.  Is  known  (ginosketai).  The  fruit  of  each  tree  reveals 
its  actual  character.  It  is  the  final  test.  This  sentence  is 
not  in  Matt.  7:17-20,  but  the  same  idea  is  in  the  repeated 
saying  (Matt.  7:16,  20):  "By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know 
them,"  where  the  verb  epignosesthe  means  full  knowledge. 
The  question  in  Matt.  7:16  is  put  here  in  positive  declara- 
tive form.  The  verb  is  in  the  plural  for  "men"  or  "people," 
sullegousin.  See  on  Matt.  7:16.  Bramble  bush  (batou). 
Old  word,  quoted  from  the  LXX  in  Mark  12:26,  Luke  20: 
37  (from  Ex.  3:6)  about  the  burning  bush  that  Moses  saw, 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  95 

and  by  Stephen  (Acts  7:30,  35)  referring  to  the  same  inci- 
dent. Nowhere  else  in  the  N.T.  "Galen  has  a  chapter  on 
its  medicinal  uses,  and  the  medical  writings  abound  in 
prescriptions  of  which  it  is  an  ingredient"  (Vincent).  Gather 
{trugbsin).  A  verb  common  in  Greek  writers  for  gathering 
ripe  fruit.  In  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Rev.  I4:i8f.  Grapes 
{staphulen).    Cluster  of  grapes. 

45.  Bringeth  forth  {propherei).  In  a  similar  saying  re- 
peated later.  Matt.  12:341.  has  the  verb  ekballei  (throws  out, 
casts  out),  a  bolder  figure.  "When  men  are  natural,  heart 
and  mouth  act  in  concert.  But  otherwise  the  mouth  some- 
times professes  what  the  heart  does  not  feel"  (Plummer). 

46.  And  do  not  {kai  ou  poieite).  This  is  the  point  about 
every  sermon  that  counts.  The  two  parables  that  follow 
illustrate  this  point. 

47.  Hears  and  does  {akouon  kai  poibn).  Present  active 
participles.  So  in  Matt.  7:24.  (Present  indicative.)  /  will 
show  you  {hupodeixo  humin).    Only  in  Luke,  not  Matthew. 

48.  Digged  and  went  deep  {eskapsen  kai  ebathunen).  Two 
first  aorist  indicatives.  Not  a  hendiadys  for  dug  deep. 
Skapto,  to  dig,  is  as  old  as  Homer,  as  is  bathuno,  to  make  deep. 
And  laid  a  foundation  {kai  etheken  themelion).  That  is  the 
whole  point.  This  wise  builder  struck  the  rock  before  he 
laid  the  foundation.  When  a  flood  arose  {plemmures  geno- 
menes).  Genitive  absolute.  Late  word  for  flood,  plemmura, 
only  here  in  the  N.T.,  though  in  Job  40:18.  Brake  against 
(proserexen) .  First  aorist  active  indicative  from  prosregnumi 
and  in  late  writers  prosresso,  to  break  against.  Only  here 
in  the  N.T.  Matt.  7:25  has  prosepesan,  from  prospipto, 
to  fall  against.  Could  not  shake  it  (ouk  ischusen  saleusai 
auten).  Did  not  have  strength  enough  to  shake  it.  Because 
it  had  been  well  builded  {dia  to  kalos  oikodomesthai  auten). 
Perfect  passive  articular  infinitive  after  dia  and  with  accusa- 
tive of  general  reference. 

49.  He  that  heareth  and  doeth  not  {ho  de  akousas  kai  me 


96        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

poiesas).  Aorist  active  participle  with  article.  Particular 
case  singled  out  (punctiliar,  aorist).  Like  a  man  {homoios 
estin  anthropbi).  Associative  instrumental  case  after  homoios 
as  in  verse  47.  Upon  the  earth  {epi  ten  gen).  Matt.  7:26  has 
"upon  the  sand"  {epi  ten  ammon),  more  precise  and  worse 
than  mere  earth.  But  not  on  the  rock.  Without  a  founda- 
tion (choris  themeliou).  The  foundation  on  the  rock  after 
deep  digging  as  in  verse  48.  It  fell  in  (sunepesen).  Second 
aorist  active  of  sunpipto,  to  fall  together,  to  collapse.  An 
old  verb  from  Homer  on,  but  only  here  in  the  N.T.  The 
ruin  {to  regma).  The  crash  like  a  giant  oak  in  the  forest  re- 
sounded far  and  wide.  An  old  word  for  a  rent  or  fracture  as 
in  medicine  for  laceration  of  a  wound.    Only  here  in  the  N.T. 


CHAPTER  VII 

1.  After  {epeide,  epei  and  de).  This  conjunction  was 
written  epei  de  in  Homer  and  is  simple  epei  with  the  inten- 
sive de  added  and  even  epei  de  per  once  in  N.T.  (Luke 
I  :i).  This  is  the  only  instance  of  the  temporal  use  of  epeide 
in  the  N.T.  The  causal  sense  occurs  only  in  Luke  and  Paul, 
for  epei  is  the  correct  text  in  Matt.  21:46.  Had  ended 
(eplerosen).  First  aorist  active  indicative.  There  is  here  a 
reference  to  the  conclusion  of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount, 
but  with  nothing  concerning  the  impression  produced  by 
the  discourse  such  as  is  seen  in  Matt.  7:28.  This  verse  really 
belongs  as  the  conclusion  of  Chapter  6,  not  as  the  beginning 
of  Chapter  7.  In  the  ears  of  the  people  {eis  tas  akoas  tou 
laou).  Akoe  from  akouo,  to  hear,  is  used  of  the  sense  of  hear- 
ing (I  Cor.  12:17),  tne  ear  with  which  one  hears  (Mark 
7:35;  Heb.  5:11),  the  thing  heard  or  the  report  (Rom.  10:16) 
or  oral  instruction  (Gal.  3:2,  5).  Both  Matt.  8:5-13  and 
Luke  7:1-10  locate  the  healing  of  the  centurion's  servant  in 
Capernaum  where  Jesus  was  after  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount. 

2.  Centurion' *s  servant  (Hekatontarchou  tinos  doulos). 
Slave  of  a  certain  centurion  (Latin  word  centurio,  com- 
mander of  a  century  or  hundred).  Mark  15:39,  44  has  the 
Latin  word  in  Greek  letters,  kenturion.  The  centurion  com- 
manded a  company  which  varied  from  fifty  to  a  hundred. 
Each  cohort  had  six  centuries.  Each  legion  had  ten  cohorts 
or  bands  (Acts  10:1).  The  centurions  mentioned  in  the  N.T. 
all  seem  to  be  fine  men  as  Polybius  states  that  the  best  men 
in  the  army  had  this  position.  See  also  Luke  23:47.  The 
Greek  has  two  forms  of  the  word,  both  from  hekaton,  hun- 
dred, and  archo,  to  rule,  and  they  appear  to  be  used  inter- 
changeably.    So  we  have  hekatontarchos;  here,  the  form  is 

97 


98        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

-archos,  and  hekatontarches,  the  form  is  -arches  in  verse  6. 
The  manuscripts  differ  about  it  in  almost  every  instance. 
The  -archos  form  is  accepted  by  Westcott  and  Hort  only  in 
the  nominative  save  the  genitive  singular  here  in  Luke  7:2 
and  the  accusative  singular  in  Acts  22:25.  See  like  varia- 
tion between  them  in  Matt.  8:5  and  8  (-archos)  and  13 
(archei).  So  also  -archon  (Acts  22:25)  an<^  -arches  (Acts 
22:26).  Dear  to  him  (autbi  entimos).  Held  in  honour,  prized, 
precious,  dear  (Luke  14:8;  I  Pet.  2:4;  Phil.  2:29),  common 
Greek  word.  Even  though  a  slave  he  was  dear  to  him.  Was 
sick  (kakbs  echbn).  Having  it  bad.  Common  idiom.  See 
already  Matt.  4:24,  8:16;  Mark  2:17;  Luke  5:31,  etc.  Matt. 
8:6  notes  that  the  slave  was  a  paralytic.  And  at  the  point 
of  death  (emellen  teleutdin).  Imperfect  active  of  mello  (note 
double  augment  e)  which  is  used  either  with  the  present  infin- 
itive as  here,  the  aorist  (Rev.  3:16),  or  even  the  future  be- 
cause of  the  future  idea  in  mello  (Acts  11:28;  24:15).  He 
was  about  to  die. 

3.  Sent  unto  him  elders  of  the  Jews  (apesteilen  pros  auton 
presbuterous  ton  Ioudaibn).  Matt.  8:5  says  "the  centurion 
came  unto  him."  For  discussion  of  this  famous  case  of 
apparent  discrepancy  see  discussion  on  Matthew.  One  pos- 
sible solution  is  that  Luke  tells  the  story  as  it  happened  with 
the  details,  whereas  Matthew  simply  presents  a  summary 
statement  without  the  details.  What  one  does  through 
another  he  does  himself.  Asking  him  (erbtbn  auton).  Pres- 
ent active  participle,  masculine  singular  nominative,  of 
the  verb  erbtab  common  for  asking  a  question  as  in  the  old 
Greek  (Luke  22:68).  But  more  frequently  in  the  N.T.  the 
verb  has  the  idea  of  making  a  request  as  here.  This  is  not  a 
Hebraism  or  an  Aramaism,  but  is  a  common  meaning  of 
the  verb  in  the  papyri  (Deissmann,  Light  from  the  Ancient 
East,  p.  168).  It  is  to  be  noted  here  that  Luke  represents 
the  centurion  himself  as  "asking"  through  the  elders  of 
the  Jews    (leading    citizens).     In    Matt.    8:6  the  verb  is 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  99 

parakalbn  (beseeching).  That  he  would  come  and  save  (hopos 
elthbn  diasbsei).  Hina  is  the  more  common  final  or  sub- 
final  (as  here)  conjunction,  but  hopos  still  occurs.  Diasbsei 
is  effective  aorist  active  subjunctive,  to  bring  safe  through 
as  in  a  storm  (Acts  28:  1,  4).    Common  word. 

4.  Besought  (parekaloun).  Imperfect  active,  began  and 
kept  on  beseeching.  This  is  the  same  verb  used  by  Mat- 
thew in  8:5  of  the  centurion  himself.  Earnestly  (spoudaibs). 
From  spoude  haste.  So  eagerly,  earnestly,  zealously,  for 
time  was  short.  That  thou  shouldst  do  this  for  him  (hoi 
parexei  touto).  Second  future  middle  singular  of  par  echo. 
Old  and  common  verb,  furnish  on  thy  part.  Hoi  is  rela- 
tive in  dative  case  almost  with  notion  of  contemplated  re- 
sult (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  961). 

5.  For  {gar).  This  clause  gives  the  reason  why  the  elders 
of  the  Jews  consider  him  "worthy"  (axios,  drawing  down 
the  scale,  axis,  ago).  He  was  hardly  a  proselyte,  but  was  a 
Roman  who  had  shown  his  love  for  the  Jews.  Himself 
(autos).  All  by  himself  and  at  his  own  expense.  Us  (hemin). 
Dative  case,  for  us.  It  is  held  by  some  archaeologists  that 
the  black  basalt  ruins  in  Tell  Hum  are  the  remains  of  the 
very  synagogue  (ten  sunagbgen).  Literally,  the  synagogue, 
the  one  which  we  have,  the  one  for  us. 

6.  Went  with  them  (eporeueto  sun  autois).  Imperfect  in- 
dicative middle.  He  started  to  go  along  with  them.  Now 
(ede).  Already  like  Latin  jam.  In  I  Cor.  4:8  nun  ede  like 
jam  nunc.  Sent  friends  (epempsen  philous).  This  second 
embassy  also,  wanting  in  Matthew's  narrative.  He  "puts 
the  message  of  both  into  the  mouth  of  the  centurion  him- 
self" (Plummer).  Note  saying  (legbn),  present  active  singu- 
lar participle,  followed  by  direct  quotation  from  the  cen- 
turion himself.  Trouble  not  thyself  (Me  skullou).  Present 
middle  (direct  use)  imperative  of  skullb,  old  verb  originally 
meaning  to  skin,  to  mangle,  and  then  in  later  Greek  to  vex, 
trouble,  annoy.    Frequent  in  the  papyri  in  this  latter  sense. 


IOO      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

For  I  am  not  worthy  that  (ou  gar  hikanos  eimi  hind).  The 
same  word  hikanos ',  not  axios,  as  in  Matt.  8:8,  which  see  for 
discussion,  from  hiko,  hikano,  to  fit,  to  reach,  be  adequate 
for.  Hina  in  both  places  as  common  in  late  Greek.  See 
Matt.  8:8  also  for  "roof"  (stegen,  covering). 

7.  Wherefore  neither  thought  I  myself  worthy  to  come  unto 
thee  (dio  oude  emauton  exiosa  pros  se  elthein).  Not  in  Mat- 
thew because  he  represents  the  centurion  as  coming  to 
Jesus.  Speak  the  word  (eipe  logoi).  As  in  Matt.  8:8.  Second 
aorist  active  imperative  with  instrumental  case,  speak  with 
a  word.  My  servant  shall  be  healed  (iatheto  ho  pais  mou). 
Imperative  first  aorist  passive,  let  be  healed.  Pais  literally 
means  "boy,"  an  affectionate  term  for  the  "slave,"  doulos 
(verse  2),  who  was  "dear"  to  him. 

8.  ''Set"  (tassomenos).  Genuine  here,  though  doubtful 
in  Matt.  8:9  where  see  discussion  of  this  vivid  and  charac- 
teristic speech  of  the  centurion. 

9.  Turned  (strapheis).  Second  aorist  passive  participle  of 
strepho,  to  turn.  Common  verb.  A  vivid  touch  not  in 
Matthew's  account.  In  both  Matthew  and  Luke  Jesus 
marvels  at  the  great  faith  of  this  Roman  centurion  beyond 
that  among  the  Jews.  As  a  military  man  he  had  learned  how 
to  receive  orders  and  to  execute  them  and  hence  to  expect 
obedience  to  his  commands,  He  recognized  Jesus  as  Master 
over  disease  with  power  to  compel  obedience. 

10.  Whole   (hugiainonta) .     Sound,  well.     See  Luke  5:31. 

11.  Soon  afterwards  (en  toi  hexes).  According  to  this  read- 
ing supply  chronoi,  time.  Other  MSS.  read  tei  hexes  (supply 
hemerdi,  day).  Hexes  occurs  in  Luke  and  Acts  in  the  N.T. 
though  old  adverb  of  time.  That  (Hoti).  Not  in  the  Greek, 
the  two  verbs  egeneto  and  eporeuthe  having  no  connective 
(asyndeton).  Went  with  him  (suneporeuonto  autoi).  Imper- 
fect middle  picturing  the  procession  of  disciples  and  the 
crowd  with  Jesus.  Nain  is  not  mentioned  elsewhere  in  the 
N.T.     There  is  today  a  hamlet  about  two  miles  west  of 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  ioi 

Endor  on  the  north  slope  of  Little  Hermon.  There  is  a 
burying-place  still  in  use.  Robinson  and  Stanley  think  that 
the  very  road  on  which  the  crowd  with  Jesus  met  the  funeral 
procession  can  be  identified. 

12.  Behold  (kai  idou).  The  kai  introduces  the  apodosis 
of  the  temporal  sentence  and  has  to  be  left  out  in  translations. 
It  is  a  common  idiom  in  Luke,  kai  idou.  There  was  carried 
out  (exekomizeto) .  Imperfect  passive  indicative.  Common 
verb  in  late  Greek  for  carrying  out  a  body  for  burial,  though 
here  only  in  the  N.T.  (ekkomizo).  Rock  tombs  outside 
of  the  village  exist  there  today.  One  that  was  dead  (tethne- 
kos).  Perfect  active  participle  of  thnesko,  to  die.  The  only 
son  of  his  mother  (monogenes  huios  iei  metri  autou).  Only 
begotten  son  to  his  mother  (dative  case).  The  compound 
adjective  monogenes  (monos  and  genos)  is  common  in  the  old 
Greek  and  occurs  in  the  N.T.  about  Jesus  (John  3:16,  18). 
The  "  death  of  a  widow's  only  son  was  the  greatest  misfortune 
conceivable"  (Easton).  And  she  was  a  widow  (kai  aute  en 
chera).  This  word  chera  gives  the  finishing  touch  to  the 
pathos  of  the  situation.  The  word  is  from  cheros,  bereft. 
The  mourning  of  a  widow  for  an  only  son  is  the  extremity 
of  grief  (Plummer).  Much  people  (ochlos  hikanos).  Con- 
siderable crowd  as  often  with  this  adjective  hikanos.  Some 
were  hired  mourners,  but  the  size  of  the  crowd  showed  the 
real  sympathy  of  the  town  for  her. 

13.  The  Lord  saw  her  (idon  auten  ho  kurios).  The  Lord  of 
Life  confronts  death  (Plummer)  and  Luke  may  use  Kurios 
here  purposely.  Had  compassion  (esplagchthe).  First  aorist 
(ingressive)  passive  indicative  of  splagchnizomai.  Often  love 
and  pity  are  mentioned  as  the  motives  for  Christ's  miracles 
(Matt.  14:14;  15:32,  etc.).  It  is  confined  to  the  Synoptics 
in  the  N.T.  and  about  Christ  save  in  the  parables  by  Christ. 
Weep  not  (me  klaie).  Present  imperative  in  a  prohibition. 
Cease  weeping. 

14.  Touched  the  bier  (hepsato  tou  sorou).    An  urn  for  the 


102      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

bones  or  ashes  of  the  dead  in  Homer,  then  the  coffin  (Gen. 
5:26),  then  the  funeral  couch  or  bier  as  here.  Only  here  in 
the  N.T.  Jesus  touched  the  bier  to  make  the  bearers  stop, 
which  they  did  (stood  still,  estesan),  second  aorist  active 
indicative   of   histemi. 

15.  Sat  up  (anekathisen).  First  aorist  active  indicative. 
The  verb  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Acts  9:40.  Medical 
writers  often  used  it  of  the  sick  sitting  up  in  bed  (Hobart, 
Med.  Lang,  of  St.  Luke,  p.  n).  It  is  objected  that  the  sym- 
metry of  these  cases  (daughter  of  Jairus  raised  from  the  death- 
bed, this  widow's  son  raised  from  the  bier,  Lazarus  raised 
from  the  tomb)  is  suspicious,  but  no  one  Gospel  gives  all 
three  (Plummer).  Gave  him  to  his  mother  (edoken  auton  iei 
metri  autou).  Tender  way  of  putting  it.  "For  he  had 
already  ceased  to  belong  to  his  mother"  (Bengel).  So  in 
Luke  9:42. 

16.  Fear  seized  all  (elaben  de  phobos  pantas).  Aorist  active 
indicative.  At  once.  They  glorified  God  (edoxazon  ton  theon). 
Imperfect  active,  inchoative,  began  and  increased. 

17.  This  report  (ho  logos  houtos).  That  God  had  raised 
up  a  great  prophet  who  had  shown  his  call  by  raising  the 
dead. 

18.  And  the  disciples  of  John  told  him  (kai  apeggeilan 
Ioanei  hoi  mathetai  autou).  Literally,  and  his  disciples 
announced  to  John.  Such  news  (verse  17)  was  bound  to  come 
to  the  ears  of  the  Baptist  languishing  in  the  dungeon  of 
Machaerus  (Luke  3:20).  Luke  7:18-35  runs  parallel  with 
Matt.  11:2-19,  a  specimen  of  Q,  the  non-Marcan  portion  of 
Matthew  and  Luke. 

19.  Calling  unto  him  (proskalesamenos).  First  aorist  middle 
(indirect)  participle.  Two  (duo  tinas).  Certain  two.  Not 
in  Matt.  11:2.  Saying  (legbn).  John  saying  by  the  two 
messengers.  The  message  is  given  precisely  alike  in  Matt. 
11:3,  which  see.  In  both  we  have  heteron  for  "another," 
either  a  second  or  a  different  kind.    In  verse  20  Westcott  and 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  103 

Hort  read  allon  in  the  text,  heteron  in  the  margin.  Prosdoko- 
men,  may  be  present  indicative  or  present  subjunctive 
(deliberative),  the  same  contract  form  {ao  =  0,  ao  0). 

21.  In  that  hour  he  cured  {en  ekeinei  tei  hordi  ether apeus en). 
This  item  is  not  in  Matthew.  Jesus  gave  the  two  disciples 
of  John  an  example  of  the  direct  method.  They  had  heard. 
Then  they  saw  for  themselves.  Diseases  (noson),  plagues 
(mastigon),  evil  spirits  {pneumaton  poneron),  all  kinds  of 
bodily  ills,  and  he  singles  out  the  blind  (tuphlois)  to  whom  in 
particular  he  bestowed  sight  (echarizato  blepein),  gave  as  a 
free  gift  (from  charis,  grace)  seeing  {blepein). 

22.  What  things  ye  have  seen  and  heard  {ha  eidete  kai 
ekousate).  In  Matt.  11:4,  present  tense  "which  ye  do  hear 
and  see."  Rest  of  verse  22  and  23  as  in  Matt.  11:4-6, 
which  see  for  details.  Luke  mentions  no  raisings  from  the 
dead  in  verse  21,  but  the  language  is  mainly  general,  while 
here  it  is  specific.  Skandalizomai  used  here  has  the  double 
notion  of  to  trip  up  and  to  entrap  and  in  the  N.T.  always 
means  causing  to  sin. 

24.  When  the  messengers  of  John  were  departed  {apelthonton 
ton  aggelon  Ibanou).  Genitive  absolute  of  aorist  active 
participle.  Matt.  11:7  has  the  present  middle  participle 
poreuomenon,  suggesting  that  Jesus  began  his  eulogy  of  John 
as  soon  as  the  messengers  (angels,  Luke  calls  them)  were  on 
their  way.  The  vivid  questions  about  the  people's  interest 
in  John  are  precisely  alike  in  both  Matthew  and  Luke. 

25.  Gorgeously  apparelled  {en  himatismoi  endoxoi).  In 
splendid  clothing.  Here  alone  in  this  sense  in  the  N.T. 
And  live  delicately  {truphei).  From  thrupto  to  break  down,  to 
enervate,  an  old  word  for  luxurious  living.  See  the  verb 
truphao  in  James  5:5.  In  kings1  courts  {en  tois  basileiois). 
Only  here  in  the  N.T.  Matt.  11:8  has  it  "in  kings'  houses." 
Verses  26  and  27  are  precisely  alike  in  Matt.  119  and  10, 
which  see  for  discussion. 

26.  A  prophet?  {propheten;).    A  real  prophet  will  always  get 


104      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

a  hearing  if  he  has  a  message  from  God.  He  is  a  for-speaker, 
forth-teller  {pro-phetes).  He  may  or  may  not  be  a  fore-teller. 
The  main  thing  is  for  the  prophet  to  have  a  message  from 
God  which  he  is  willing  to  tell  at  whatever  cost  to  himself. 
The  word  of  God  came  to  John  in  the  wilderness  of  Judea 
(Luke  3:2).  That  made  him  a  prophet.  There  is  a  prophetic 
element  in  every  real  preacher  of  the  Gospel.  Real  prophets 
become  leaders   and  moulders  of  men. 

28.  There  is  none  {oudeis  estin).  No  one  exists,  this  means. 
Matt.  1 1  :i  1  has  ouk  egegertai  (hath not  arisen).  See  Matthew 
for  discussion  of  "but  little"  and  "greater." 

29.  Justified  God  {edikaiosan  ton  theon).  They  considered 
God  just  or  righteous  in  making  these  demands  of  them. 
Even  the  publicans  did.  They  submitted  to  the  baptism  of 
John  {baptisthentes  to  baptisma  tou  Ioanou.  First  aorist  pas- 
sive participle  with  the  cognate  accusative  retained  in  the 
passive.  Some  writers  consider  verses  29  and  30  a  comment 
of  Luke  in  the  midst  of  the  eulogy  of  John  by  Jesus.  This 
would  be  a  remarkable  thing  for  so  long  a  comment  to  be 
interjected.     It  is  perfectly  proper  as  the  saying  of  Jesus. 

30.  Rejected  for  themselves  (ethetesan  eis  heautous).  The 
first  aorist  active  of  atheteb  first  seen  in  LXX  and  Polybius. 
Occurs  in  the  papyri.  These  legalistic  interpreters  of  the 
law  refused  to  admit  the  need  of  confession  of  sin  on  their 
part  and  so  set  aside  the  baptism  of  John.  They  annulled 
God's  purposes  of  grace  so  far  as  they  applied  to  them. 
Being  not  baptized  by  him  {me  baptisthentes  hup*  autou. 
First  aorist  passive  participle.  Me  is  the  usual  negative  of 
the  participle  in  the  Koine. 

31.  And  to  what  are  they  like?  (kai  tini  eisin  homoioi;). 
This  second  question  is  not  in  Matt.  11  :i6.  It  sharpens  the 
point.  The  case  of  tini  is  associative  instrumental  after 
homoioi.    See  discussion  of  details  in  Matthew. 

32.  And  ye  did  not  weep  {kai  ouk  eklausate).  Here  Matt. 
11:17  has  "and  ye  did  not  mourn  (or  beat  your  breast,  ouk 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  I05 

ekopsasthe).    They  all  did   it   at  funerals.    These  children 
would  not  play  wedding  or  funeral. 

33.  John  the  Baptist  is  come  (eleluthen).  Second  perfect 
active  indicative  where  Matt.  11:18  has  elthen  second  aorist 
active  indicative.  So  as  to  verse  34.  Luke  alone  has 
"bread"  and  "wine."  Otherwise  these  verses  like  Matt. 
11  :i8  and  19,  which  see  for  discussion  of  details.  There  are 
actually  critics  today  who  say  that  Jesus  was  called  the 
friend  of  sinners  and  even  of  harlots  because  he  loved  them 
and  their  ways  and  so  deserved  the  slur  cast  upon  him  by  his 
enemies.  If  men  can  say  that  today  we  need  not  wonder 
that  the  Pharisees  and  lawyers  said  it  then  to  justify  their 
own  rejection  of  Jesus. 

35.  Oj  all  her  children  (apo  panibn  ion  teknbn  antes).  Here 
Matt.  11  :ig  has  "by  her  works"  (apo  ton  ergon  antes).  Aleph 
has  ergon  here.  The  use  of  "children"  personifies  wisdom  as 
in  Prov.  8  and  9. 

36.  That  he  would  eat  with  him  (hina  phagei  met'  autou). 
Second  aorist  active  subjunctive.  The  use  of  hina  after 
erbtab  (see  also  Luke  16:27)  is  on  the  border  between  the 
pure  object  clause  and  the  indirect  question  (Robertson, 
Grammar,  p.  1046)  and  the  pure  final  clause.  Luke  has  two 
other  instances  of  Pharisees  who  invited  Jesus  to  meals 
(11 :37;  14:1)  and  he  alone  gives  them.  This  is  the  Gospel  of 
Hospitality  (Ragg).  Jesus  would  dine  with  a  Pharisee  or 
with  a  publican  (Luke  5 129  =  Mark  2:15  =  Matt.  9:10)  and 
even  invited  himself  to  be  the  guest  of  Zaccheus  (Luke  9:5). 
This  Pharisee  was  not  as  hostile  as  the  leaders  in  Jerusalem. 
It  is  not  necessary  to  think  this  Pharisee  had  any  sinister 
motive  in  his  invitation  though  he  was  not  overly  friendly 
(Plummer). 

37.  A  woman  which  was  in  the  city,  a  sinner  (gune  hetis  en 
tei  polei  hamartblos).  Probably  in  Capernaum.  The  use  of 
hetis  means  "Who  was  of  such  a  character  as  to  be"  (cf.  8:3) 
and  so  more  than  merely  the  relative  he,  who,   that  is, 


106      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

"who  was  a  sinner  in  the  city,"  a  woman  of  the  town,  in 
other  words,  and  known  to  be  such.  Hamartolos,  from 
hamartano,  to  sin,  means  devoted  to  sin  and  uses  the  same 
form  for  feminine  and  masculine.  It  is  false  and  unjust  to 
Mary  Magdalene,  introduced  as  a  new  character  in  Luke 
8:2,  to  identify  this  woman  with  her.  Luke  would  have  no 
motive  in  concealing  her  name  here  and  the  life  of  a  courtesan 
would  be  incompatible  with  the  sevenfold  possession  of 
demons.  Still  worse  is  it  to  identify  this  courtesan  not  only 
with  Mary  Magdalene,  but  also  with  Mary  of  Bethany 
simply  because  it  is  a  Simon  who  gives  there  a  feast  to  Jesus 
when  Mary  of  Bethany  does  a  beautiful  deed  somewhat  like 
this  one  here  (Mark  14:3-9  =  Matt.  26:6-13  =  John  12;  2-8). 
Certainly  Luke  knew  full  well  the  real  character  of  Mary  of 
Bethany  (10:38-42)  so  beautifully  pictured  by  him.  But 
a  falsehood,  once  started,  seems  to  have  more  lives  than  the 
cat's  proverbial  nine.  The  very  name  Magdalene  has  come 
to  mean  a  repentant  courtesan.  But  we  can  at  least  refuse  to 
countenance  such  a  slander  on  Mary  Magdalene  and  on  Mary 
of  Bethany.  This  sinful  woman  had  undoubtedly  repented 
and  changed  her  life  and  wished  to  show  her  gratitude  to 
Jesus  who  had  rescued  her.  Her  bad  reputation  as  a  harlot 
clung  to  her  and  made  her  an  unwelcome  visitor  in  the 
Pharisee's  house.  When  she  knew  (epignousa).  Second 
aorist  active  participle  from  epiginosko,  to  know  fully,  to 
recognize.  She  came  in  by  a  curious  custom  of  the  time  that 
allowed  strangers  to  enter  a  house  uninvited  at  a  feast,  es- 
pecially beggars  seeking  a  gift.  This  woman  was  an  intruder 
whereas  Mary  of  Bethany  was  an  invited  guest.  "Many 
came  in  and  took  their  places  on  the  side  seats,  uninvited  and 
yet  unchallenged.  They  spoke  to  those  at  table  on  business 
or  the  news  of  the  day,  and  our  host  spoke  freely  to  them" 
(Trench  in  his  Parables,  describing  a  dinner  at  a  Consul's 
house  at  Damietta).  He  was  sitting  at  meat  (katakeitai). 
Literally,  he  is  reclining  (present  tense  retained  in  indirect 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  107 

discourse  in  Greek).  An  alabaster  cruse  of  ointment  {alabas- 
tron  murou).  See  on  Matt.  26:7  for  discussion  of  alabastron 
and  murou. 

38.  Standing  behind  at  his  feet  {stasa  opiso  para  tous  podas 
autou).  Second  aorist  active  participle  from  hisiemi  and 
intransitive,  first  aorist  estesa  being  transitive.  The  guest 
removed  his  sandals  before  the  meal  and  he  reclined  on  the 
left  side  with  the  feet  outward.  She  was  standing  beside 
{para)  his  feet  weeping  (klaiousa).  She  was  drawn  irresist- 
ibly by  gratitude  to  Jesus  and  is  overcome  with  emotion 
before  she  can  use  the  ointment;  her  tears  (tois  dakrusin, 
instrumental  case  of  dakru)  take  the  place  of  the  ointment. 
Wiped  them  with  the  hair  of  her  head  (tais  thrixin  tes  kephales 
autes  exemassen).  Inchoative  imperfect  of  an  old  verb 
ekmasso,  to  rub  out  or  off,  began  to  wipe  off,  an  act  of  impulse 
evidently  and  of  embarrassment.  "Among  the  Jews  it  was  a 
shameful  thing  for  a  woman  to  let  down  her  hair  in  public; 
but  she  makes  this  sacrifice"  (Plummer).  So  Mary  of  Beth- 
any wiped  the  feet  of  Jesus  with  her  hair  (John  12:3)  with  a 
similar  sacrifice  out  of  her  great  love  for  Jesus.  This  fact  is 
relied  on  by  some  to  prove  that  Mary  of  Bethany  had  been  a 
woman  of  bad  character,  surely  an  utter  failure  to  recognize 
Mary's  motive  and  act.  Kissed  (katephilei).  Imperfect  active 
of  kataphileo,  to  kiss  repeatedly  (force  of  kata),  and  accented 
by  the  tense  of  continued  action  here.  The  word  in  the  N.T. 
occurs  here,  of  the  prodigal's  father  (15:20),  of  the  kiss  of 
Judas  (Mark  14:45  =Matt.  26:49),  of  the  Ephesian  elders 
(Acts  20 :37) .  "  Kissing  the  feet  was  a  common  mark  of  deep 
reverence,  especially  to  leading  rabbis"  (Plummer).  Anointed 
them  with  the  ointment  {eleiphen  toi  muroi) .  Imperfect  active 
again  of  aleipho,  a  very  common  verb.  Chrio  has  a  more 
religious  sense.  The  anointing  came  after  the  burst  of  emo- 
tional excitement. 

39.  This  man  (houtos).  Contemptuous,  this  fellow.  If  he 
were  a  {the)  prophet  {ei en  [ho]  prophetes).    Condition  of  the 


108      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

second  class,  determined  as  unfulfilled.  The  Pharisee  as- 
sumes that  Jesus  is  not  a  prophet  (or  the  prophet,  reading  of 
B,  that  he  claims  to  be).  A  Greek  condition  puts  the  thing 
from  the  standpoint  of  the  speaker  or  writer.  It  does  not 
deal  with  the  actual  facts,  but  only  with  the  statement  about 
the  facts.  Would  have  perceived  (eginosken  an).  Wrong 
translation,  would  now  perceive  or  know  (which  he  assumes 
that  Jesus  does  not  do).  The  protasis  is  false  and  the  con- 
clusion also.  He  is  wrong  in  both.  The  conclusion  (apodosis) , 
like  the  condition,  deals  here  with  the  present  situation  and 
so  both  use  the  imperfect  indicative  (an  in  the  conclusion, 
a  mere  device  for  making  it  plain  that  it  is  not  a  condition 
of  the  first  class).  Who  and  what  manner  of  woman  (tis  kai 
potape  he  gune).    She  was  notorious  in  person  and  character. 

40.  Answering  (apokritheis).  First  aorist  passive  parti- 
ciple, redundant  use  with  eipen.  Jesus  answers  the  thoughts 
and  doubts  of  Simon  and  so  shows  that  he  knows  all  about 
the  woman  also.    Godet  notes  a  tone  of  Socratic  irony  here. 

41.  A  certain  lender  (danistei  tini).  A  lender  of  money 
with  interest.  Here  alone  in  the  N.T.  though  a  common 
word.  Debtors  (chreophiletai).  From  chreo  (debt,  obligation) 
and  opheilo,  to  owe.  Only  here  and  16:5  in  the  N.T.,  though 
common  in  late  Greek  writers.  Owed  (opheilen).  Imperfect 
active  and  so  unpaid.  Five  hundred  denaria  and  fifty  like 
two  hundred  and  fifty  dollars  and  twenty-five  dollars. 

42.  Will  love  him  most  (pleion  agapesei  auton).  Strictly, 
comparative  more,  pleion,  not  superlative  pleista,  but  most 
suits  the  English  idiom  best,  even  between  two.  Superlative 
forms  are  vanishing  before  the  comparative  in  the  KoinS. 
This  is  the  point  of  the  parable,  the  attitude  of  the  two  debt- 
ors toward  the  lender  who  forgave  both  of  them  (Plummer). 

43.  /  suppose  (hupolambano).  Old  verb,  originally  to 
take  up  from  under,  to  bear  away  as  on  high,  to  take  up  in 
speech  (Luke  10:30),  to  take  up  in  mind  or  to  assume  as  here 
and  Acts  2:15.    Here  with  an  air  of  supercilious  indifference 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  109 

(Plummer).  The  most  {to  pleion).  The  more.  Rightly 
{orthos).  Correctly.  Socrates  was  fond  of  panu  orthos.  The 
end  of  the  argument. 

44.  Turning  (strapheis).  Second  aorist  passive  participle. 
See st  thou  {blepeis).  For  the  first  time  Jesus  looks  at  the 
woman  and  he  asks  the  Pharisee  to  look  at  her.  She  was 
behind  Jesus.  Jesus  was  an  invited  guest.  The  Pharisee 
had  neglected  some  points  of  customary  hospitality.  The 
contrasts  here  made  have  the  rhythm  of  Hebrew  poetry. 
In  each  contrast  the  first  word  is  the  point  of  defect  in 
Simon:  water  (44),  kiss  (45),  oil  (46). 

45.  Hath  not  ceased  to  kiss  (ou  dielipen  kataphilousa). 
Supplementary  participle. 

46.  With  ointment  {muroi).  Instrumental  case.  She  used 
the  costly  ointment  even  for  the  feet  of  Jesus. 

47.  Are  forgiven  {apheontai).  Doric  perfect  passive  form. 
See  Luke  5:21,  23.  For  she  loved  much  {hoti  egapesen  polu). 
Illustration  or  proof,  not  reason  for  the  forgiveness.  Her 
sins  had  been  already  forgiven  and  remained  forgiven.  But 
to  whom  little  is  forgiven,  the  same  loveth  little  {Hoi  de  oligon 
aphietai  oligon  agapai).  This  explanation  proves  that  the 
meaning  of  hoti  preceding  is  proof,  not  cause. 

48.  Are  forgiven  {apheontai).  As  in  verse  47.  Remain 
forgiven,  Jesus  means,  in  spite  of  the  slur  of  the  Pharisee. 

49.  Who  even  forgiveth  sins  {hos  kai  hamartias  aphiesin). 
Present  indicative  active  of  same  verb,  aphiemi.  Once  before 
the  Pharisees  considered  Jesus  guilty  of  blasphemy  in  claim- 
ing the  power  to  forgive  sins  (Luke  5:21).  Jesus  read  their 
inmost  thoughts  as  he  always  does. 


CHAPTER  VIII 

i.  Soon  afterwards  {en  tbi  kathexes).  In  7:11  we  have  en 
tbi  hexes.  This  word  means  one  after  the  other,  successively, 
but  that  gives  no  definite  data  as  to  the  time,  only  that  this 
incident  in  8:1-3  follows  that  in  7:36-50.  Both  in  Luke 
alone.  That  {kai).  One  of  Luke's  idioms  with  kai  egeneto 
like  Hebrew  wav.  Went  about  {diodeuen).  Imperfect  active 
of  diodeub,  to  make  one's  way  through  {dia,  hodos),  common 
in  late  Greek  writers.  In  the  N.T.  here  only  and  Acts  17:1. 
Through  cities  and  villages  {kola  polin  kai  kbmen).  Distribu- 
tive use  of  kata  (up  and  down).  The  clause  is  amphibolous 
and  goes  equally  well  with  diodeuen  or  with  kerussbn  (herald- 
ing) kai  euaggelizomenos  (evangelizing,  gospelizing).  This 
is  the  second  tour  of  Galilee,  this  time  the  Twelve  with  him. 

2.  Which  had  been  healed  [hai  esan  tetherapeumenai). 
Periphrastic  past  perfect  passive,  suggesting  that  the  healing 
had  taken  place  some  time  before  this  tour.  These  women 
all  had  personal  grounds  of  gratitude  to  Jesus.  From  whom 
seven  devils  {demons)  had  gone  out  {apK  hes  daimonia  hepta 
exeleluthei).  Past  perfect  active  third  singular  for  the 
daimonia  are  neuter  plural.  This  first  mention  of  Mary 
Magdalene  describes  her  special  cause  of  gratitude.  This 
fact  is  stated  also  in  Mark  16:9  in  the  disputed  close  of  the 
Gospel.  The  presence  of  seven  demons  in  one  person  indi- 
cates special  malignity  (Mark  5:9).  See  Matt.  12:45  for 
the  parable  of  the  demon  who  came  back  with  seven  other 
demons  worse  than  the  first.  It  is  not  known  where  Magdala 
was,  whence  Mary  came. 

3.  Joanna  {Ibana).  Her  husband  Chuza,  steward  {epi- 
tropou)  of  Herod,  is  held  by  some  to  be  the  nobleman  {basi- 
likos)  of  John  4:46-53  who  believed  and  all  his  house.    At 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  III 

any  rate  Christ  had  a  follower  from  the  household  of  Herod 
Antipas  who  had  such  curiosity  to  see  and  hear  him.  One 
may  recall  also  Manaen  (Acts  13:1),  Herod's  foster  brother. 
Joanna  is  mentioned  again  with  Mary  Magdalene  in  Luke 
24:10.  Who  ministered  unto  them  {haitines  diekonoun  autois). 
Imperfect  active  of  diakoneo,  common  verb,  but  note  aug- 
ment as  if  from  dia  and  akoneo,  but  from  diakonos  and  that 
from  dia  and  konis  (dust).  The  very  fact  that  Jesus  now 
had  twelve  men  going  with  him  called  for  help  from  others 
and  the  women  of  means  responded  to  the  demand.  Of  their 
substance  {ek  ton  huparchonton  autais).  From  the  things 
belonging  to  them.  This  is  the  first  woman's  missionary 
society  for  the  support  of  missionaries  of  the  Gospel.  They 
had  difficulties  in  their  way,  but  they  overcame  these,  so 
great  was  their  gratitude  and  zeal. 

4.  By  a  parable  {dia  paraboles).  Mark  4:2  says  "in  par- 
ables" as  does  Matt.  13:3.  This  is  the  beginning  of  the  first 
great  group  of  parables  as  given  in  Mark  4:1-34  and  Matt. 
13:1-53.  There  are  ten  of  these  parables  in  Mark  and  Mat- 
thew and  only  two  in  Luke  8 :4~i8  (The  Sower  and  the  Lamp, 
8:16)  though  Luke  also  has  the  expression  "in  parables" 
(8:10).  See  Matt.  13  and  Mark  4  for  discussion  of  the  word 
parable  and  the  details  of  the  Parable  of  the  Sower.  Luke 
does  not  locate  the  place,  but  he  mentions  the  great  crowds 
on  hand,  while  both  Mark  and  Matthew  name  the  seaside 
as  the  place  where  Jesus  was  at  the  start  of  the  series  of 
parables. 

5.  His  seed  {ton  sporon  autou).  Peculiar  to  Luke.  Was 
trodden  under  foot  {katepatethe).  First  aorist  passive  indica- 
tive of  katapateo.  Peculiar  to  Luke  here.  Of  the  heavens 
{tou  ouranou).    Added  in  Luke. 

6.  Upon  the  rock  {epi  ten  petran).  Mark  4:5  "the  rocky 
ground"  {epi  to  petrodes).  Matt.  13:5  "the  rocky  places. 
As  soon  as  it  grew  {phuen).  Second  aorist  passive  participle 
of  phuo,  an  old  verb  to  spring  up  like  a  sprout.     Withered 


112      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

away  (exeranthe).  First  aorist  passive  indicative  of  zeraino, 
old  verb,  to  dry  up.  Moisture  (ikmada).  Here  only  in  the 
N.T.,  though  common  word. 

7.  Amidst  the  thorns  {en  mesoi  ion  akanthbn).  Mark  4:7 
has  eis  (among)  and  Matt.  13:7  has  epi  "upon."  Grew  with 
it  (sunphueisai).  Same  participle  as  phuen  above  with  sun- 
(together).  Choked  (apepnixan).  From  apopnigo,  to  choke 
off  as  in  Matt.  13:7.  In  Mark  4:7  the  verb  is  sunepnixan 
(choked  together). 

8.  A  hundredfold  (hekatonplasiona).  Luke  omits  the  thirty 
and  sixty  of  Mark  4:8  and  Matt.  13:8.  He  cried  (ephonei). 
Imperfect  active,  and  in  a  loud  voice,  the  verb  means.  The 
warning  about  hearing  with  the  ears  occurs  also  in  Mark  4:9 
and  Matt.  13:9. 

9.  Asked  (eperoton).  Imperfect  of  eperotao  {epi  and  erbtao) 
where  Mark  4:10  has  erbtbn  (uncompounded  imperfect), 
both  the  tense  and  the  use  of  epi  indicate  eager  and  repeated 
questions  on  the  part  of  the  disciples,  perhaps  dimly  perceiv- 
ing a  possible  reflection  on  their  own  growth.  What  this 
parable  might  be  {tis  haute  eie  he  parabole).  A  mistranslation, 
What  this  parable  was  (or  meant).  The  optative  eie  is 
merely  due  to  indirect  discourse,  changing  the  indicative 
estin  (is)  of  the  direct  question  to  the  optative  eie  of  the 
indirect,  a  change  entirely  with  the  writer  or  speaker  and 
without  any  change  of  meaning  (Robertson,  Grammar, 
pp.  I043f.). 

10.  The  mysteries  {ta  musteria).  See  for  this  word  on 
Matt.  13:11=  Mark  4:11.  Part  of  the  mystery  here  explained 
is  how  so  many  people  who  have  the  opportunity  to  enter 
the  kingdom  fail  to  do  so  because  of  manifest  unfitness. 
That  {hina).  Here  Mark  4:11  also  has  hina  while  Matt. 
13:13  has  hoti  (because).  On  the  so-called  causal  use  of 
hina  as  here  equal  to  hoti  see  discussion  on  Matt.  13:13  and 
Mark  4:11.  Plummer  sensibly  argues  that  there  is  truth 
both  in  the  causal  hoti  of  Matthew  and  the  final  hina  of  Mark 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  1 13 

and  Matthew.  "But  the  principle  that  he  who  hath  shall 
receive  more,  while  he  who  hath  not  shall  be  deprived  of  what 
he  seemeth  to  have,  explains  both  the  hina  and  the  hoti.  Jesus 
speaks  in  parables  because  the  multitudes  see  without  seeing 
and  hear  without  hearing.  But  He  also  speaks  in  parable 
in  order  that  they  may  see  without  seeing  and  hear  without 
hearing."  Only  for  "hearing"  Luke  has  "understand" 
suniosin,  present  subjunctive  from  a  late  omega  form  sunib 
instead  of  the  -mi  verb  suniemi. 

11.  Is  this  {estin  de  haute).  Means  this.  Jesus  now  pro- 
ceeds to  interpret  his  own  parable.  The  seed  is  the  word  of 
God  {ho  sporos  estin  ho  logos  tou  theou).  The  article  with  both 
subject  and  predicate  as  here  means  that  they  are  inter- 
changeable and  can  be  turned  round:  The  word  of  God  is 
the  seed.  The  phrase  "the  word  of  God"  does  not  appear  in 
Matthew  and  only  once  in  Mark  (7:13)  and  John  (10:35), 
but  four  times  in  Luke  (5:1;  8:11,  21;  11:28)  and  twelve 
times  in  Acts.  In  Mark  4:14  we  have  only  "the  word." 
In  Mark  3 :3i  we  have  "the  will  of  God,"  and  in  Matt.  12:46 
"the  will  of  my  Father"  where  Luke  8:21  has  "the  word  of 
God."  This  seems  to  show  that  Luke  has  the  subjective 
genitive  here  and  means  the  word  that  comes  from  God. 

12.  Those  by  the  wayside  {hoi  para  ten  hodon).  As  in  Mark 
4:i5=Matt.  19  so  here  the  people  who  hear  the  word  = 
the  seed  are  discussed  by  metonymy.  The  devil  {ho  diabolos). 
The  slanderer.  Here  Mark  4:15  has  Satan.  From  their 
heart  {apo  tes  kardias  autbn)*  Here  Mark  has  "in  them." 
It  is  the  devil's  business  to  snatch  up  the  seed  from  the  heart 
before  it  sprouts  and  takes  root.  Every  preacher  knows  how 
successful  the  devil  is  with  his  auditors.  Matt.  13:19  has  it 
"sown  in  the  heart."  That  they  may  not  believe  and  be  saved 
{hina  me  pisteusantes  sothosin).  Peculiar  to  Luke.  Negative 
purpose  with  aorist  active  participle  and  first  aorist  (in- 
gressive)  passive  subjunctive.  Many  reasons  are  offered 
today  for  the  failure  of  preachers  to  win  souls.    Here  is  the 


114      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

main  one,  the  activity  of  the  devil  during  and  after  the 
preaching  of  the  sermon.  No  wonder  then  that  the  sower 
must  have  good  seed  and  sow  wisely,  for  even  then  he  can 
only  win  partial  success. 

13.  Which  for  a  while  believe  {hoi  pros  kairon  pisteuousin) . 
Ostensibly  they  are  sincere  and  have  made  a  real  start  in 
the  life  of  faith.  They  fall  away  (aphistantai).  Present 
middle  indicative.  They  stand  off,  lose  interest,  stop  coming 
to  church,  drop  out  of  sight.  It  is  positively  amazing  the 
number  of  new  church  members  who  "stumble"  as  Mark 
4:17  has  it  (skandalizontai),  do  not  like  the  pastor,  take 
offence  at  something  said  or  done  by  somebody,  object  to 
the  appeals  for  money,  feel  slighted.  The  "season  of  trial" 
becomes  a  "season  of  temptation"  (en  kairbi  peirasmou)  for 
these  superficial,  emotional  people  who  have  to  be  periodi- 
cally rounded  up  if  kept  within  the  fold. 

14.  They  are  choked  (sunpnigontai) .  Present  passive  in- 
dicative of  this  powerfully  vivid  compound  verb  sunpnigo 
used  in  Mark  4:i9=Matt.  13:22,  only  there  these  worldly 
weeds  choke  the  word  while  here  the  victims  themselves  are 
choked.  Both  are  true.  Diphtheria  will  choke  and  strangle 
the  victim.  Who  has  not  seen  the  promise  of  fair  flower  and 
fruit  choked  into  yellow  withered  stalk  without  fruit  "as 
they  go  on  their  way"  (poreuomenoi) .  Bring  no  fruit  to 
perfection  (ou  telesphorousin).  Compound  verb  common  in 
the  late  writers  (telos,  phoreo).  To  bring  to  completion. 
Used  of  fruits,  animals,  pregnant  women.  Only  here  in  the 
N.T. 

15.  In  an  honest  and  good  heart  (en  kardiai  kalei  kai  aga- 
thei).  Peculiar  to  Luke.  In  verse  8  the  land  (gen)  is  called 
agathen  (really  good,  generous)  and  in  verse  15  we  have  en 
tei  kalei  gei  (in  the  beautiful  or  noble  land).  So  Luke  uses  both 
adjectives  of  the  heart.  The  Greeks  used  kalos  k*  agathos  of 
the  high-minded  gentleman.  It  is  probable  that  Luke  knew 
this  idiom.    It  occurs  here  alone  in  the  N.T.    It  is  not  easy 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  115 

to  translate.  We  have  such  phrases  as  "good  and  true," 
"sound  and  good,"  "right  and  good,"  no  one  of  which  quite 
suits  the  Greek.  Certainly  Luke  adds  new  moral  qualities 
not  in  the  Hellenic  phrase.  The  English  word  "honest" 
here  is  like  the  Latin  honestus  (fair,  noble).  The  words  are 
to  be  connected  with  "hold  fast"  {katechousin),  "hold  it 
down"  so  that  the  devil  does  not  snatch  it  away,  having 
depth  of  soil  so  that  it  does  not  shrivel  up  under  the  sun,  and 
is  not  choked  by  weeds  and  thorns.  It  bears  fruit  {karpo- 
phorousin,  an  old  expressive  verb,  karpos  and  phoreo).  That 
is  the  proof  of  spiritual  life.  In  patience  {en  hupomonei). 
There  is  no  other  way  for  real  fruit  to  come.  Mushrooms 
spring  up  overnight,  but  they  are  usually  poisonous.  The 
best  fruits  require  time,  cultivation,  patience. 

16.  When  he  hath  lighted  a  lamp  {luchnon  haps  as).  It  is  a 
portable  lamp  {luchnon)  that  one  lights  {hapsas  aorist  active 
participle  of  hapto,  to  kindle,  fasten  to,  light).  With  a  vessel 
{skeuei,  instrumental  case  of  skeuos).  Here  Mark  4:21  has 
the  more  definite  figure  "under  the  bushel"  as  has  Matt. 
5:15.  Under  the  bed  {hupokato  Mines).  Here  Mark  4:21  has 
the  regular  hupo  ten  klinen  instead  of  the  late  compound 
hupokato.  Ragg  notes  that  Matthew  distributes  the  sayings 
of  Jesus  given  here  by  Luke  8:16-18  =Mark  4:21-25  con- 
cerning the  parable  of  the  lamp  and  gives  them  in  three  sepa- 
rate places  (Matt.  5:15;  10:26;  13:12).  That  is  true,  but  it 
does  not  follow  that  Mark  and  Luke  have  bunched  together 
separate  sayings  or  that  Matthew  has  scattered  sayings  de- 
livered only  on  one  occasion.  One  of  the  slowest  lessons  for 
some  critics  to  learn  is  that  Jesus  repeated  favourite  sayings  on 
different  occasions  and  in  different  groupings  just  as  every 
popular  preacher  and  teacher  does  today.  See  on  Mark  4:21 
for  further  discussion  of  the  lamp  and  stand.  May  see  the 
light  {Bleposin  to  phos).  In  Matt.  5:16  Jesus  has  it  "may 
see  your  good  works."  The  purpose  of  light  is  to  let  one  see 
something  else,  not  the  light.     Note  present  subjunctive 


Il6      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

(blepdsin),  linear  action  "Jesus  had  kindled  a  light  within 
them.  They  must  not  hide  it,  but  must  see  that  it  spreads 
to  others"  (Plummer).  The  parable  of  the  lamp  throws 
light  on  the  parable  of  the  sower. 

17.  That  shall  not  be  known  (ho  ou  me  gnosthei).  Peculiar 
to  Luke.  First  aorist  passive  subjunctive  of  ginosko  with 
the  strong  double  negative  ou  me.  See  on  Mark  4:22  for 
discussion  of  krupton  and  apokruphon. 

18.  How  ye  hear  (pds  akouete).  The  manner  of  hearing. 
Mark  4:24  has  "what  ye  hear"  (ti  akouete),  the  matter  that 
is  heard.  Both  are  supremely  important.  Some  things 
should  not  be  heard  at  all.  Some  that  are  heard  should  be 
forgotten.  Others  should  be  treasured  and  practised.  For 
whosoever  hath  (Hos  an  gar  echei).  Present  active  subjunctive 
of  the  common  verb  echo  which  may  mean  "  keep  on  having" 
or  "acquiring."  See  on  Mark  4:25  for  discussion.  Thinketh 
he  hath  (dokei  echein),  or  seems  to  acquire  or  to  hold.  Losses 
in  business  illustrate  this  saying  as  when  we  see  their  riches 
take  wings  and  fly  away.  So  it  is  with  hearing  and  heeding. 
Self-deception  is  a  common  complaint. 

19.  His  mother  and  brethren  (he  meter  kai  hoi  adelphoi 
autou).  Mark  3:31-35  and  Matt.  12:46-50  place  the  visit 
of  the  mother  and  brothers  of  Jesus  before  the  parable  of  the 
sower.  Usually  Luke  follows  Mark's  order,  but  he  does  not 
do  so  here.  At  first  the  brothers  of  Jesus  (younger  sons  of 
Joseph  and  Mary,  I  take  the  words  to  mean,  there  being 
sisters  also)  were  not  unfriendly  to  the  work  of  Jesus  as  seen 
in  John  2:12  when  they  with  the  mother  of  Jesus  are  with 
him  and  the  small  group  (half  dozen)  disciples  in  Capernaum 
after  the  wedding  in  Cana.  But  as  Jesus  went  on  with  his 
work  and  was  rejected  at  Nazareth  (Luke  4:16-31),  there 
developed  an  evident  disbelief  in  his  claims  on  the  part  of 
the  brothers  who  ridiculed  him  six  months  before  the  end 
(John  7:5).  At  this  stage  they  have  apparently  come  with 
Mary  to  take  Jesus  home  out  of  the  excitement  of  the  crowds, 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  117 

perhaps  thinking  that  he  is  beside  himself  (Mark  3:21). 
They  hardly  believed  the  charge  of  the  rabbis  that  Jesus 
was  in  league  with  Beelzebub.  Certainly  the  mother  of 
Jesus  could  give  no  credence  to  that  slander.  But  she  her- 
self was  deeply  concerned  and  wanted  to  help  him  if  possible. 
See  discussion  of  the  problem  in  my  little  book  The  Mother 
of  Jesus  and  also  on  Mark  3:31  and  Matt.  12:46.  Come  to 
him  {suntuchein) .  Second  aorist  active  infinitive  of  sun- 
tugchano,  an  old  verb,  though  here  alone  in  the  N.T.,  mean- 
ing to  meet  with,  to  fall  in  with  as  if  accidentally,  here  with 
associative  instrumental  case  autoi. 

20.  Was  told  {apeggele).  Second  aorist  passive  indicative 
of  apaggello,  to  bring  word  or  tidings.  Common  verb.  See 
on  Mark  3:32  and  Matt.  12:47  for  details. 

21.  These  which  hear  the  word  of  God  and  do  it  {hoi  ton 
logon  tou  theou  akouontes  kai  poiountes).  The  absence  of  the 
article  with  "mother"  and  "brothers"  probably  means,  as 
Plummer  argues,  "Mother  to  me  and  brothers  to  me  are 
those  who  &c."  No  one  is  a  child  of  God  because  of  human 
parentage  (John  1:13).  "Family  ties  are  at  best  temporal; 
spiritual  ties  are  eternal"  (Plummer).  Note  the  use  of 
"hear  and  do"  together  here  as  in  Matt.  7:24  =  Luke  6:47 
at  the  close  of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  The  parable  of 
the  sower  is  almost  like  a  footnote  to  that  sermon.  Later 
Jesus  will  make  "doing"  a  test  of  friendship  for  him  (John 

22.  And  they  launched  forth  {kai  anechthesan).  First  aorist 
passive  indicative  of  anago,  an  old  verb,  to  lead  up,  to  put 
out  to  sea  (looked  at  as  going  up  from  the  land).  This  nau- 
tical sense  of  the  verb  occurs  only  in  Luke  in  the  N.T.  and 
especially  in  the  Acts  (13:13;  16:11;  18:21;  20:3,  13;  21:1,  2; 
27:2,  4,  12,  21;  28:101.). 

23.  He  fell  asleep  {aphupnosen).  First  aorist  (ingressive) 
active  indicative  of  aphupnoo,  to  put  to  sleep,  to  fall  off  to 
sleep,  a  late  verb  for  which  the  older  Greek  used  kathupnoo. 


Il8      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Originally  aphupnoo  meant  to  waken  from  sleep,  then  to  fall 
off  to  sleep  (possibly  a  medical  use).  This  is  the  only  passage 
which  speaks  of  the  sleep  of  Jesus.  Here  only  in  the  N.T. 
Came  down  (katebe).  Second  aorist  active  indicative  of 
katabaino,  common  verb.  It  was  literally  true.  These  wind 
storms  (lailaps.  So  also  Mark  4:37)  rushed  from  Hermon 
down  through  the  Jordan  gorge  upon  the  Sea  of  Galilee  and 
shook  it  like  a  tempest  (Matt.  8:24).  Mark's  (4:37)  vivid 
use  of  the  dramatic  present  ginetai  (ariseth)  is  not  so  precise 
as  Luke's  "came  down."  See  on  Matt.  8:24.  These  sudden 
squalls  were  dangerous  on  this  small  lake.  They  were  filling 
(suneplerounto).  Imperfect  passive.  It  was  the  boat  that 
was  being  filled  (Mark  4:37)  and  it  is  here  applied  to  the 
navigators  as  sailors  sometimes  spoke.  An  old  verb,  but  in 
the  N.T.  used  only  by  Luke  (8:23;  9:51;  Acts  2:1).  Were  in 
jeopardy  (ekinduneuon).  Imperfect  active,  vivid  descrip- 
tion. Old  verb,  but  in  the  N.T.  only  here,  Acts  19:27; 
I  Cor.  15:30. 

24.  Master,  Master  (Epistata,  epistata).  See  on  Luke  5:5 
for  discussion.  Mark  4:38  has  Teacher  (Didaskale),  Matt. 
8:25  has  Lord  (Kurie).  The  repetition  here  shows  the  un- 
easiness of  the  disciples.  We  perish  (apollumetha) .  So  in 
Mark  4:38  and  Matt.  8:25.  Linear  present  middle  indica- 
tive, we  are  perishing.  The  raging  of  the  water  (toi  kludoni 
tou  hudatos).  Kludon,  common  Greek  word,  is  a  boisterous 
surge,  a  violent  agitation.  Here  only  in  the  N.T.  save  James 
1:6.  Kuma  (Mark  4:37)  is  the  regular  swell  or  wave.  A 
calm  (galene).  Only  in  the  parallels  in  the  N.T.,  though 
common  word.  Here  Mark  4:39  and  Matt.  8:26  add  great 
(megale).  That  (hoti).  This  use  of  hoti  as  explanatory  of  the 
demonstrative  pronoun  houtos  occurs  in  the  parallels  Mark 
4:36  =  Matt.  8 :27  and  also  in  Luke  4 136.  It  is  almost  result. 
He  commandeth  (epitassei).    Peculiar  to  Luke. 

26.  They  arrived  (katepleusan).  First  aorist  active  indica- 
tive of  katapleo,  common  verb,  but  here  only  in  the  N.T. 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  119 

Literally,  they  sailed  down  from  the  sea  to  the  land,  the  op- 
posite of  launched  forth  (anechthesan)  of  verse  22.  So 
we  today  use  like  nautical  terms,  to  bear  up,  to  bear  down. 
The  Gerasenes  (ton  Gerasenon).  This  is  the  correct  text  here 
as  in  Mark  5:1  while  Gadarenes  is  correct  in  Matt.  8:28. 
See  there  for  explanation  of  this  famous  discrepancy,  now 
cleared  up  by  Thomson's  discovery  of  Khersa  (Gersa)  on  the 
steep  eastern  bank  and  in  the  vicinity  of  Gadara.  Over 
against  Galilee  (antipera  tes  Galilaias).  Only  here  in  the 
N.T.  The  later  Greek  form  is  antiperan  (Polybius,  etc.). 
Some  MSS.  here  have  per  an  like  Mark  5:1  =Matt.  8:28. 

27.  And  for  a  long  time  (kai  chronoi  hikanoi).  The  use  of 
the  associative  instrumental  case  in  expressions  of  time  is  a 
very  old  Greek  idiom  that  still  appears  in  the  papyri  (Robert- 
son, Grammar,  p.  527).  He  had  worn  no  clothes  (ouk  enedusato 
himation).  First  aorist  middle  indicative,  constative  aorist, 
viewing  the  "long  time"  as  a  point.  Not  pluperfect  as 
English  has  it  and  not  for  the  pluperfect,  simply  "and  for 
a  long  time  he  did  not  put  on  himself  (indirect  middle)  any 
clothing."  The  physician  would  naturally  note  this  item. 
Common  verb  enduo  or  enduno.  This  item  in  Luke  alone, 
though  implied  by  Mark  5:15  "clothed"  (himatismenon) . 
And  abode  not  in  any  house  (kai  en  oikiai  ouk  emenen).  Im- 
perfect active.  Peculiar  to  Luke,  though  implied  by  the 
mention  of  tombs  in  all  three  (Mark  5 :3  =  Matt.  8 :28  == 
Luke  8:27). 

28.  Fell  down  (prosepesen).  Second  aorist  active  of 
prospipto,  to  fall  forward,  towards,  prostrate  before  one  as 
here.  Common  verb.  Mark  5:6  has  prosekunesen  (wor- 
shipped). The  Most  High  God  (tou  theou  tou  hupsistou). 
Uncertain  whether  tou  theou  genuine  or  not.  But  "the 
Most  High"  clearly  means  God  as  already  seen  (Luke  1:32, 
35,  36;  6:35).  The  phrase  is  common  among  heathen  (Num. 
24:16;  Micah.  6:6;  Isa.  14:14).  The  demoniac  may  have  been 
a  Gentile,  but  it  is  the  demon  here  speaking.    See  on  Mark 


120      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

2:7  =  Matt.  8:29  for  the  Greek  idiom  (ti  emoi  kai  sot). 
"  What  have  I  to  do  with  thee?"  See  there  also  for  "Tor- 
ment me  not. " 

29.  For  he  commanded  (pareggellen  gar).  Imperfect  ac- 
tive, correct  text,  for  he  was  commanding.  Oftentimes 
(pollois  chronois).  Or  "for  a  long  time"  like  chronbi  pollbi 
of  verse  27  (see  Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  537,  for  the  plural 
here).  It  had  seized  (sunerpakei).  Past  perfect  active  of 
sunarpazb,  to  lay  hold  by  force.  An  old  verb,  but  only  in 
Luke  in  the  N.T.  (Luke  8:29;  Acts  6:12;  19:29;  27:15). 
Was  kept  under  guard  (edesmeueto).  Imperfect  passive  of 
desmeuo  to  put  in  chains,  from  desmos,  bond,  and  that  from 
deb  to  bind.  Old,  but  rather  rare  verb.  Only  here  and  Acts 
22:4  in  this  sense.  In  Matt.  23  14  it  means  to  bind  together. 
Some  MSS.  read  desmeb  in  Luke  8:29.  Breaking  the  bands 
asunder  (diaressbn  ta  desmd).  Old  verb,  the  preposition  dia 
(in  two)  intensifying  the  meaning  of  the  simple  verb  ressb 
or  regnumi,  to  rend.  Was  driven  (elauneto).  Imperfect  pas- 
sive of  elaunb,  to  drive,  to  row,  to  march  (Xenophon). 
Only  five  times  in  the  N.T.  Here  alone  in  Luke  and  pecul- 
iar to  Luke  in  this  incident. 

30.  Legion  (Legion).    See  on  Mark  5:9. 

31.  Into  the  abyss  (eis  ten  abusson).  Rare  old  word  com- 
mon in  LXX  from  a  privative  and  bathus  (deep).  So  bot- 
tomless place  (supply  chord).  The  deep  sea  in  Gen.  1:2; 
7:11.  The  common  receptacle  of  the  dead  in  Rom.  10:7 
and  especially  the  abode  of  demons  as  here  and  Rev.  9:1-11; 
11:7;  17:8;  20:1,  3. 

32.  A  herd  of  many  swine  (agele  choirbn  hikanbn).  Word 
herd  (agele)  old  as  Homer,  but  in  N.T.  only  here  and  parallels 
(Mark  5:ii=Matt.  8:30).  Luke  shows  his  fondness  for 
adjective  hikanos  here  again  (see  verse  27)  where  Mark  has 
megale  and  Matthew  pollbn. 

33.  Rushed  down  the  steep  (hbrmesen  kata  tou  kremnou). 
Ablative  with  kata  as  in  Mark  5:13  and  Matt.  8:32  and  the 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  121 

same  vivid  verb  in  each  account,  to  hurl  impetuously,  to 
rush.  Were  choked  (apepnige).  Second  aorist  (constative) 
passive  indicative  third  singular  (collective  singular)  where 
Mark  5:13  has  the  picturesque  imperfect  epnigonto. 

34.  Saw  what  had  come  to  pass  (idontes  to  gegonos).  This 
item  only  in  Luke.  Note  the  neat  Greek  idiom  to  gegonos, 
articular  second  perfect  active  participle  of  ginomai.  Re- 
peated in  verse  35  and  in  Mark  5:14.  Note  numerous 
participles  here  in  verse  35  as  in  Mark  5:15. 

36.  He  that  was  possessed  with  devils  {demons)  (only  two 
words  in  Greek,  ho  daimonistheis,  the  demonized).  Was 
made  whole  (esbthe).  First  aorist  passive  indicative  of  sozo  to 
save  from  sos  (safe  and  sound).  This  is  additional  informa- 
tion to  the  news  carried  to  them  in  verse  34. 

37.  Were  holden  with  great  fear  (phoboi  megalbi  suneichonto). 
Imperfect  passive  of  sunechb  with  the  instrumental  case  of 
phobos.  See  a  similar  use  of  this  vigorous  verb  in  Luke 
12:50  of  Jesus  and  in  Phil.  1 :23  of  Paul. 

38.  From  whom  the  devils  (demons)  were  gone  out  iapK  hou 
exeleluthei  ta  daimonia).  Past  perfect  active  of  exerchomai, 
state  of  completion  in  the  past.  Prayed  him  (edeeito  autou). 
Imperfect  middle,  kept  on  begging. 

39.  Throughout  the  whole  city  (kath'  holen  ten  polin). 
Mark  5:20  has  it  "in  Decapolis."  He  had  a  great  story  to 
tell  and  he  told  it  with  power.  The  rescue  missions  in  our 
cities  can  match  this  incident  with  cases  of  great  sinners 
who  have  made  witnesses  for  Christ. 

40.  Welcomed  (apedexato).  Peculiar  to  Luke.  To  re- 
ceive with  pleasure,  from  apodechomai,  a  common  verb.  For 
they  were  all  waiting  for  him  (esan  gar  pantes  prosdokontes 
auton).  Periphrastic  imperfect  active  of  prosdokao,  an 
old  verb  for  eager  expectancy,  a  vivid  picture  of  the  attitude 
of  the  people  towards  Jesus.  Driven  from  Decapolis,  he 
is  welcomed  in  Capernaum. 

41.  Was  (huperchen).     Imperfect  of  huparcho  in  sense  of 


122      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

en  as  in  modern  Greek.     Common  in  Luke,  and  Acts,  but 
not  in  other  Gospels. 

42.  An  only  daughter  {thugaier  monogenes).  The  same 
adjective  used  of  the  widow's  son  (7:12)  and  the  epileptic 
boy  (9:38)  and  of  Jesus  (John  1:18;  3:16).  She  lay  a  dying 
(apethnesken).  Imperfect  active,  she  was  dying.  Matt. 
9:18  has  it  that  she  has  just  died.  Thronged  (sunepnigon). 
Imperfect  active  of  sumpnigo,  to  press  together,  the  verb 
used  of  the  thorns  choking  the  growing  grain  (Luke  8:14). 
It  was  a  jam. 

43.  Had  spent  all  her  living  upon  physicians  (eis  iatrous 
prosanalosasa  holon  ton  bion).  First  aorist  active  participle 
of  an  old  verb  prosanalisko,  only  here  in  the  N.T.  But 
Westcott  and  Hort  reject  this  clause  because  it  is  not  in 
B  D  Syriac  Sinaitic.  Whether  genuine  or  not,  the  other 
clause  in  Mark  5:26  certainly  is  not  in  Luke:  "had  suffered 
many  things  of  many  physicians."  Probably  both  are  not 
genuine  in  Luke  who  takes  care  of  the  physicians  by  the 
simple  statement  that  it  was  a  chronic  case:  could  not  be 
healed  of  any  (ouk  ischusen  ap*  oudenos  therapeuthenai). 
He  omitted  also  what  Mark  has:  "and  was  nothing  bet- 
tered but  rather  grew  worse. " 

44.  The  border  of  his  garment  (tou  kraspedou  tou  himatiou). 
Probably  the  tassel  of  the  overgarment.  Of  the  four  corners 
two  were  in  front  and  two  behind.  See  on  Matt.  9:20. 
Stanched  (este).  Second  aorist  active  indicative,  stopped 
at  once  (effective  aorist). 

45.  Press  thee  and  crush  thee  (sunechousin  se  kai  apothli- 
bousin).  Hold  thee  together,  hold  thee  in  (sunecho,  see  verse 
37).  Crush  thee  (apothlibo)  here  only  in  the  N.T.,  a  verb 
used  of  pressing  out  grapes  in  Diodorus  and  Josephus. 
Mark  5:31  has  sunthlibo,  to  press  together. 

46.  For  I  perceived  that  power  had  gone  forth  from  me  {ego 
gar  egnon  dunamin  exeleluthuian  ap^  emou).  Egnbn  is  second 
aorist  active  indicative  of  ginosko,  knowledge  by  personal 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  123 

experience  as  here.  It  is  followed  by  the  second  perfect  ac- 
tive participle  exeleluthuian  in  indirect  discourse  (Robert- 
son, Grammar,  pp.  1040-42).  Jesus  felt  the  sensation  of 
power  already  gone.  Who  does  not  know  what  this  sense  of 
"goneness"  or  exhaustion  of  nervous  energy  means? 

47.  Trembling  (tremousa).  Vivid  touch  of  the  feeling  of 
this  sensitive  woman  who  now  had  to  tell  everybody  of  her 
cure,  "in  the  presence  of  all  the  people"  (enopion  pantos  tou 
laou).    She  faced  the  widest  publicity  for  her  secret  cure. 

49.  From  the  ruler  of  the  synagogue's  house  (para  tou 
archisunagogou).  The  word  "house"  is  not  in  the  Greek 
here  as  in  Mark  5:35  where  apo  is  used  rather  than  para,  as 
here.  But  the  ruler  himself  had  come  to  Jesus  (Luke  8:41) 
and  this  is  the  real  idea.  Trouble  not  (meketi  skulle).  See 
on  Luke  7:6  for  this  verb  and  also  Mark  5:35  and  Matt  9:36. 

50.  And  she  shall  be  made  whole  (kai  sothesetai).  This 
promise  in  addition  to  the  words  in  Mark  5:36.  See  there 
for  discussion  of  details. 

53.  Knowing  that  she  was  dead  (eidotes  hoti  apethanen). 
That  she  died  {apethanen),  second  aorist  active  indicative 
of  apothnesko. 

54.  Called  (ephonesen) .  Certainly  not  to  wake  up  the  dead, 
but  to  make  it  plain  to  all  that  she  rose  in  response  to  his 
elevated  tone  of  voice.  Some  think  that  the  remark  of 
Jesus  in  verse  52  (  =  Mark  5 139  =  Matt.  9:24)  proves  that 
she  was  not  really  dead,  but  only  in  a  trance.  It  matters 
little.  The  touch  of  Christ's  hand  and  the  power  of  his  voice 
restored  her  to  life.  Maiden  (he  pais)  rather  than  Mark's 
(5:41)  to  korasion  (vernacular  Koine). 

55.  Her  spirit  returned  (epe  strep  sen  to  pneuma  autes).  The 
life  came  back  to  her  at  once.  Be  given  her  to  eat  (autei 
dothenai  phagein).  The  first  infinitive  dothenai  is  an  in- 
direct command.  The  second  phagein  (second  aorist  active 
of  esthio)  is  epexegetic  purpose. 


CHAPTER  IX 

1.  He  called  the  twelve  together  (sunkalesamenos  tous  do- 
deka).  Mark  6:7  and  Matt.  10:1  have  proskaleomai,  to  call 
to  him.    Both  the  indirect  middle  voice. 

2.  He  sent  them  forth  (apesteilen  autous).  First  aorist 
active  indicative  of  apostellb.  To  preach  the  kingdom  of  God 
and  to  heal  the  sick  (kerussein  ten  basileian  tou  theou  kai  ids- 
thai).  Present  indicative  for  the  continuous  functions  during 
this  campaign.  This  double  office  of  herald  (kerussein)  and 
healer  (idsthai)  is  stated  directly  in  Matt.  10:7-8.  Note 
the  verb  iaomai  for  healing  here,  though  therapeuein  in  verse 
I,  apparently  used  interchangeably. 

3.  Neither  staff  (mete  rabdon).  For  the  apparent  contra- 
diction between  these  words  ( =  Matt.  10:10)  and  Mark  6:8 
see  discussion  there.  For  per  an  (wallet)  see  also  on  Mark  6:8 
(  =  Matt.  10:10)  for  this  and  other  details  here. 

5.  As  many  as  receive  you  not  (hosoi  an  me  dechontai  humas). 
Indefinite  relative  plural  with  an  and  present  middle  sub- 
junctive and  the  negative  me.  Here  Matt.  10:14  has  the 
singular  (whosoever)  and  Mark  6:11  has  "whatsoever 
place."  For  a  testimony  against  them  (eis  marturion  ep* 
autous).  Note  use  of  ep'  autous  where  Mark  6:11  has  simply 
the  dative  autois  (disadvantage),  really  the  same  idea. 

6.  Went  (dierchonto) .  Imperfect  middle,  continuous  and 
repeated  action  made  plainer  also  by  three  present  parti- 
ciples (exerchomenoi,  euaggelizomenoi,  therapeuontes),  describ- 
ing the  wide  extent  of  the  work  through  all  the  villages  (kata 
las  komas,  distributive  use  of  kata)  everywhere  (pantachou) 
in  Galilee. 

7.  All  that  was  done  (ta  ginomena  panta).  Present  middle 
participle,  "all  that  was  coming  to  pass."     He  was  much 

124 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  125 

perplexed  {dieporei).  Imperfect  active  of  diaporeo,  to  be 
thoroughly  at  a  loss,  unable  to  find  a  way  out  (dia,  a  priva- 
tive, porojy  way),  common  ancient  verb,  but  only  in  Luke's 
writings  in  the  N.T.  Because  it  was  said  {dia  to  legesthai). 
Neat  Greek  idiom,  the  articular  passive  infinitive  after  dia. 
Three  reports  came  to  the  ears  of  Herod  as  Luke  has  it,  each 
introduced  by  hoti  (that)  in  indirect  discourse:  "By  some" 
(hupo  tinon),  "by  some"  (hupo  tinon  de),  "by  others" 
(allon  de,  hupo  not  here  expressed,  but  carried  over).  The 
verbs  in  the  indirect  discourse  here  (verses  7  and  8)  are  all 
three  aorists  (egerthe  first  passive;  ephane  second  passive; 
aneste  second  active),  not  past  perfects  as  the  English  has 
them. 

9.  He  sought  (ezetei).  Imperfect  active.  He  keep  on  seek- 
ing to  see  Jesus.  The  rumours  disturbed  Herod  because  he 
was  sure  that  he  had  put  him  to  death  ("John  I  beheaded"). 

10.  Declared  (diegesanto).  First  aorist  middle  of  diegeomai, 
to  carry  a  narrative  through  to  the  end.  Jesus  listened  to  it 
all.  They  had  done  (epoiesan).  Aorist  active  indicative,  they 
did.  He  took  them  (paralabbn  autous).  Second  aorist  active 
participle  of  paralambano.  Very  common  verb.  Bethsaida 
(Bethsaida).  Peculiar  to  Luke.  Bethsaida  Julias  is  the  terri- 
tory of  Philip,  for  it  is  on  the  other  side  of  the  Sea  of 
Galilee  (John  6:1). 

11.  Spake  (elalei).  Imperfect  active,  he  continued  speak- 
ing. He  healed  (iato).  Imperfect  middle,  he  continued 
healing. 

12.  To  wear  away  (klinein).  Old  verb  usually  transitive, 
to  bend  or  bow  down.  Many  compounds  as  in  English 
decline,  incline,  recline,  clinic  (kline,  bed),  etc.  Luke  alone 
in  the  N.T.  uses  it  intransitively  as  here.  The  sun  was  turn- 
ing down  towards  setting.  Lodge  (katalusosin) .  First  aorist 
active  subjunctive  of  kataluo,  a  common  verb,  to  dissolve, 
destroy,  overthrow,  and  then  of  travellers  to  break  a  journey, 
tc  lodge  (kataluma,  inn,  Luke  2:7).     Only  here  and  19:7 


126      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

in  the  N.T.  in  this  sense.  Get  victuals  {heurbsin  episitismon). 
Ingressive  aorist  active  of  heuriskb,  very  common  verb. 
Victuals  (episitismon,  from  episitizomai,  to  provision  one- 
self, sitizb,  from  siton,  wheat)  only  here  in  the  N.T.,  though 
common  in  ancient  Greek,  especially  for  provisions  for  a 
journey  (snack).  See  on  Mark  6:32-44  =  Matt.  14:13-21  for 
discussion  of  details. 

13.  Except  we  should  go  and  buy  food  (ei  meti  poreuthentes 
hemeis  agorasbmen  brbmata).  This  is  a  condition  of  the  third 
class  with  the  aorist  subjunctive  (agorasbmen),  where  the 
conjunction  is  usually  ean  (with  negative  ean  me),  but  not 
always  or  necessarily  so  especially  in  the  Koine.  So  in  I  Cor. 
14:5  ei  me  diermeneuei  and  in  Phil.  3:12  ei  kai  katalabb. 
"Unless"  is  better  here  than  "except."  Food  (brbmata), 
means  eaten  pieces  from  bibrbskb,  to  eat,  somewhat  like  our 
"edibles"  or  vernacular  "eats." 

14.  About  (hbsei).  Luke  as  Matt.  14:21  adds  this  word  to 
the  definite  statement  of  Mark  6:44  that  there  were  5,000 
men,  a  hundred  companies  of  fifty  each.  Sit  down  (katakli- 
nate).  First  aorist  active  imperative.  Recline,  lie  down. 
Only  in  Luke  in  the  N.T.  See  also  verse  15.  In  companies 
(klisias).  Cognate  accusative  after  kataklinate.  Only  here  in 
the  N.T.  A  row  of  persons  reclining  at  meals  (table  com- 
pany). About  fifty  each  (hbsei  ana  pentekonta).  Distributive 
use  of  ana  and  approximate  number  again  (hbsei). 

16.  The  five  .  .  .  the two  (tous  pente  .  .  .  tousduo).  Point- 
ing back  to  verse  13,  fine  example  of  the  Greek  article.  And 
gave  (kai  edidou).  Imperfect  active  of  didbmi,  kept  on  giving. 
This  picturesque  imperfect  is  preceded  by  the  aorist  kate- 
klasen  (brake),  a  single  act.  This  latter  verb  in  the  N.T. 
only  here  and  the  parallel  in  Mark  6:41,  though  common 
enough  in  ancient  Greek.  We  say  "break  off"  where  here 
the  Greek  has  "break  down"  (or  thoroughly),  perfective  use 
of  kata. 

17.  Twelve  baskets  (kophinoi  dbdeka).     For  discussion  of 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  127 

kophonoi  and  sphurides  as  well  as  of  klasmata  (broken  pieces) 
see  on  Mark  6:43  =  Matt.  14:20. 

18.  As  he  was  praying  {en  toi  einai  auton  proseuchomenon). 
Common  Lukan  idiom  of  en  with  the  articular  infinitive  for 
a  temporal  clause,  only  here  Luke  has  the  periphrastic 
infinitive  {einai  proseuchomenon)  as  also  in  11  :i.  This  item 
about  Christ's  praying  alone  in  Luke.  Alone  {kata  monas). 
In  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Mark  4:10.  Perhaps  choras 
(places)  is  to  be  supplied  with  monas  (lonely  places).  Were 
with  him  {sunesan  autbi).  This  seems  like  a  contradiction 
unless  "alone"  is  to  be  taken  with  sunesan.  Westcott  and 
Hort  put  sunentesan  in  the  margin.  This  would  mean  that  as 
Jesus  was  praying  alone,  the  disciples  fell  in  with  him.  At 
any  rate  he  was  praying  apart  from  them. 

19.  That  I  am  {me  einai).  Accusative  and  infinitive  in 
indirect  assertion,  a  common  Greek  idiom.  Matt.  16:13 
for  "I"  has  "the  Son  of  man"  as  identical  in  the  conscious- 
ness of  Christ.  The  various  opinions  of  men  about  Jesus 
here  run  parallel  to  the  rumours  heard  by  Herod  (verses  8 
and  9). 

20.  But  who  say  ye?  {Humeis  de  tina  legete;).  Note  the 
emphatic  proleptical  position  of  humeis:  "But  ye  who  do  ye 
say?  This  is  really  what  mattered  now  with  Jesus.  The 
Christ  of  God  {Ton  christon  tou  theou).  The  accusative 
though  the  infinitive  is  not  expressed.  The  Anointed  of 
God,  the  Messiah  of  God.  See  on  2:26  for  "the  Anointed  of 
the  Lord."  See  on  Matt.  16:17  f°r  discussion  of  Peter's 
testimony  in  full.  Mark  6 129  has  simply  "the  Christ. "  It  is 
clear  from  the  previous  narrative  that  this  is  not  a  new  dis- 
covery from  Simon  Peter,  but  simply  the  settled  conviction 
of  the  disciples  after  all  the  defections  of  the  Galilean  masses 
and  the  hostility  of  the  Jerusalem  ecclesiastics.  The  disciples 
still  believed  in  Jesus  as  the  Messiah  of  Jewish  hope  and 
prophecy.  It  will  become  plain  that  they  do  not  grasp  the 
spiritual  conception  of  the  Messiah  and  his  kingdom  that 


128      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Jesus  taught,  but  they  are  clear  that  he  is  the  Messiah  how- 
ever faulty  their  view  of  the  Messiah  may  be.  There  was 
comfort  in  this  for  Jesus.     They  were  loyal  to  him. 

21.  To  tell  this  to  no  man  (medeni  legein  touto).  Indirect 
command  with  the  negative  infinitive  after  commanded 
(pareggeilen).  It  had  been  necessary  for  Jesus  to  cease  using 
the  word  Messiah  (Christos)  about  himself  because  of  the 
political  meaning  to  the  Jews.  Its  use  by  the  disciples  would 
lead  to  revolution  as  was  plain  after  the  feeding  of  the  five 
thousand  (John  6:15). 

22.  Rejected  (apodokimasthenai) .  First  aorist  passive  in- 
finitive of  apodokimazo,  to  reject  after  trial.  The  third  day 
(tei  trifei  hemerai).  Locative  case  of  time  as  in  Matt.  16:21. 
Here  in  the  parallel  passage  Mark  8:31  has  "after  three  days" 
(meta  treis  hemeras)  in  precisely  the  same  sense.  That  is  to 
say,  "after  three  days"  is  just  a  free  way  of  saying  "on  the 
third  day"  and  cannot  mean  "on  the  fourth  day"  if  taken 
too  literally.  For  discussion  of  this  plain  prediction  of  the 
death  of  Christ  with  various  details  see  discussion  on  Matt. 
16:21  =Mark  8:31.  It  was  a  melancholy  outlook  that  de- 
pressed the  disciples  as  Mark  and  Matthew  show  in  the 
protest  of  Peter  and  his  rebuke. 

23.  He  said  unto  all  (elegen  de  pros  pantas).  This  is  like 
Luke  (cf.  verse  43).  Jesus  wanted  all  (the  multitude  with  his 
disciples,  as  Mark  8:34  has  it)  to  understand  the  lesson  of 
self-sacrifice.  They  could  not  yet  understand  the  full  mean- 
ing of  Christ's  words  as  applied  to  his  approaching  death  of 
which  he  had  been  speaking.  But  certainly  the  shadow  of 
the  cross  is  already  across  the  path  of  Jesus  as  he  is  here 
speaking.  For  details  (soul,  life,  forfeit,  gain,  profit,  lose, 
world)  see  discussion  on  Matt.  16:24-26  =  Mark  8:34-37. 
The  word  for  lose  (apolesei,  from  apollumi,  a  very  common 
verb)  is  used  in  the  sense  of  destroy,  kill,  lose,  as  here.  Note 
the  mercantile  terms  in  this  passage  (gain,  lose,  fine  or  for- 
feit, exchange).     Daily  {kath>  hemeran).     Peculiar  to  Luke 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  129 

in  this  incident.  Take  up  the  cross  (his  own  cross)  daily 
(aorist  tense,  arato),  but  keep  on  following  me  (akoloutheito, 
present  tense).  The  cross  was  a  familiar  figure  in  Palestine. 
It  was  rising  before  Jesus  as  his  destiny.  Each  man  has  his 
own  cross  to  meet  and  bear. 

26.  Whosoever  shall  be  ashamed  (hos  an  epaischunthei). 
Rather,  Whosoever  is  ashamed  as  in  Mark  8:38.  The  first 
aorist  passive  subjunctive  in  an  indefinite  relative  clause 
with  an.  The  passive  verb  is  transitive  here  also.  This  verb 
is  from  epi  and  aischune,  shame  (in  the  eyes  of  men).  Jesus 
endured  the  shame  of  the  cross  (Heb.  12:2).  The  man  at 
the  feast  who  had  to  take  a  lower  seat  did  it  with  shame 
(Luke  14:9).  Paul  is  not  ashamed  of  the  Gospel  (Rom. 
1  :i6).  Onesiphorus  was  not  ashamed  of  Paul  (II  Tim.  1  :i6). 
In  his  own  glory  {en  tei  doxei  autou).  This  item  added  to  what 
is  in  Mark  8 138  =  Matt.  16:27. 

27.  Till  they  see  {heos  an  idosin).  Second  aorist  active 
subjunctive  with  heos  and  an  referring  to  the  future,  an 
idiomatic  construction.  So  in  Mark  9:1  =  Matt.  16:28.  In 
all  three  passages  "shall  not  taste  of  death"  (ou  me  geusbntai 
thanatou,  double  negative  with  aorist  middle  subjunctive) 
occurs  also.  Rabbinical  writings  use  this  figure.  Like  a 
physician  Christ  tasted  death  that  we  may  see  how  to  die. 
Jesus  referred  to  the  cross  as  "this  cup"  (Mark  14:36  = 
Matt.  26:39  =  Luke  22:42).  Mark  speaks  of  the  kingdom  of 
God  as  "come"  {eleluthuian,  second  perfect  active  participle). 
Matthew  as  "coming"  {erchomenon)  referring  to  the  Son  of 
man,  while  Luke  has  neither  form.  See  Matthew  and  Mark 
for  discussion  of  the  theories  of  interpretation  of  this  difficult 
passage.  The  Transfiguration  follows  in  a  week  and  may  be 
the  first  fulfilment  in  the  mind  of  Jesus.  It  may  also  sym- 
bolically point  to  the  second  coming. 

28.  About  eight  days  (hosei  hemerai  okto).  A  nominations 
pendens  without  connexion  or  construction.  Mark  9:2 
(  =  Matt.  17:1)  has  "after  six  days"  which  agrees  with  the 


130      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

general  statement.  Into  the  mountain  (eis  to  or os).  Probably 
Mount  Hermon  because  we  know  that  Jesus  was  near 
Caesarea  Philippi  when  Peter  made  the  confession  (Mark 
8:27=Matt.  16:13).  Hermon  is  still  the  glory  of  Palestine 
from  whose  heights  one  can  view  the  whole  of  the  land.  It 
was  a  fit  place  for  the  Transfiguration.  To  pray  (proseuxas- 
thai).  Peculiar  to  Luke  who  so  often  mentions  Christ's  habit 
of  prayer  (cf.  3:21).  See  also  verse  29  "as  he  was  praying" 
(en  tbi  proseuchesthai,  one  of  Luke's  favourite  idioms).  His 
countenance  was  altered  (egeneto  to  eidos  tou  prosbpou  autou 
heteron).  Literally,  "the  appearance  of  his  face  became 
different."  Matt.  17:2  says  that  "his  face  did  shine  as  the 
sun."  Luke  does  not  use  the  word  "transfigured"  (mete- 
morphbthe)  in  Mark  9:2  =Matt.  17:2.  He  may  have  avoided 
this  word  because  of  the  pagan  associations  with  this  word 
as  Ovid's  Metamorphoses.  And  his  raiment  became  white 
and  dazzling  (kai  ho  himatismos  autou  leukos  exastraptbn). 
Literally,  And  his  raiment  white  radiant.  There  is  no 
and  between  "white"  and  "dazzling."  The  participle 
exastraptbn  is  from  the  compound  verb  meaning  to  flash 
(astraptb)  out  or  forth  (ex).  The  simple  verb  is  common  for 
lightning  flashes  and  bolts,  but  the  compound  in  the  LXX 
and  here  alone  in  the  N.T.  See  Mark  9 -.3  "exceeding  white " 
and  Matt.  17:2  "white  as  the  light." 

31.  There  talked  with  him  (sunelaloun  autbi).  Imperfect 
active,  were  talking  with  him.  Who  appeared  in  glory  (hoi 
ophthentes  en  doxei).  First  aorist  passive  participle  of 
horab.  This  item  peculiar  to  Luke.  Compare  verse  26. 
Spake  of  his  decease  (elegon  ten  exodon).  Imperfect  active, 
were  talking  about  his  exodus  (departure  from  earth  to 
heaven)  very  much  like  our  English  word  "decease"  (Latin 
decessus,  a  going  away).  The  glorious  light  graphically 
revealed  Moses  and  Elijah  talking  with  Jesus  about  the 
very  subject  concerning  which  Peter  had  dared  to  rebuke 
Jesus  for  mentioning  (Mark  8:32  =  Matt.  16:22).    This  very 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  13 1 

word  exodus  (way  out)  in  the  sense  of  death  occurs  in  II  Pet. 
1:15  and  is  followed  by  a  brief  description  of  the  Transfigura- 
tion glory.  Other  words  for  death  (thanatos)  in  the  N.T. 
are  ekbasis,  going  out  as  departure  (Heb.  13:7),  aphixis, 
departing  (Acts  20:29),  analusis,  loosening  anchor  (II  Tim. 
4:6)  and  analusai  (Phil.  1:23).  To  accomplish  (pleroun). 
To  fulfil.  Moses  had  led  the  Exodus  from  Egypt.  Jesus 
will  accomplish  the  exodus  of  God's  people  into  the  Promised 
Land  on  high.  See  on  Mark  and  Matthew  for  discussion  of 
significance  of  the  appearance  of  Moses  and  Elijah  as  rep- 
resentatives of  law  and  prophecy  and  with  a  peculiar  death. 
The  purpose  of  the  Transfiguration  was  to  strengthen  the 
heart  of  Jesus  as  he  was  praying  long  about  his  approach- 
ing death  and  to  give  these  chosen  three  disciples  a  glimpse 
of  his  glory  for  the  hour  of  darkness  coming.  No  one  on 
earth  understood  the  heart  of  Jesus  and  so  Moses  and 
Elijah  came.  The  poor  disciples  utterly  failed  to  grasp  the 
significance  of  it  all. 

32.  Were  heavy  with  sleep  (esan  bebaremenoi  hupnoi). 
Periphrastic  past  perfect  of  bared,  a  late  form  for  the  ancient 
baruno  (not  in  N.T.  save  Textus  Receptus  in  Luke  21:34). 
This  form,  rare  and  only  in  passive  (present,  aorist,  perfect) 
in  the  N.T.,  is  like  baruno,  from  barus,  and  that  from  baros, 
weight,  burden  (Gal.  6:2).  Hupnoi  is  in  the  instrumental 
case.  They  had  apparently  climbed  the  mountain  in  the 
early  part  of  the  night  and  were  now  overcome  with  sleep 
as  Jesus  prolonged  his  prayer.  Luke  alone  tells  of  their 
sleep.  The  same  word  is  used  of  the  eyes  of  these  three  dis- 
ciples in  the  Garden  of  Gethsemane  (Matt.  26:43)  and  of  the 
hearts  of  many  (Luke  21 134).  But  when  they  were  fully  awake 
{diagre  gores  antes  de).  First  aorist  active  participle  of  this 
late  (Herodian)  and  rare  compound  verb  (here  alone  in  the 
N.T.),  diagregoreo  (Luke  is  fond  of  compounds  with  did). 
The  simple  verb  gregoreb  (from  the  second  perfect  active 
egregora)  is  also  late,  but  common  in  the  LXX  and  the  N.T. 


132      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

The  effect  of  dia  can  be  either  to  remain  awake  in  spite  of 
desire  to  sleep  (margin  of  Revised  Version)  or  to  become 
thoroughly  awake  (ingressive  aorist  tense  also)  as  Revised 
Version  has  it.  This  is  most  likely  correct.  The  Syriac  Sina- 
itic  has  it  "When  they  awoke."  Certainly  they  had  been 
through  a  strain.  His  glory  {ten  doxan  autou).  See  also  verse 
26  in  the  words  of  Jesus. 

33.  As  they  were  departing  from  him  {en  toi  diachorizesthai 
autous  ap*  autou).  Peculiar  to  Luke  and  another  instance  of 
Luke's  common  idiom  of  en  with  the  articular  infinitive  in  a 
temporal  clause.  This  common  verb  occurs  here  only  in  the 
N.T.  The  present  middle  voice  means  to  separate  oneself 
fully  (direct  middle).  This  departing  of  Moses  and  Elijah 
apparently  accompanied  Peter's  remark  as  given  in  all  three 
Gospels.  See  for  details  on  Mark  and  Matthew.  Master 
{Epistata)  here,  Rabbi  (Mark  9:5),  Lord  {Kurie,  Matt.  17:4). 
Let  us  make  {poiesomen,  first  aorist  active  subjunctive)  as  in 
Mark  9:5,  but  Matt.  17:4  has  "I  will  make"  {poieso).  It 
was  near  the  time  of  the  feast  of  the  tabernacles.  So  Peter 
proposes  that  they  celebrate  it  up  here  instead  of  going  to 
Jerusalem  for  it  as  they  did  a  bit  later  (John  7).  Not  know- 
ing what  he  said  {me  eidos  ho  legei) .  Literally,  not  understand- 
ing what  he  was  saying  {me,  regular  negative  with  participle 
and  legei,  present  indicative  retained  in  relative  clause  in 
indirect  discourse).  Luke  puts  it  more  bluntly  than  Mark 
(Peter's  account),  "For  he  wist  not  what  to  answer;  for  they 
became  sore  afraid"  (Mark  9:6).  Peter  acted  according  to 
his  impulsive  nature  and  spoke  up  even  though  he  did  not 
know  what  to  say  or  even  what  he  was  saying  when  he  spoke. 
He  was  only  half  awake  as  Luke  explains  and  he  was  sore 
afraid  as  Mark  (Peter)  explains.  He  had  bewilderment 
enough  beyond  a  doubt,  but  it  was  Peter  who  spoke,  not 
James  and  John. 

34.  Overshadowed  them  {epeskiazen  autous).  Imperfect 
active  (aorist  in  Matt.  17:5)  as  present  participle  in  Mark 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  133 

9:7,  inchoative,  the  shadow  began  to  come  upon  them.  On 
Hermon  as  on  many  high  mountains  a  cloud  will  swiftly 
cover  the  cap.  I  have  seen  this  very  thing  at  Blue  Ridge, 
North  Carolina.  This  same  verb  is  used  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
upon  Mary  (Luke  1 3  5).  Nowhere  else  in  the  N.T.,  though 
an  old  verb  (epi,  skiazo,  from  skia,  shadow).  As  they  entered 
into  the  cloud  {en  toi  eiselthein  autous  eis  ten  nephelen).  Luke's 
idiom  of  en  with  the  articular  infinitive  again  (aorist  active 
this  time,  on  the  entering  in  as  to  them).  All  six  "entered 
into"  the  cloud,  but  only  Peter,  James,  and  John  "became 
afraid"  (ephobethesan,  ingressive  first  aorist  passive). 

35.  If  ekeinous  be  accepted  here  instead  of  autous,  the 
three  disciples  would  be  outside  of  the  cloud.  Out  of  the 
cloud  (ek  tes  nepheles).  This  voice  was  the  voice  of  the  Father 
like  that  at  the  baptism  of  Jesus  (Luke  3 :22  =  Mark  1:11  = 
Matt.  3  \\j)  and  like  that  near  the  end  (John  12:28-30)  when 
the  people  thought  it  was  a  clap  of  thunder  or  an  angel. 
My  son,  my  chosen  (Ho  huios  mou,  ho  eklelegmenos).  So  the 
best  documents  (Aleph  B  L  Syriac  Sinaitic).  The  others 
make  it  "My  Beloved"  as  in  Mark  9:7  =  Matt.  17:5.  These 
disciples  are  commanded  to  hear  Jesus,  God's  Son,  even 
when  he  predicts  his  death,  a  pointed  rebuke  to  Simon  Peter 
as  to  all. 

36.  When  the  voice  came  (en  toi  genesthai  ten  phonen) .  An- 
other example  of  Luke's  idiom,  this  time  with  the  second 
aorist  middle  infinitive.  Literally,  "on  the  coming  as  to  the 
voice"  (accusative  of  general  reference).  It  does  not  mean 
that  it  was  "after"  the  voice  was  past  that  Jesus  was  found 
alone,  but  simultaneously  with  it  (ingressive  aorist  tense). 
Alone  (monos).  Same  adjective  in  Mark  9:8  =  Matt.  17:8 
translated  "only."  Should  be  rendered  "alone"  there  also. 
They  held  their  peace  (esigesan).  Ingressive  aorist  active  of 
common  verb  sigao,  became  silent.  In  Mark  9:9  =  Matt. 
17:9,  Jesus  commanded  them  not  to  tell  till  His  Resurrection 
from  the  dead.    Luke  notes  that  they  in  awe  obeyed  that 


134      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

command  and  it  turns  out  that  they  finally  forgot  the  lesson 
of  this  night's  great  experience.  By  and  by  they  will  be  able 
to  tell  them,  but  not  "in  those  days."  Which  they  had  seen 
{hbn  hedrakan).  Attraction  of  the  relative  ha  into  the  case 
of  the  unexpressed  antecedent  toutbn.  Perfect  active  indic- 
ative hedrakan  with  Koine  (papyri)  form  for  the  ancient 
hebrakasin  changed  by  analogy  to  the  first  aorist  ending  in 
-an  instead  of  -asin. 

37.  On  the  next  day  (tei  hexes  hemerai).  Alone  in  Luke. 
It  shows  that  the  Transfiguration  took  place  on  the  preceding 
night.  They  were  come  down  {katelthontbn  auton).  Genitive 
absolute  of  second  aorist  active  participle  of  katerchomai, 
a  common  enough  verb,  but  in  the  N.T.  only  in  Luke's  writ- 
ings save  James  3  :i5-  Met  him  (sunentesen  autbi).  First  ao- 
rist active  of  sunantab,  common  compound  verb,  to  meet  with, 
only  in  Luke's  writings  in  the  N.T.  save  Heb.  7:1.  With  as- 
sociative instrumental  case  autbi. 

38.  Master  (Didaskale).  Teacher  as  in  Mark  9:17.  Lord 
(kurie,  Matt.  17:15).  To  look  upon  (epiblepsai).  Aorist 
active  infinitive  of  epiblepb  {epi,  upon,  blepb,  look),  common 
verb,  but  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  James  2:3  except  Luke 
1  48  in  quotation  from  LXX.  This  compound  verb  is  com- 
mon in  medical  writers  for  examining  carefully  the  patient. 
Mine  only  child  (monogenes  moi).  Only  in  Luke  as  already 
about  an  only  child  in  7:12;  8:42. 

39.  Suddenly  (exephnes).  Old  adverb,  but  in  the  N.T. 
only  in  Luke's  writings  save  Mark  13:36.  Used  by  medical 
writers  of  sudden  attacks  of  disease  like  epilepsy.  It  teareth 
him  that  he  foameth  (sparassei  auton  meta  aphrou).  Literally, 
"It  tears  him  with  (accompanied  with,  meta)  foam"  (old 
word,  aphros,  only  here  in  the  N.T.).  From  spar  as  so,  to  con- 
vulse, a  common  verb,  but  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Mark 
1 126 ;  9 :26  (a  nd  sunsparassb,  Mark  9 :2o) .  See  Ma  rk  9 : 1 7  and 
Matt.  17:15  and  Luke  9:39  for  variations  in  the  symptoms 
in  each  Gospel.    The  use  of  meta  aphrou  is  a  medical  item. 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  135 

Hardly  (molis).  Late  word  used  in  place  of  mogis,  the  old 
Greek  term  (in  some  MSS.  here)  and  alone  in  Luke's  writings 
in  the  N.T.  save  I  Pet.  4:18  and  Rom.  5.7.  Bruising  him 
sorely  (suntribon  auton) .  Common  verb  for  rubbing  together, 
crushing  together  like  chains  (Mark  5 14)  or  as  a  vase  (Mark 
14:3).  See  on  Matthew  and  Mark  for  discussion  of  details 
here. 

41.  How  long  shall  I  be  with  you  and  bear  with  you?  (hebs 
pote  esomai  pros  humas  kai  anexomai  humbn;).  Here  the  two 
questions  of  Mark  9:19  (only  one  in  Matt.  17:17)  are  combined 
in  one  sentence.  Bear  with  (anexomai,  direct  middle  future) 
is,  hold  myself  from  you  (ablative  case  humbn).  Faithless 
(apistos)  is  disbelieving  and  perverse  (diestrammene,  perfect 
passive  participle  of  diastrephb),  is  twisted,  turned,  or  torn  in 
two. 

42.  As  he  was  yet  a  coming  (eti  proserchomenou  autou). 
Genitive  absolute.  While  he  was  yet  coming  (the  boy,  that  is, 
not  Jesus).  Note  quaint  English  "a  coming"  retained  in  the 
Revised  Version.  Dashed  him  (errexen  auton).  First  aorist 
active  indicative  of  regnumi  or  ressb,  to  rend  or  convulse, 
a  common  verb,  used  sometimes  of  boxers  giving  knockout 
blows.  Tare  grievously  (sunesparaxen).  Rare  word  as  only 
here  and  Mark  9:20  in  the  N.T.,  which  see.  Gave  him  back  to 
his  father  (apedbken  auton  tbi  patri  autou).  Tender  touch 
alone  in  Luke  as  in  7:15.  They  were  all  astonished  (exeples- 
sonto  de  pantes).  Imperfect  passive  of  the  common  verb 
ekplessb  or  ekplegnumi,  to  strike  out,  a  picturesque  description 
of  the  amazement  of  all  at  the  easy  victory  of  Jesus  where  the 
nine  disciples  had  failed.  At  the  majesty  of  God  (epi  tei  mega- 
leioteti  tou  theou).  A  late  word  from  the  adjective  megaleios 
and  that  from  megas  (great).  In  the  N.T.  only  here  and 
Acts  19:27  of  Artemis  and  in  II  Pet.  1  :i6  of  the  Transfigura- 
tion. It  came  to  be  used  by  the  emperors  like  our  word 
"Majesty."  Which  he  did  (hois  epoiei).  This  is  one  of  the 
numerous  poor  verse  divisions.    This  sentence  has  nothing 


136      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

to  do  with  the  first  part  of  the  verse.  The  imperfect  ac- 
tive epoiei  covers  a  good  deal  not  told  by  Luke  (see  Mark 
9 130  =  Matt.  17 :22).  Note  the  attraction  of  the  relative  hois 
into  the  case  of  pasin,  its  antecedent. 

44.  Sink  into  your  ears  (Thesthe  humeis  eis  ta  bta  humon). 
Second  aorist  imperative  middle  of  tithemi,  common  verb. 
"Do  you  (note  emphatic  position)  yourselves  (whatever 
others  do)  put  into  your  ears."  No  word  like  "sink"  here. 
The  same  prediction  here  a  s  in  Mark  9:31=  Matt.  17:22  about 
the  Son  of  man  only  without  mention  of  death  and  resurrec- 
tion as  there,  which  see  for  discussion. 

45.  It  was  concealed  from  them  {en  parakekalummenon  ap' 
autbn).  Periphrastic  past  perfect  of  parakalupto,  a  common 
verb,  but  only  here  in  the  N.T.,  to  cover  up,  to  hide  from. 
This  item  only  in  Luke.  That  they  should  not  perceive  it  (hina 
me  aisthontai  auto).  Second  aorist  middle  subjunctive  of  the 
common  verb  aisthanomai  used  with  hina  me,  negative  pur- 
pose. This  explanation  at  least  relieves  the  disciples  to 
some  extent  of  full  responsibility  for  their  ignorance  about 
the  death  of  Jesus  as  Mark  9:32  observes,  as  does  Luke  here 
that  they  were  afraid  to  ask  him.  Plummer  says,  "They 
were  not  allowed  to  understand  the  saying  then,  in  order 
that  they  might  remember  it  afterwards,  and  see  that  Jesus 
had  met  His  sufferings  with  full  knowledge  and  free  will." 
Perhaps  also,  if  they  had  fully  understood,  they  might  have 
lacked  courage  to  hold  on  to  the  end.  But  it  is  a  hard  prob- 
lem. 

46.  A  reasoning  (dialogismos).  A  dispute.  The  word  is 
from  dialogizomai,  the  verb  used  in  Mark  9:33  about  this 
incident.  In  Luke  this  dispute  follows  immediately  after 
the  words  of  Jesus  about  his  death.  They  were  afraid  to 
ask  Jesus  about  that  subject,  but  Matt.  18:1  states  that  they 
came  to  Jesus  to  settle  it.  Which  of  them  should  be  greatest 
(to  tis  an  eie  meizon  auibn).  Note  the  article  with  the  indi- 
rect question,  the  clause  being  in  the  accusative  of  general 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  137 

reference.  The  optative  with  an  is  here  because  it  was  so  in 
the  direct  question  (potential  optative  with  an  retained  in 
the  indirect).  But  Luke  makes  it  plain  that  it  was  not  an 
abstract  problem  about  greatness  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
as  they  put  it  to  Jesus  (Matt.  18:1),  but  a  personal  problem 
in  their  own  group.  Rivalries  and  jealousies  had  already 
come  and  now  sharp  words.  By  and  by  James  and  John 
will  be  bold  enough  to  ask  for  the  first  places  for  themselves 
in  this  political  kingdom  which  they  expect  (Mark  10:35=?= 
Matt.  20:20).    It  is  a  sad  spectacle. 

47.  Took  a  little  child  {epilabomenos  paidion).  Second 
aorist  middle  participle  of  the  common  verb  epilambano. 
Strictly,  Taking  a  little  child  to  himself  (indirect  middle). 
Mark  9:36  has  merely  the  active  labon  of  the  simple  verb 
lambano.  Set  him  by  his  side  (esiesen  auto  par'  heautoi). 
"In  his  arms"  Mark  9:36  has  it,  "in  the  midst  of  them" 
Matt.  18:3  says.  All  three  attitudes  following  one  another 
(the  disciples  probably  in  a  circle  around  Jesus  anyhow)  and 
now  the  little  child  (Peter's  child  ?)  was  slipped  down  by  the 
side  of  Jesus  as  he  gave  the  disciples  an  object  lesson  in 
humility  which  they  sorely  needed. 

48.  This  little  child  (touto  to  paidion).  As  Jesus  spoke  he 
probably  had  his  hand  upon  the  head  of  the  child.  Matt. 
18:5  has  "one  such  little  child."  The  honoured  disciple,  Jesus 
holds,  is  the  one  who  welcomes  little  children  "in  my  name" 
(epi  toi  onomati  mou),  upon  the  basis  of  my  name  and  my 
authority.  It  was  a  home-thrust  against  the  selfish  ambition 
of  the  Twelve.  Ministry  to  children  is  a  mark  of  greatness. 
Have  preachers  ever  yet  learned  how  to  win  children  to 
Christ?  They  are  allowed  to  slip  away  from  home,  from 
Sunday  school,  from  church,  from  Christ.  For  he  that  is 
least  among  you  all  (ho  gar  mikroteros  en  pasin  humin  hupar- 
chon).  Note  the  use  of  huparchb  as  in  8:41  and  23  :5c  The 
comparative  mikroteros  is  in  accord  with  the  Koine  idiom 
where  the  superlative  is  vanishing  (nearly  gone  in  modern 


138      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Greek).    But  great  (me gas)  is  positive  and  very  strong.    This 
saying  peculiar  to  Luke  here. 

49.  And  John  answered  (apokritheis  de  Ioanes).  As  if 
John  wanted  to  change  the  subject  after  the  embarrassment 
of  the  rebuke  for  their  dispute  concerning  greatness  (Luke 
9:46-48).  Master  (epistata).  Only  in  Luke  in  the  N.T.  as 
already  four  times  (5:5;  8:24,  45;  9:33).  We  forbade  him 
(ekoluomen  auton).  Conative  imperfect  as  in  Mark  9:38, 
We  tried  to  hinder  him.  Because  he  jolloweth  not  with  us 
(hoti  ouk  akolouthei  meth  hemon).  Present  tense  preserved 
for  vividness  where  Mark  has  imperfect  ekolouthei.  Note 
also  here  "with  us"  (meth''  hemon)  where  Mark  has  associa- 
tive instrumental  hemin.  It  is  a  pitiful  specimen  of  partisan 
narrowness  and  pride  even  in  the  Beloved  Disciple,  one  of 
the  Sons  of  Thunder.  The  man  was  doing  the  Master's 
work  in  the  Master's  name  and  with  the  Master's  power, 
but  did  not  run  with  the  group  of  the  Twelve. 

50.  "  Against  you  is  for  you"  (kath?  humon  huper  humon). 
Mark  9:40  has  "against  us  is  for  us"  (hemon  .  .  .  hemon). 
The  Koine  Greek  e  and  u  were  often  pronounced  alike  and 
it  was  easy  to  interchange  them.  So  many  MSS.  here  read 
just  as  in  Mark.  The  point  is  precisely  the  same  as  it  is  a 
proverbial  saying.  See  a  similar  saying  in  Luke  11:23: 
"He  that  is  not  with  me  is  against  me."  The  prohibition 
here  as  in  Mark  9:39  is  general:  "Stop  hindering  him" 
(me  koluete,  me  and  the  present  imperative,  not  me  and  the 
aorist  subjunctive).  The  lesson  of  toleration  in  methods  of 
work  for  Christ  is  needed  today. 

51.  When  the  days  were  well-nigh  come  (en  tbi  sumplerous- 
thai  tas  hemeras).  Luke's  common  idiom  en  with  the  articu- 
lar infinitive,  "in  the  being  fulfilled  as  to  the  days."  This 
common  compound  occurs  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Luke 
8:23  and  Acts  2:1.  The  language  here  makes  it  plain  that 
Jesus  was  fully  conscious  of  the  time  of  his  death  as  near  as 
already  stated  (Luke  9:22,  27,  31).     That  he  should  be  re- 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  139 

ceived  up  (tes  analempseos  autou).  Literally,  "of  his  taking 
up."  It  is  an  old  word  (from  Hippocrates  on),  but  here 
alone  in  the  N.T.  It  is  derived  from  analambano  (the  verb 
used  of  the  Ascension,  Acts  1:2,  11,  22;  I  Tim.  3:16)  and  re- 
fers here  to  the  Ascension  of  Jesus  after  His  Resurrection. 
Not  only  in  John's  Gospel  (17:5)  does  Jesus  reveal  a  yearning 
for  a  return  to  the  Father,  but  it  is  in  the  mind  of  Christ 
here  as  evidently  at  the  Transfiguration  (9:31)  and  later  in 
Luke  12:49^  He  steadfastly  set  his  face  {autos  to  prosbpon 
esterisen).  Note  emphatic  autos,  he  himself,  with  fixedness 
of  purpose  in  the  face  of  difficulty  and  danger.  This  look 
on  Christ's  face  as  he  went  to  his  doom  is  noted  later  in 
Mark  10:32.  It  is  a  Hebraistic  idiom  (nine  times  in  Ezekiel), 
this  use  of  face  here,  but  the  verb  (effective  aorist  active) 
is  an  old  one  from  sterizo  (from  sterigx,  a  support),  to  set 
fast,  to  fix.  To  go  to  Jerusalem  {tou  poreuesthai  eis  Ierou- 
salem).  Genitive  infinitive  of  purpose.  Luke  three  times 
mentions  Christ  making  his  way  to  Jerusalem  (9:51; 
13:22;  17:11)  and  John  mentions  three  journeys  to  Jeru- 
salem during  the  later  ministry  (7:10;  11:17;  12:1).  It  is 
natural  to  take  these  journeys  to  be  the  same  in  each 
of  these  Gospels.  Luke  does  not  make  definite  location 
of  each  incident  and  John  merely  supplements  here  and 
there.  But  in  a  broad  general  way  they  seem  to  corre- 
spond. 

52.  Sent  messengers  (apesteilen  aggelous).  As  a  precau- 
tion since  he  was  going  to  Jerusalem  through  Samaria.  The 
Samaritans  did  not  object  when  people  went  north  from 
Jerusalem  through  their  country.  He  was  repudiating 
Mount  Gerizim  by  going  by  it  to  Jerusalem.  This  was  an 
unusual  precaution  by  Jesus  and  we  do  not  know  who  the 
messengers  (angels)  were.  To  make  ready  for  him  (hos  hetoi- 
masai  autoi).  Hos  is  correct  here,  not  hoste.  The  only  ex- 
amples of  the  final  use  of  hos  with  the  infinitive  in  the  N.T. 
are  this  one  and  Heb.  7:9  (absolute  use).     In  Acts  20:24 


140      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Westcott  and  Hort  read  hbs  teleioso  and  put  hbs  teleibsai  in 
the  margin  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  1091). 

53.  And  they  did  not  receive  him  {kai  ouk  edexanto  auton). 
Adversative  use  of  kai  =  But.  Because  his  face  was  going 
to  Jerusalem  (hoti  to  prosbpon  autou  en  poreuomenon  eis 
Ierousalem).  Periphrastic  imperfect  middle.  It  was  reason 
enough  to  the  churlish  Samaritans. 

54.  Saw  this  (idontes).  Second  aorist  active  participle 
of  horab.  Saw  the  messengers  returning.  We  bid  (theleis 
eipomen).  Deliberative  subjunctive  eipomen  after  theleis 
without  hina,  probably  two  questions,  Dost  thou  wish? 
Shall  we  bid?  Perhaps  the  recent  appearance  of  Elijah  on 
the  Mount  of  Transfiguration  reminded  James  and  John 
of  the  incident  in  II  Kings  1:10-12.  Some  MSS.  add  here 
"as  Elijah  did."  The  language  of  the  LXX  is  quoted  by 
James  and  John,  these  fiery  Sons  of  Thunder.  Note  the 
two  aorist  active  infinitives  {katabenai,  analbsai,  the  first 
ingressive,  the  second  effective). 

55.  But  he  turned  (strapheis  de).  Second  aorist  passive 
participle  of  strepho,  common  verb,  to  turn  round.  Dra- 
matic act.  Some  ancient  MSS.  have  here:  Ye  know  not 
what  manner  of  spirit  ye  are  of  {ouk  oidate  poiou  pneumatos 
este).  This  sounds  like  Christ  and  may  be  a  genuine  saying 
though  not  a  part  of  Luke's  Gospel.  A  smaller  number  of 
MSS.  add  also:  For  the  Son  of  Man  came  not  to  destroy 
men's  lives,  but  to  save  them  {Ho  gar  huios  tou  anthrbpou 
ouk  elthen  psuckas  anthrbpbn  apolesai  alia  sbsai),  a  saying 
reminding  us  of  Matt.  5:17  and  Luke  19:10.  Certain  it  is 
that  here  Jesus  rebuked  the  bitterness  of  James  and  John 
toward  Samaritans  as  he  had  already  chided  John  for  his 
narrowness  towards  a  fellow-worker  in  the  kingdom. 

57.  A  certain  man  {tis).  Matt.  8:19  calls  him  "a  scribe." 
Luke  9:57-60  =  Matt.  8:19-22,  but  not  in  Mark  and  so 
from  Q  or  the  Logia.  Wherever  you  go  {hopou  ean  aperchei) 
is  the  present  middle  subjunctive  with  the  indefinite  rela- 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  141 

tive  adverb  ean,  common  Greek  idiom.  See  on  Matthew  for 
"holes,"  "nests,"  "Son  of  man."  The  idiom  "where  to 
lay  his  head"  (pou  ten  kephalen  klinei)  is  the  same  in  both, 
the  deliberative  subjunctive  retained  in  the  indirect  ques- 
tion. "Jesus  knows  the  measure  of  the  scribe's  enthusiasm" 
(Plummer).  The  wandering  life  of  Jesus  explains  this  state- 
ment. 

59.  And  he  said  unto  another  (eipen  de  pros  heteron). 
Matt.  8:21  omits  Christ's  "Follow  me"  (akolouthei  moi) 
and  makes  this  man  a  volunteer  instead  of  responding  to 
the  appeal  of  Jesus.  There  is  no  real  opposition,  of  course. 
In  Matthew's  account  the  man  is  apologetic  as  in  Luke. 
Plummer  calls  him  "one  of  the  casual  disciples"  of  whom 
there  are  always  too  many.  The  scribes  knew  how  to  give 
plausible  reasons  for  not  being  active  disciples.  First  {pro- 
ton). One  of  the  problems  of  life  is  the  relation  of  duties  to 
each  other,  which  comes  first.  The  burial  of  one's  father 
was  a  sacred  duty  (Gen.  25:9),  but,  as  in  the  case  of  Tobit 
4:3,  this  scribe's  father  probably  was  still  alive.  What  the 
scribe  apparently  meant  was  that  he  could  not  leave  his 
father  while  still  alive  to  follow  Jesus  around  over  the  coun- 
try. 

60.  Leave  the  dead  to  bury  their  own  dead  {aphes  tous  nek- 
rous  thapsai  tous  heautbn  nekrous).  This  paradox  occurs  so 
in  Matt.  8 :22.  The  explanation  is  that  the  spiritually  dead 
can  bury  the  literally  dead.  For  such  a  quick  change  in  the 
use  of  the  same  words  see  John  5:21-29  (spiritual  resurrec- 
tion from  sin  in  21-27,  bodily  resurrection  from  the  grave, 
28  and  29)  and  John  n:25f.  The  harshness  of  this  proverb 
to  the  scribe  probably  is  due  to  the  fact  that  he  was  mani- 
festly using  his  aged  father  as  an  excuse  for  not  giving  Christ 
active  service.  But  go  thou  and  publish  abroad  the  kingdom 
of  God  (su  de  apelthbn  diaggelle  ten  basileian  tou  theou) .  The 
scribe's  duty  is  put  sharply  (But  do  thou,  su  de).  Christ 
called  him  to  preach,  and  he  was  using  pious  phrases  about 


14.2      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

his  father  as  a  pretext.  Many  a  preacher  has  had  to  face  a 
similar  delicate  problem  of  duty  to  father,  mother,  brothers, 
sisters  and  the  call  to  preach.  This  was  a  clear  case.  Jesus 
will  help  any  man  called  to  preach  to  see  his  duty.  Certainly 
Jesus  does  not  advocate  renunciation  of  family  duties  on 
the  part  of  preachers. 

61.  And  another  also  said  (eipen  de  kai  heteros).  A  volun- 
teer like  the  first.  This  third  case  is  given  by  Luke  alone, 
though  the  incident  may  also  come  from  the  same  Logia  as 
the  other  two.  Heteros  does  not  here  mean  one  of  a  "differ- 
ent" sort  as  is  sometimes  true  of  this  pronoun,  but  merely 
another  like  alios  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  749).  But  first 
{proton  de).  He  also  had  something  that  was  to  come 
"first."  To  bid  farewell  to  them  that  are  at  my  house  (apo- 
taxasthai  tois  eis  ton  oikon  mou).  In  itself  that  was  a  good 
thing  to  do.  This  first  aorist  middle  infinitive  is  from 
apotasso,  an  old  verb,  to  detach,  to  separate,  to  assign  as  a 
detachment  of  soldiers.  In  the  N.T.  it  only  appears  in  the 
middle  voice  with  the  meaning  common  in  late  writers  to 
bid  adieu,  to  separate  oneself  from  others.  It  is  used  in 
Acts  18:18  of  Paul  taking  leave  of  the  believers  in  Corinth. 
See  also  Mark  6:46;  II  Cor.  2:13.  It  is  thus  a  formal 
function  and  this  man  meant  to  go  home  and  set  things 
in  order  there  and  then  in  due  time  to  come  and  follow 
Jesus. 

62.  Having  put  his  hand  to  the  plough  {epibalon  ten  cheira  ep' 
arotron).  Second  aorist  active  participle  of  epiballo,  an  old 
and  common  verb,  to  place  upon.  Note  repetition  of  preposi- 
tion epi  before  arotron  (plough).  This  agricultural  proverb  is 
as  old  as  Hesiod.  Pliny  observes  that  the  ploughman  who 
does  not  bend  attentively  to  his  work  goes  crooked.  It 
has  always  been  the  ambition  of  the  ploughman  to  run  a 
straight  furrow.  The  Palestine  fellah  had  good  success  at 
it.  And  looking  back  {kai  blepbn  eis  ta  opiso).  Looking  to 
the  things  behind.     To  do  that  is  fatal  as  any  ploughman 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  143 

knows.  The  call  to  turn  back  is  often  urgent.  Fit  {euthetos) . 
From  eu  and  tithemi  =  well-placed,  suited  for,  adapted  to. 
"The  first  case  is  that  of  inconsiderate  impulse,  the  second 
that  of  conflicting  duties,  the  third  tiiat  of  a  divided  mind" 
(Bruce). 


CHAPTER  X 

i.  Appointed  {anedeixen).  First  aorist  active  indicative 
of  anadeiknumi,  an  old  verb,  not  only  common,  but  in  LXX. 
In  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Acts  1 124.  Cf.  anadeixis  in  Luke 
1 :8o.  To  show  forth,  display,  proclaim,  appoint.  Seventy 
others  {heterous  hebdomekonta  kai).  The  "also"  {kai)  and 
the  "others"  point  back  to  the  mission  of  the  Twelve  in 
Galilee  (9:1-6).  Some  critics  think  that  Luke  has  con- 
fused this  report  of  a  mission  in  Judea  with  that  in  Galilee, 
but  needlessly  so.  What  earthly  objection  can  there  be  to 
two  similar  missions  ?  B  D  Syr.  Cur.  and  Syr.  Sin.  have  "sev- 
enty-two." The  seventy  elders  were  counted  both  ways 
and  the  Sanhedrin  likewise  and  the  nations  of  the  earth. 
It  is  an  evenly  balanced  point.  Two  and  two  {ana  duo). 
For  companionship  as  with  the  Twelve  though  Mark  6:7  has 
it  duo  duo  (vernacular  idiom).  B  K  have  here  ana  duo  duo,  a 
combination  of  the  idiom  in  Mark.  6:7  and  that  here.  He 
himself  was  about  to  come  {emellen  autos  erchesthai).  Im- 
perfect of  mellb  with  present  infinitive  and  note  autos. 
Jesus  was  to  follow  after  and  investigate  the  work  done. 
This  was  only  a  temporary  appointment  and  no  names  are 
given,  but  they  could  cover  a  deal  of  territory. 

2.  Harvest  (therismos).  Late  word  for  the  older  theros, 
summer,  harvest.  The  language  in  this  verse  is  verbatim 
what  we  have  in  Matt.  9:37  and  38  to  the  Twelve.  Why  not? 
The  need  is  the  same  and  prayer  is  the  answer  in  each  case. 
Prayer  for  preachers  is  Christ's  method  for  increasing  the 
supply. 

3.  As  lambs  {hos  arnas).  Here  again  the  same  language  as 
that  in  Matt.  10:16  except  that  there  "sheep"  {probata) 
appears  instead  of  "lambs."     Pathetic  picture  of  the  risks 

144 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  145 

of  missionaries  for  Christ.    They  take  their  life  in  their 
hands. 

4.  Purse  {ballantion) .  Old  word  for  money-bag,  sometimes 
a  javelin  as  if  from  hallo.  Only  in  Luke  in  the  N.T.  (10:4; 
12:33;  22:35ff-)-  See  Luke  9:3=  Mark.  6:jf.  =  Matt.  10:91. 
for  the  other  similar  items.  Salute  no  man  on  the  way  {medena 
kata  ten  hodon  aspasesthe).  First  aorist  (ingressive)  middle 
subjunctive  with  medena.  The  peril  of  such  wayside  saluta- 
tions was  palaver  and  delay.  The  King's  business  required 
haste.  Elisha's  servant  was  not  to  tarry  for  salutations  or 
salaams  (II  Kings  4:29).  These  oriental  greetings  were  tedi- 
ous, complicated,  and  often  meddlesome  if  others  were  pres- 
ent or  engaged  in  a  bargain. 

5.  First  say  {proton  legete).  Say  first.  The  adverb  proton 
can  be  construed  with  "enter"  {eiselthete) ,  but  probably 
with  legete  is  right.  The  word  spoken  is  the  usual  oriental 
salutation. 

6.  A  son  of  peace  {huios  eirenes).  A  Hebraism,  though 
some  examples  occur  in  the  vernacular  Koine  papyri.  It 
means  one  inclined  to  peace,  describing  the  head  of  the  house- 
hold. Shall  rest  (epanapaesetai) .  Second  future  passive  of 
epanapauo,  a  late  double  compound  (epi,  ana)  of  the  common 
verb  pauo.  It  shall  turn  to  you  again  {eph'  humds  anakampsei) . 
Common  verb  anakampto,  to  bend  back,  return.  The  peace 
in  that  case  will  bend  back  with  blessing  upon  the  one  who 
spoke  it. 

7.  In  that  same  house  {en  autei  iei  oikidi).  Literally,  in 
the  house  itself,  not "  in  the  same  house"  {en  iei  autei  oikidi), 
a  different  construction.  A  free  rendering  of  the  common 
Lukan  idiom  is,  "in  that  very  house."  Eating  {esthontes). 
An  old  poetic  verb  estho  for  esthib  that  survives  in  late  Greek. 
Such  things  as  they  give  {ta  par*  auton).  "The  things  from 
them."  For  the  labourer  is  worthy  of  his  hire  {axios  gar  ho  er- 
gaies  tou  misthou  autou).  In  Matt.  10:10  we  have  tes  trophes 
autou  (his  food).     I  Tim.  5:18  has  this  saying  quoted  as 


146      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

scripture.  That  is  not  impossible  if  Luke  wrote  by  a.d.  62. 
Paul  there  however  may  quote  only  Deut.  25:4  as  scripture 
and  get  this  quotation  either  from  Luke  10:7  or  from  a  pro- 
verbial saying  of  Jesus.  It  is  certainly  not  a  real  objection 
against  the  Pauline  authorship  of  First  Timothy.  Go  not 
from  house  to  house  (me  metabainete  ex  oikias  eis  oikian).  As 
a  habit,  vie  and  the  present  imperative,  and  so  avoid  waste 
of  time  with  such  rounds  of  invitations  as  would  come. 

8.  Such  things  as  are  set  before  you  {ta  paratithemena 
humin).  The  things  placed  before  you  from  time  to  time 
(present  passive  participle,  repetition).  Every  preacher  needs 
this  lesson  of  common  politeness.  These  directions  may 
seem  perfunctory  and  even  commonplace,  but  every  teacher 
of  young  preachers  knows  how  necessary  they  are.  Hence 
they  were  given  both  to  the  Twelve  and  to  the  Seventy. 

9.  Is  come  nigh  unto  you  (eggiken  epK  humas).  Perfect 
active  indicative  of  eggizb  as  in  Matt.  3  :2  of  the  Baptist  and 
Mark  1:15  of  Jesus.    Note  epK  humas  here. 

10.  Into  the  streets  thereof  (eis  tas  plateias  auies).  Out  of 
the  inhospitable  houses  into  the  broad  open  streets. 

11.  Even  the  dust  (kai  ton  koniorton).  Old  word  from 
konis,  dust,  and  ornumi,  to  stir  up.  We  have  seen  it  already 
in  Matt.  10:14;  Luke  9:5.  Dust  is  a  plague  in  the  east. 
Shake  off  even  that.  Cleaveth  (kollethenta) .  First  aorist 
passive  participle  of  kollao,  to  cling  as  dust  and  mud  do  to 
shoes.  Hence  the  orientals  took  off  the  sandals  on  entering 
a  house.  We  wipe  off  (apomassometha).  Middle  voice  of  an 
old  verb  apomasso,  to  rub  off  with  the  hands.  Nowhere  else 
in  the  N.T.  But  ekmasso,  occurs  in  Luke  7:38,  44.  Against 
you  (Humin).  Fine  example  of  the  dative  of  disadvantage 
(the  case  of  personal  interest,  the  dative). 

12.  More  tolerable  (anektoteron) .  Comparative  of  the 
verbal  adjective  anektos  from  anechomai.  An  old  adjective, 
but  only  the  comparative  in  the  N.T.  and  in  this  phrase 
(Matt.  10:15;  11:22,  24;  Luke  10:12,  14). 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  147 

13.  Would  have  repented  (an  metenoesan).  Conclusion 
(apodosis)  of  second-class  condition,  determined  as  unful- 
filled. Long  ago  (palai).  Implies  a  considerable  ministry 
in  these  cities  of  which  we  are  not  told.  Chorazin  not  men- 
tioned save  here  and  Matt.  11:21.  Perhaps  Karazeh  near 
Tell  Hum  (Capernaum).  Sitting  in  sackcloth  and  ashes  (en 
sakkbi  kai  spodbi  kathemenoi).  Pictorial  and  graphic.  The 
sakkos  (sackcloth)  was  dark  coarse  cloth  made  of  goat's  hair 
and  worn  by  penitents,  mourners,  suppliants.  It  is  a  Hebrew 
word,  sag.  The  rough  cloth  was  used  for  sacks  or  bags.  To 
cover  oaeself  with  ashes  was  a  mode  of  punishment  as  well  as 
of  voluntary  humiliation. 

15.  Shalt  thou  be  exalted?  (me  hupsbthesei;).  Me  expects 
the  answer  No.  The  verb  is  future  passive  indicative  second 
singular  of  hupsob,  to  lift  up,  a  late  verb  from  hupsos,  height. 
It  is  used  by  Jesus  of  the  Cross  (John  12:32).  Unto  Hades 
(hebs  Haidou).  See  on  Matt.  16:18  for  this  word  which  is 
here  in  contrast  to  Heaven  as  in  Isa.  14:13-15.  Hades  is  not 
Gehenna.  "The  desolation  of  the  whole  neighbourhood,  and 
the  difficulty  of  identifying  even  the  site  of  these  flourishing 
towns,  is  part  of  the  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy"  (Plummer). 
Ragg  notes  the  omission  of  Nazareth  from  this  list  of  cities 
of  neglected  privilege  and  opportunity.  "Is  it  the  tender 
memories  of  boyhood  that  keep  from  His  lips  the  name  of 
the  arch-rejector  (4:28  sqq.)  Nazareth?" 

16.  Rejecteth  him  that  sent  me  (athetei  ton  aposteilanta  me). 
These  solemn  words  form  a  fit  close  for  this  discourse  to  the 
Seventy.  The  fate  of  Chorazin,  Bethsaida,  Capernaum  will 
befall  those  who  set  aside  (a  privative  and  theteb,  from  ti- 
themi)  the  mission  and  message  of  these  messengers  of 
Christ.  See  this  verb  used  in  7:30  of  the  attitude  of  the 
scribes  and  Pharisees  toward  John  and  Jesus.  It  is  this 
thought  that  makes  it  so  grave  a  responsibility  to  be  co-work- 
ers with  Christ,  high  privilege  as  it  is  (John  9:4). 

17.  Returned  with  joy  (hupe 'Streps an  meta  char  as).    They 


148      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

had  profited  by  the  directions  of  Jesus.  Joy  overflows  their 
faces  and  their  words.  Even  the  demons  {kai  ta  daimonid). 
This  was  a  real  test.  The  Twelve  had  been  expressly  endowed 
with  this  power  when  they  were  sent  out  (Luke  9:1),  but 
the  Seventy  were  only  told  to  heal  the  sick  (10:9).  It  was 
better  than  they  expected.  The  Gospel  worked  wonders  and 
they  were  happy.  The  demons  were  merely  one  sign  of  the 
conflict  between  Christ  and  Satan.  Every  preacher  has  to 
grapple  with  demons  in  his  work.  Are  subject  {hupotassetai). 
Present  passive  indicative  (repetition). 

18.  /  beheld  Satan  fallen  {ethebroun  ton  Satanan  pesonta). 
Imperfect  active  (I  was  beholding)  and  second  aorist  (con- 
stative)  active  participle  of  piptb  (not  fallen,  peptbkota,  per- 
fect active  participle,  nor  falling,  piptonta,  present  active 
participle,  but  fall,  pesonta).  As  a  flash  of  lightning  out  of 
heaven,  quick  and  startling,  so  the  victory  of  the  Seventy 
over  the  demons,  the  agents  of  Satan,  forecast  his  downfall 
and  Jesus  in  vision  pictured  it  as  a  flash  of  lightning. 

19.  And  over  all  the  power  of  the  enemy  {kai  epi  pas  an  ten 
dunamin  tou  echthrou).  This  is  the  heart  of  "the  authority" 
{ten  exousian)  here  given  by  Jesus  which  is  far  beyond  their 
expectations.  The  victory  over  demons  was  one  phase  of  it. 
The  power  to  tread  upon  serpents  is  repeated  in  Mark  16:18 
(the  Appendix)  and  exemplified  in  Paul's  case  in  Malta 
(Acts  28:3-5).  But  protection  from  physical  harm  is  not 
the  main  point  in  this  struggle  with  Satan  "the  enemy" 
(Matt.  13:25;  Rom.  16:20;  I  Pet.  5:8).  Nothing  shall  in  any 
wise  hurt  you  {ouden  humas  ou  me  adikesei).  Text  has  future 
active  indicative,  while  some  MSS.  read  adikesei,  aorist  active 
subjunctive  of  adikeb,  common  verb  from  adikos  {a  privative 
and  dikos),  to  suffer  wrong,  to  do  wrong.  The  triple  negative 
here  is  very  strong.  Certainly  Jesus  does  not  mean  this 
promise  to  create  presumption  or  foolhardiness  for  he  re- 
pelled the  enemy's  suggestion  on  the  pinnacle  of  the  temple. 

20.  Are  written  {engegraptai).    Perfect  passive  indicative, 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  149 

state  of  completion,  stand  written,  enrolled  or  engraved, 
from  engraphb,  common  verb.  "As  citizens  possessing  the 
full  privileges  of  the  commonwealth"  (Plummer). 

21.  In  that  same  hour  {en  auiei  tei  hbrai).  Literally,  "at 
the  hour  itself,"  almost  a  demonstrative  use  of  autos  (Robert- 
son, Grammar,  p.  686)  and  in  Luke  alone  in  the  N.T.  (2:38; 
10:21;  12:12;  20:19).  Matt.  11:25  uses  tne  demonstrative 
here,  "at  that  time"  {en  ekeinbi  tbi  kairbi).  Rejoiced  in  the 
Holy  Spirit  {egalliasato  tbi  pneumati  tbi  hagibi).  First  aorist 
middle  of  the  late  verb  agalliab  for  agallb,  to  exult.  Always  in 
the  middle  in  the  N.T.  save  Luke  1 47  in  Mary's  Magnificat. 
This  holy  joy  of  Jesus  was  directly  due  to  the  Holy  Spirit. 
It  is  joy  in  the  work  of  his  followers,  their  victories  over 
Satan,  and  is  akin  to  the  joy  felt  by  Jesus  in  John  4:32-38 
when  the  vision  of  the  harvest  of  the  world  stirred  his  heart. 
The  rest  of  this  verse  is  precisely  like  Matt.  n:25f.,  a  pe- 
culiarly Johannine  passage  in  Matthew  and  Luke,  but  not 
in  Mark,  and  so  from  Q  (the  Logia  of  Jesus).  It  has  dis- 
turbed critics  who  are  unwilling  to  admit  the  Johannine 
style  and  type  of  teaching  as  genuine,  but  here  it  is.  See 
on  Matthew  for  discussion.  "That  God  had  proved  his 
independence  of  the  human  intellect  is  a  matter  for  thank- 
fulness. Intellectual  gifts,  so  far  from  being  necessary,  are 
often  a  hindrance"  (Plummer). 

22.  Knoweth  who  the  Son  is  {ginbskei  tis  estin  ho  huios). 
Knows  by  experience,  ginbskei.  Here  Matt.  11:27  nas 
epiginbskei  (fully  knows)  and  simply  ton  huion  (the  Son) 
instead  of  the  "who"  (tis)  clause.  So  also  in  "who  the 
Father  is"  {tis  estin  ho  pater).  But  the  same  use  and  con- 
trast of  "the  Father,"  "the  Son."  in  both  Matthew  and 
Luke,  "an  aerolite  from  the  Johannean  heaven"  (Hase). 
No  sane  criticism  can  get  rid  of  this  Johannine  bit  in  these 
Gospels  written  long  before  the  Fourth  Gospel  was  com- 
posed. We  are  dealing  here  with  the  oldest  known  document 
about  Christ  (the  Logia)  and  the  picture  is  that  drawn  in  the 


150      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Fourth  Gospel  (see  my  The  Christ  of  the  Logia).  It  is  idle 
to  try  to  whittle  away  by  fantastic  exegesis  the  high  claims 
made  by  Jesus  in  this  passage.  It  is  an  ecstatic  prayer  in 
the  presence  of  the  Seventy  under  the  rapture  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  on  terms  of  perfect  equality  and  understanding  be- 
tween the  Father  and  the  Son  in  the  tone  of  the  priestly 
prayer  in  John  17.  We  are  justified  in  saying  that  this  prayer 
of  supreme  Fellowship  with  the  Father  in  contemplation  of 
final  victory  over  Satan  gives  us  a  glimpse  of  the  prayers 
with  the  Father  when  the  Son  spent  whole  nights  on  the 
mountain  alone  with  the  Father.  Here  is  the  Messianic 
consciousness  in  complete  control  and  with  perfect  confidence 
in  the  outcome.  Here  as  in  Matt.  1 1 :2J  by  the  use  of  zvilleth 
to  reveal  him  (bouletai  apokalupsai).  The  Son  claims  the 
power  to  reveal  the  Father  "to  whomsoever  he  wills"  {hoi 
an  bouletai,  indefinite  relative  and  present  subjunctive  of 
boulomai,  to  will,  not  the  future  indicative).  This  is  divine 
sovereignty  most  assuredly.  Human  free  agency  is  also 
true,  but  it  is  full  divine  sovereignty  in  salvation  that  is  here 
claimed  along  with  possession  (paredothe,  timeless  aorist 
passive  indicative)  of  all  power  from  the  Father.  Let  that 
supreme  claim  stand. 

23.  Turning  to  the  disciples  (strapheis  pros  tous  mathetas). 
Second  aorist  passive  of  strepho  as  in  9:55.  The  prayer  was 
a  soliloquy  though  uttered  in  the  presence  of  the  Seventy  on 
their  return.  Now  Jesus  turned  and  spoke  "privately" 
or  to  the  disciples  (the  Twelve,  apparently),  whether  on  this 
same  occasion  or  a  bit  later.  Blessed  (makarioi).  A  beati- 
tude, the  same  adjective  as  in  Matt.  5:3-11.  A  beatitude  of 
privilege  very  much  like  that  in  Matt.  13-16.  Jesus  often 
repeated  his  sayings. 

24.  Which  ye  see  (ha  humeis  blepete).  The  expression  of 
humeis  makes  "ye"  very  emphatic  in  contrast  with  the 
prophets  and  kings  of  former  days. 

25.  And  tempted  him  (ekpeirazon  auton).     Present  active 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  151 

participle,  conative  idea,  trying  to  tempt  him.  There  is  no 
"and"  in  the  Greek.  He  "stood  up  (aneste,  ingressive  sec- 
ond aorist  active)  trying  to  tempt  him."  Peirazb  is  a  late 
form  of  peirao  and  ekpeirazb  apparently  only  in  the  LXX, 
and  N.T.  (quoted  by  Jesus  from  Deut.  6:16  in  Matt.  4:7  = 
Luke  4:12  against  Satan).  Here  and  I  Cor.  10:9.  The  spirit 
of  this  lawyer  was  evil.  He  wanted  to  entrap  Jesus  if  pos- 
sible. What  shall  I  do  to  inherit  eternal  life?  (Ti  poiesas  zoen 
aibniou  kleronomeso;).  Literally,  "By  doing  what  shall  I 
inherit  eternal  life?"  Note  the  emphasis  on  "doing" 
{poiesas).  The  form  of  his  question  shows  a  wrong  idea  as 
to  how  to  get  it.  Eternal  life  (zoen  aibnion)  is  endless  life 
as  in  John's  Gospel  (16:9;  18:18,  30)  and  in  Matt.  25:46, 
which  see. 

26.  How  readest  thou?  (pbs  anaginoskeis;).  As  a  lawyer 
it  was  his  business  to  know  the  facts  in  the  law  and  the  proper 
interpretation  of  the  law.  See  on  Luke  7:30  about  nomikos 
(lawyer).    The  rabbis  had  a  formula,  "What  readest  thou?" 

27.  And  he  answering  (ho  de  apokritheis) .  First  aorist 
participle,  no  longer  passive  in  idea.  The  lawyer's  answer 
is  first  from  the  Shema?  (Deut.  6:3;  n  113)  which  was  written 
on  the  phylacteries.  The  second  part  is  from  Lev.  19:18 
and  shows  that  the  lawyer  knew  the  law.  At  a  later  time 
Jesus  himself  in  the  temple  gives  a  like  summary  of  the  law 
to  a  lawyer  (Mark  12  =28-34  =  Matt.  22  =34-40)  who  wanted  to 
catch  Jesus  by  his  question.  There  is  no  difficulty  in  the  two 
incidents.  God  is  to  be  loved  with  all  of  man's  four  powers 
(heart,  soul,  strength,  mind)  here  as  in  Mark  12:30. 

28.  Thou  hast  answered  right  (orthos  apekrithes).  First 
aorist  passive  indicative  second  singular  with  the  adverb 
orthos.  The  answer  was  correct  so  far  as  the  words  went.  In 
Mark  12:34  Jesus  commends  the  scribe  for  agreeing  to  his 
interpretation  of  the  first  and  the  second  commandments. 
That  scribe  was  "not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God,"  but  this 
lawyer  was  "tempting"  Jesus.     Do  this  and  thou  shall  live 


152      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

(touto  poiei  kai  zesei).  Present  imperative  (keep  on  doing  this 
forever)  and  the  future  indicative  middle  as  a  natural  result. 
There  was  only  one  trouble  with  the  lawyer's  answer.  No 
one  ever  did  or  ever  can  "do"  what  the  law  lays  down  to- 
wards God  and  man  always.  To  slip  once  is  to  fail.  So 
Jesus  put  the  problem  squarely  up  to  the  lawyer  who  wanted 
to  know  by  doing  what.  Of  course,  if  he  kept  the  law 
perfectly  always,  he  would  inherit  eternal  life. 

29.  Desiring  to  justify  himself  (thelon  dikaiosai  heauton). 
The  lawyer  saw  at  once  that  he  had  convicted  himself  of 
asking  a  question  that  he  already  knew.  In  his  embarrass- 
ment he  asks  another  question  to  show  that  he  did  have  some 
point  at  first:  And  who  is  my  neighbour?  {kai  tis  estin  mou 
plesion;).  The  Jews  split  hairs  over  this  question  and  ex- 
cluded from  "neighbour  "Gentiles  and  especially  Samaritans. 
So  here  was  his  loop-hole.  A  neighbour  is  a  nigh  dweller  to 
one,  but  the  Jews  made  racial  exceptions  as  many,  alas,  do 
today.  The  word  plesion  here  is  an  adverb  (neuter  of  the 
adjective  plesios)  meaning  ho  plesion  on  (the  one  who  is  near), 
but  on  was  usually  not  expressed  and  the  adverb  is  here  used 
as  if  a  substantive. 

30.  Made  answer  (hupolabon).  Second  aorist  active  parti- 
ciple of  hupolambanb  (see  7:43),  to  take  up  literally,  and  then 
in  thought  and  speech,  old  verb,  but  in  this  sense  of  inter- 
rupting in  talk  only  in  the  N.T.  Was  going  down  (katebainen). 
Imperfect  active  describing  the  journey.  Fell  among  robbers 
(leistais  periepesen).  Second  aorist  ingressive  active  indic- 
ative of  peripipto,  old  verb  with  associative  instrumental 
case,  to  fall  among  and  to  be  encompassed  by  (peri,  around), 
to  be  surrounded  by  robbers.  A  common  experience  to  this 
day  on  the  road  to  Jericho.  The  Romans  placed  a  fort  on 
this  "red  and  bloody  way."  These  were  bandits,  not  petty 
thieves.  Stripped  (ekdusantes).  Of  his  clothing  as  well  as 
of  his  money,  the  meanest  sort  of  robbers.  Beat  him  {plegas 
epithentes).     Second  aorist  active  participle  of  epitithemi, 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  153 

a  common  verb.  Literally,  "placing  strokes  or  blows" 
(plegas,  plagues)  upon  him.  See  Luke  12:48;  Acts  16:23; 
Rev.  15:1,  6,  8  for  "plagues."  Half-dead  (hemithane) .  Late 
word  from  hemi,  half,  and  thnesko,  to  die.  Only  here  in  the 
N.T.    Vivid  picture  of  the  robbery. 

31.  By  chance  (kata  sugkurian).  Here  only  in  the  N.T., 
meaning  rather,  "by  way  of  coincidence."  It  is  a  rare  word 
elsewhere  and  in  late  writers  like  Hippocrates.  It  is  from 
the  verb  sugkureo,  though  sugkuresis  is  more  common.  Was 
going  down  (katebainen) .  Imperfect  active  as  in  verse  30. 
Passed  by  on  the  other  side  (antipar  elthen) .  Second  aorist 
active  indicative  of  antiparerchomai,  a  late  double  compound 
here  (verses  31  and  32)  only  in  the  N.T.,  but  in  the  papyri 
and  late  writers.  It  is  the  ingressive  aorist  (elthen),  came 
alongside  (para),  and  then  he  stepped  over  to  the  opposite 
side  (anti)  of  the  road  to  avoid  ceremonial  contamination 
with  a  stranger.  A  vivid  and  powerful  picture  of  the  vice 
of  Jewish  ceremonial  cleanliness  at  the  cost  of  moral  princi- 
ple and  duty.  The  Levite  in  verse  32  behaved  precisely  as 
the  priest  had  done  and  for  the  same  reason. 

33.  A  certain  Samaritan  (Samareites  de  tis).  Of  all  men  in 
the  world  to  do  a  neighbourly  act!  As  he  journeyed  (hodeubn). 
Making  his  way.  Came  where  he  was  (elthen  kaf  auton). 
Literally,  "came  down  upon  him."  He  did  not  sidestep  or 
dodge  him,  but  had  compassion  on  him. 

34.  Bound  up  his  wounds  (katedesen  ta  traumata).  First 
aorist  active  indicative  of  katadeo,  old  verb,  but  here  only  in 
the  N.T.  The  verb  means  "bound  down."  We  say  "bind 
up."  Medical  detail  that  interested  Luke.  The  word 
for  "wounds"  (traumata)  here  only  in  the  N.T.  Pouring  on 
them  oil  and  wine  (epicheon  elaion  kai  oinon).  Old  verb  again, 
but  here  only  in  the  N.T.  Oil  and  wine  were  household 
remedies  even  for  wounds  (soothing  oil,  antiseptic  alcohol). 
Hippocrates  prescribed  for  ulcers:  "Bind  with  soft  wool, 
and  sprinkle  with  wine  and  oil."    Set  him  (epibibasas).    An 


154      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

old  verb  epibibazo  (epi,  bibazb),  to  cause  to  mount.  In  the 
N.T.  only  here  and  Acts  19:35;  23:24,  common  in  LXX. 
Beast  {ktenos).  Old  word  from  ktaomai,  to  acquire,  and  so 
property  {ktema)  especially  cattle  or  any  beast  of  burden. 
An  inn  {pandocheion).  The  old  Attic  form  was  pandokeion 
(from  pan,  all,  and  dechomai,  to  receive).  A  public  place  for 
receiving  all  comers  and  a  more  pretentious  caravanserai 
than  a  kataluma  like  that  in  Luke  2:7.  Here  only  in  the 
N.T.  There  are  ruins  of  two  inns  about  halfway  between 
Bethany  and  Jericho. 

35.  On  the  morrow  {epi  ten  aurion).  Towards  the  morrow 
as  in  Acts  4:5.  (Cf.  also  Acts  3:1).  Syriac  Sinaitic  has  it 
"at  dawn  of  the  day."  An  unusual  use  of  epi.  Took  out 
{ekbalbn).  Second  aorist  active  participle  of  ekballo.  It 
could  mean,  "fling  out,"  but  probably  only  means  "drew 
out."  Common  verb.  Two  pence  {duo  denaria).  About 
thirty-five  cents,  but  worth  more  in  purchasing  power.  To 
the  host  {toi  pandochei).  The  innkeeper.  Here  only  in  the 
N.T.  Whatsoever  thou  spendest  more  {hoti  an  prosdapaneseis). 
Indefinite  relative  clause  with  an  and  the  aorist  active  sub- 
junctive of  prosdapanao,  to  spend  besides  {pros),  a  late  verb 
for  the  common  prosanalisko  and  here  only  in  the  N.T.  / 
will  repay  {ego  apodoso).  Emphatic.  What  he  had  paid 
was  merely  by  way  of  pledge.  He  was  a  man  of  his  word 
and  known  to  the  innkeeper  as  reliable.  When  I  come  back 
again  {en  toi  epanerchesthai  me).  Luke's  favourite  idiom  of 
en  and  the  articular  infinitive  with  accusative  of  general 
reference.    Double  compound  verb  epanerchomai. 

36.  Proved  neighbour  to  him  that  fell  {plesion  gegonenai  tou 
empesontos).  Second  perfect  infinitive  of  ginomai  and  second 
aorist  active  participle  of  empipto.  Objective  genitive,  be- 
came neighbour  to  the  one,  etc.  Jesus  has  changed  the  law- 
yer's standpoint  and  has  put  it  up  to  him  to  decide  which  of 
"these  three"  {toutbn  ton  trion,  priest,  Levite,  Samaritan) 
acted  like  a  neighbour  to  the  wounded  man. 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  155 

37.  On  him  {met!  autou).  With  him,  more  exactly.  The 
lawyer  saw  the  point  and  gave  the  correct  answer,  but  he 
gulped  at  the  word  "Samaritan"  and  refused  to  say  that. 
Do  thou  {su  poiei).  Emphasis  on  "thou."  Would  this  Jew- 
ish lawyer  act  the  neighbour  to  a  Samaritan?  This  parable 
of  the  Good  Samaritan  has  built  the  world's  hospitals  and, 
if  understood  and  practised,  will  remove  race  prejudice, 
national  hatred  and  war,  class  jealousy. 

38.  Now  as  they  went  on  their  way  {en  de  toi  poreuesthai 
autous).  Luke's  favourite  temporal  clause  again  as  in  verse 
35.  Received  him  into  her  house  {hupedexato  auton  eis  ten 
oikian).  Aorist  middle  indicative  of  hupodechomai,  an  old 
verb  to  welcome  as  a  guest  (in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Luke 
19:6;  Acts  17:7;  James  2:25).  Martha  is  clearly  the  mistress 
of  the  home  and  is  probably  the  elder  sister.  There  is  no 
evidence  that  she  was  the  wife  of  Simon  the  leper  (John 
I2:if.).  It  is  curious  that  in  an  old  cemetery  at  Bethany  the 
names  of  Martha,  Eleazar,  and  Simon  have  been  found. 

39.  Which  also  sat  {he  kai  parakathestheisa).  First  aorist 
passive  participle  of  parakathezomai,  an  old  verb,  but  only 
here  in  the  N.T.  It  means  to  sit  beside  {para)  and  pros 
means  right  in  front  of  the  feet  of  Jesus.  It  is  not  clear 
what  the  point  is  in  kai  here.  It  may  mean  that  Martha 
loved  to  sit  here  also  as  well  as  Mary.  Heard  {ekouen). 
Imperfect  active.  She  took  her  seat  by  the  feet  of  Jesus 
and  went  on  listening  to  his  talk. 

40.  Was  cumbered  {periespdtd).  Imperfect  passive  of 
perispao,  an  old  verb  with  vivid  metaphor,  to  draw  around. 
One  has  sometimes  seen  women  whose  faces  are  literally 
drawn  round  with  anxiety,  with  a  permanent  twist,  dis- 
tracted in  mind  and  in  looks.  She  came  up  to  him  {epistasa). 
Second  aorist  active  participle  of  ephistemi,  an  old  verb  to 
place  upon,  but  in  the  N.T.  only  in  the  middle  voice  or  the 
intransitive  tenses  of  the  active  (perfect  and  second  aorist 
as  here).    It  is  the  ingressive  aorist  here  and  really  meass. 


156      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

stepping  up  to  or  bursting  in  or  upon  Jesus.  It  is  an  explosive 
act  as  is  the  speech  of  Martha.  Dost  thou  not  care  (ou  melei 
soi).  This  was  a  reproach  to  Jesus  for  monopolizing  Mary 
to  Martha's  hurt.  Did  leave  me  {me  kateleipen).  Imperfect 
active,  she  kept  on  leaving  me.  Bid  her  (eipon  autei).  Late 
form  instead  of  eipe,  second  aorist  active  imperative,  com- 
mon in  the  papyri.  Martha  feels  that  Jesus  is  the  key  to 
Mary's  help.  That  she  help  me  (hina  moi  sunantilabetai) . 
Sub-final  use  of  hina  with  second  aorist  middle  subjunctive 
of  sunantilambanomai,  a  double  compound  verb  (sun,  with, 
anti,  at  her  end  of  the  line,  and  lambanomai,  middle  voice  of 
lambano,  to  take  hold),  a  late  compound  appearing  in  the 
LXX,  Diodorus  and  Josephus.  Deissmann  (Light  from  the 
Ancient  East,  p.  87)  finds  it  in  many  widely  scattered  inscrip- 
tions "throughout  the  whole  extent  of  the  Hellenistic  world 
of  the  Mediterranean."  It  appears  only  twice  in  the  N.T. 
(here  and  Rom.  8:26).  It  is  a  beautiful  word,  to  take  hold 
oneself  (middle  voice)  at  his  end  of  the  task  (anti)  together 
with  (sun)  one. 

41.  Art  anxious  (merimnais).  An  old  verb  for  worry  and 
anxiety  from  merizb  (meris,  part)  to  be  divided,  distracted. 
Jesus  had  warned  against  this  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount 
(Matt.  6:25,  28,  31,  34.  See  also  Luke  12:11,  22,  26).  And 
troubled  (kai  thorubazei).  From  thorubazomai,  a  verb  found 
nowhere  else  so  far.  Many  MSS.  here  have  the  usual  form 
turbazei,  from  turbazo.  Apparently  from  thorubos,  a  common 
enough  word  for  tumult.  Martha  had  both  inward  anxiety 
and  outward  agitation.  But  one  thing  is  needful  (henos  de 
estin  chreia).  This  is  the  reading  of  A  C  and  may  be  correct. 
A  few  manuscripts  have:  "There  is  need  of  few  things." 
Aleph  B  L  (and  Westcott  and  Hort)  have:  "There  is  need 
of  few  things  or  one,"  which  seems  like  a  conflate  reading 
though  the  readings  are  all  old.  See  Robertson,  Introduction 
to  Textual  Criticism  of  the  N.T.,  p.  190.  Jesus  seems  to 
say  to  Martha  that  only  one  dish  was  really  necessary  for 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  157 

the  meal  instead  of  the  "many"  about  which  she  was  so 
anxious. 

42.  The  good  portion  {ten  agathen  merida).  The  best  dish 
on  the  table,  fellowship  with  Jesus.  This  is  the  spiritual 
application  of  the  metaphor  of  the  dishes  on  the  table. 
Salvation  is  not  "the  good  portion"  for  Martha  had  that 
also.  From  her  {antes).  Ablative  case  after  aphairethesetai 
(future  passive  indicative).  Jesus  pointedly  takes  Mary's 
side  against  Martha's  fussiness. 


CHAPTER  XI 

I.  As  he  was  praying  in  a  certain  place  {en  toi  einai  auton 
en  topoi  tini  proseuchomenon).  Characteristically  Lukan 
idiom:  en  with  articular  periphrastic  infinitive  {einai  pros- 
euchomenon) with  accusative  of  general  reference  {auton). 
That.  Not  in  the  Greek,  asyndeton  {kai  egeneto  eipen). 
When  he  ceased  {hos  epausato).  Supply  proseuchomenos 
(praying),  complementary  or  supplementary  participle. 
Teach  us  {didaxon  hemas).  Jesus  had  taught  them  by  pre- 
cept (Matt.  6:7-15)  and  example  (Luke  9:29).  Somehow 
the  example  of  Jesus  on  this  occasion  stirred  them  to  fresh 
interest  in  the  subject  and  to  revival  of  interest  in  John's 
teachings  (Luke  5:33).  So  Jesus  gave  them  the  substance 
of  the  Model  Prayer  in  Matthew,  but  in  shorter  form.  Some 
of  the  MSS.  have  one  or  all  of  the  phrases  in  Matthew,  but 
the  oldest  documents  have  it  in  the  simplest  form.  See  on 
Matt.  6:7-15  for  discussion  of  these  details  (Father,  hal- 
lowed, kingdom,  daily  bread,  forgiveness,  bringing  us  into 
temptation).  In  Matt.  6:11  "give"  is  dos  (second  aorist 
active  imperative  second  singular,  a  single  act)  while  here 
Luke  11:3  "give"  is  didou  (present  active  imperative,  both 
from  didbmi)  and  means,  "keep  on  giving."  So  in  Luke 
11  :\  we  have  "For  we  ourselves  also  forgive"  {kai  gar  autoi 
aphiomen),  present  active  indicative  of  the  late  0  verb  aphid 
while  Matt.  6:12  has  "as  we  also  forgave"  {hos  kai  hemeis 
aphekamen),  first  aorist  {k  aorist)  active  of  aphiemi.  So 
also  where  Matt.  6:12  has  "debts"  {ta  opheilemata)  Luke 
11:4  has  "sins"  {tas  hamartias).  But  the  spirit  of  each 
prayer  is  the  same.  There  is  no  evidence  that  Jesus  meant 
either  form  to  be  a  ritual.  In  both  Matt.  6:13  and  Luke 
11:4  me  eisenegkeis  occurs  (second  aorist  subjunctive  with 

158 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  159 

me  in  prohibition,  ingressive  aorist).  "Bring  us  not"  is  a 
better  translation  than  "lead  us  not."  There  is  no  such 
thing  as  God  enticing  one  to  sin  (James  1:13).  Jesus  urges 
us  to  pray  not  to  be  tempted  as  in  Luke  22:40  in  Geth- 
semane. 

5.  At  midnight  (mesonuktiou).  Genitive  of  time.  And 
say  to  him  (kai  eipei  autoi).  This  is  the  deliberative  sub- 
junctive, but  it  is  preceded  by  two  future  indicatives  that 
are  deliberative  also  (hexei,  poreusetai).  Lend  me  (chreson 
moi).  First  aorist  active  imperative  second  singular.  Lend 
me  now.  From  kichremi,  an  old  verb,  to  lend  as  a  matter  of 
friendly  interest  as  opposed  to  daneizo,  to  lend  on  interest  as 
a  business.    Only  here  in  the  N.T. 

6.  To  set  before  him  {ho  paratheso  autoi).  Which  I  shall 
place  beside  him.  Future  active  of  paratithemi.  See  9:16  for 
this  same  verb. 

7.  And  he  (kakeinos).  Emphatic.  Shall  say  (eipei). 
Still  the  aorist  active  deliberative  subjunctive  as  in  verse  5 
(the  same  long  and  somewhat  involved  sentence).  Trouble 
me  not  (me  moi  kopous  pareche).  Me  and  the  present  im- 
perative active.  Literally,  "  Stop  furnishing  troubles  to  me." 
On  this  use  of  kopous  parecho  see  also  Matt.  26:10;  Mark 
14:6;  Gal.  6:17  and  the  singular  kopon,  Luke  18:5.  The  door 
is  now  shut  (ede  he  thura  kekleistai).  Perfect  passive  indica- 
tive, shut  to  stay  shut.  Oriental  locks  are  not  easy  to  un- 
lock. From  kleio,  common  verb.  In  bed  (eis  ten  koiten). 
Note  use  of  eis  in  sense  of  en.  Often  a  whole  family  would 
sleep  in  the  same  room.  I  cannot  (ou  dunamai) .  That  is,  I 
am  not  willing. 

8.  Though  (ei  kai).  Kai  ei  would  be  "Even  if,"  a  different 
idea.  Because  he  is  his  friend  (dia  to  einai  philon  autou).  Dia 
and  the  accusative  articular  infinitive  with  accusative  of 
general  reference,  a  causal  clause  =  "  because  of  the  being  a 
friend  of  his."  Yet  because  of  his  importunity  (dia  ge  ten 
anaidian  autou).    From  anaides,  shameless,  and  that  from  a 


160      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

privative  and  aidos,  shame,  shamelessness,  impudence.  An 
old  word,  but  here  alone  in  the  N.T.  Examples  in  the 
papyri.  The  use  of  ge  here,  one  of  the  intensive  particles, 
is  to  be  noted.  It  sharpens  the  contrast  to  "though"  by 
"yet."  As  examples  of  importunate  prayer  Vincent  notes 
Abraham  in  behalf  of  Sodom  (Gen.  18:23-33)  and  the  Syro- 
Phoenician  woman  in  behalf  of  her  daughter  (Matt.  15:22- 
28). 

9.  Shall  be  opened  (anoigesetai).  Second  future  passive 
third  singular  of  anoignumi  and  the  later  anoigb. 

11.  Of  which  of  you  that  is  a  father  (tina  de  ex  humon  ton 
patera).  There  is  a  decided  anacoluthon  here.  The  MSS. 
differ  a  great  deal.  The  text  of  Westcott  and  Hort  makes 
ton  patera  (the  father)  in  apposition  with  tina  (of  whom)  and 
in  the  accusative  the  object  of  aitesei  (shall  ask)  which  has 
also  another  accusative  (both  person  and  thing)  "a  loaf," 
So  far  so  good.  But  the  rest  of  the  sentence  is,  will  ye  give 
him  a  stone?  (me  lithon  epidbsei  autbi;).  Me  shows  that  the 
answer  No  is  expected,  but  the  trouble  is  that  the  interrog- 
ative tina  in  the  first  clause  is  in  the  accusative  the  object 
of  aitesei  while  here  the  same  man  (he)  is  the  subject  of  epi- 
dosei. It  is  a  very  awkward  piece  of  Greek  and  yet  it  is  in- 
telligible. Some  of  the  old  MSS.  do  not  have  the  part  about 
"loaf"  and  "stone,"  but  only  the  two  remaining  parts  about 
"fish"  and  "serpent,"  "egg"  and  "scorpion."  The  same 
difficult  construction  is  carried  over  into  these  questions  also. 

13.  Know  how  to  give  (oidate  didonai).  See  on  Matt.  7:11 
for  this  same  saying.  Only  here  Jesus  adds  the  Holy  Spirit 
(pneuma  hagion)  as  the  great  gift  (the  summum  bonum)  that 
the  Father  is  ready  to  bestow.  Jesus  is  fond  of  "how  much 
more"  (posbi  mdllon,  by  how  much  more,  instrumental  case). 

14.  When  (tou  daimoniou  exelthontos).  Genitive  absolute 
and  asyndeton  between  kai  egeneto  and  elalesen  as  often  in 
Luke  (no  hoti  or  kai). 

15.  Dumb  (kbphon).     See  on  Matt.  9:32.     By  Beelzebub 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  161 

(en  Beezeboul).  Blasphemous  accusation  here  in  Judea  as  in 
Galilee  (Mark  3  :22  =Matt.  12:24,  27).  See  on  Matthew  for 
discussion  of  the  form  of  this  name  and  the  various  items  in 
the  sin  against  the  Holy  Spirit  involved  in  the  charge.  It 
was  useless  to  deny  the  fact  of  the  miracles.  So  they  were 
explained  as  wrought  by  Satan  himself,  a  most  absurd  ex- 
planation. 

16.  Tempting  him  (peirazontes).  These  "others"  (heteroi) 
apparently  realized  the  futility  of  the  charge  of  being  in 
league  with  Beelzebub.  Hence  they  put  up  to  Jesus  the 
demand  for  "a  sign  from  heaven"  just  as  had  been  done  in 
Galilee  (Matt.  12:38).  By  "sign"  (semeion)  they  meant  a 
great  spectacular  display  of  heavenly  power  such  as  they 
expected  the  Messiah  to  give  and  such  as  the  devil  suggested 
to  Jesus  on  the  pinnacle  of  the  temple.  Sought  (ezetoun). 
Imperfect  active,  kept  on  seeking. 

17.  But  he  (autos  de).  In  contrast  with  them.  Knowing 
their  thoughts  (eidos  auton  ta  dianoemata).  From  dianoeo, 
to  think  through  or  distinguish.  This  substantive  is  com- 
mon in  Plato,  but  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  N.T.  It  means 
intent,  purpose.  Jesus  knew  that  they  were  trying  to  tempt 
him.  And  a  house  divided  against  a  house  falleth  (kai  oikos 
epi  oikon  piptei).  It  is  not  certain  that  diameristheisa 
(divided)  is  to  be  repeated  here  as  in  Matt.  12:25  =  Mark 
3:25.  It  may  mean,  and  house  falls  upon  house,  "one  tum- 
bling house  knocking  down  its  neighbour,  a  graphic  picture  of 
what  happens  when  a  kingdom  is  divided  against  itself" 
(Bruce). 

18.  Because  ye  say  (hoti  legete).  Jesus  here  repeats  in  in- 
direct discourse  (accusative  and  infinitive)  the  charge  made 
against  him  in  verse  15.  The  condition  is  of  the  first  class, 
determined  as  fulfilled. 

19.  And  if  I  by  Beelzebub  (ei  de  ego  en  Beezeboul).  Also  a 
condition  of  the  first  class,  determined  as  fulfilled.  A  Greek 
condition  deals  only  with  the  statement,  not  with  the  actual 


1 62      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

facts.  For  sake  of  argument,  Jesus  here  assumes  that  he 
casts  out  demons  by  Beelzebub.  The  conclusion  is  a  re- 
ductio  ad  absurdum.  The  Jewish  exorcists  practiced  incanta- 
tions against  demons  (Acts  19:13). 

20.  By  the  finger  of  God  {en  daktuloi  theou).  In  distinction 
from  the  Jewish  exorcists.  Matt.  12:28  has  "by  the  Spirit 
of  God."  Then  is  come  (ara  ephthasen).  Phthano  in  late 
Greek  comes  to  mean  simply  to  come,  not  to  come  before. 
The  aorist  indicative  tense  here  is  timeless.  Note  ara  (ac- 
cordingly) in  the  conclusion  (apodosis). 

21.  Fully  armed  (kathoplismenos).  Perfect  passive  par- 
ticiple of  kathoplizo,  an  old  verb,  but  here  only  in  the  N.T. 
Note  perfective  use  of  kata  in  composition  with  hoplizo, 
to  arm  (from  hopla,  arms).  Note  indefinite  temporal  clause 
(hotan  and  present  subjunctive  phulassei).  His  own  court 
(ten  heautou  aulen).  His  own  homestead.  Mark  3:27  = 
Matt.  12:29  has  "house"  (oikian).  Aule  is  used  in  the 
N.T.  in  various  senses  (the  court  in  front  of  the  house,  the 
court  around  which  the  house  is  built,  then  the  house  as  a 
whole).  His  goods  (ta hup archonta autou) .  "His  belongings." 
Neuter  plural  present  active  participle  of  huparcho  used  as 
substantive  with  genitive. 

22.  But  when  (epan  de).  Note  hotan  in  verse  21.  Stronger 
than  he  (ischuroteros  autou).  Comparative  of  ischuros  fol- 
lowed by  the  ablative.  Come  upon  him  and  overcome  him 
(epelthbn  nikesei  auton).  Second  aorist  active  participle  of 
eperchomai  and  first  aorist  active  subjunctive  of  nikao. 
Aorist  tense  here  because  a  single  onset  while  in  verse  22  the 
guarding  (phulassei,  present  active  subjunctive)  is  contin- 
uous. His  whole  armour  (ten  panoplian  autou).  An  old  and 
common  word  for  all  the  soldier's  outfit  (shield,  sword, 
lance,  helmet,  greaves,  breastplate).  Tyndale  renders  it 
"his  harness."  In  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Eph.  6:11,  13 
where  the  items  are  given.  Wherein  he  trusted  (epK  hei 
epepoithei) .    Second  past  perfect  active  of  peitho,  to  persuade. 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  163 

The  second  perfect  pepoitha  is  intransitive,  to  trust.  Old 
and  common  verb.  He  trusted  his  weapons  which  had  been 
so  efficacious.  His  spoils  (ta  skula  anion).  It  is  not  clear  to 
what  this  figure  refers.  Strong  as  Satan  is  Jesus  is  stronger 
and  wins  victories  over  him  as  he  was  doing  then.  In  Col. 
2:15  Christ  is  pictured  as  triumphing  openly  over  the  pow- 
ers of  evil  by  the  Cross. 

23.  He  that  is  not  with  me  (ho  me  on  met  emou).  This  verse 
is  just  like  Matt.  12:30. 

24.  And  finding  none  (kai  me  heuriskon).  Here  Matt. 
12:43  has  kai  ouch  heuriskei  (present  active  indicative  instead 
of  present  active  participle).  Luke  11 124-26  is  almost  ver- 
batim like  Matt.  12:43-45,  which  see.  Instead  of  just  "tak- 
eth"  (paralambanei)  in  verse  26,  Matthew  has  "taketh  with 
himself"  (paralambanei  metK  heautou).  And  Luke  omits: 
"Even  so  shall  it  be  also  unto  this  evil  generation"  of  Matt. 
12:45.  Than  the  first  (ton  proton).  Ablative  case  after  the 
comparative  cheirona.  The  seven  demons  brought  back 
remind  one  of  the  seven  that  afflicted  Mary  Magdalene 
(Luke  8:2). 

27.  As  he  said  these  things  (en  tbi  legein  auton).  Luke's 
common  idiom,  en  with  articular  infinitive.  Verses  27  and 
28  are  peculiar  to  Luke.  His  Gospel  in  a  special  sense  is  the 
Gospel  of  Woman.  This  woman  "speaks  well,  but  wom- 
anly" (Bengel).  Her  beatitude  (makaria)  reminds  us  of 
Elisabeth's  words  (Luke  1:42,  eulogemene).  She  is  fulfilling 
Mary's  own  prophecy  in  1 148  (makariousin  me,  shall  call  me 
happy). 

28.  But  he  said  (autos  de  eipen).  Jesus  in  contrast  turns 
attention  to  others  and  gives  them  a  beatitude  (makarioi). 
"The  originality  of  Christ's  reply  guarantees  its  historical 
character.  Such  a  comment  is  beyond  the  reach  of  an  in- 
ventor" (Plummer). 

29.  Were  gathering  together  unto  him  (epathroizomenon). 
Genitive  absolute  present  middle  participle  of  epathroizo, 


164      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

a  rare  verb,  Plutarch  and  here  only  in  the  N.T.,  from  epi 
and  athroizo  (a  common  enough  verb).  It  means  to  throng 
together  (athroos,  in  throngs).  Vivid  picture  of  the  crowds 
around  Jesus.  But  the  sign  of  Jonah  (ei  me  to  semeion  Iona). 
Luke  does  not  give  here  the  burial  and  resurrection  of  Jesus 
of  which  Jonah's  experience  in  the  big  fish  was  a  type  (Matt. 
i2:39fT.),  but  that  is  really  implied  (Plummer  argues)  by  the 
use  here  of  "shall  be  given"  (dothesetai)  and  "shall  be" 
(estai),  for  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  is  still  future.  The 
preaching  of  Jesus  ought  to  have  been  sign  enough  as  in  the 
case  of  Jonah,  but  the  resurrection  will  be  given.  Luke's  re- 
port is  much  briefer  and  omits  what  is  in  Matt.  12:41. 

3 1 .  With  the  men  of  this  generation  (meta  ton  andrbn  tes 
geneas  tautes).  Here  Matt.  12:42  has  simply  "with  this  gen- 
eration," which  see. 

32.  At  the  preaching  of  Jonah  (eis  to  kerugma  Iona).  Note 
this  use  of  eis  as  in  Matt.  10:41  and  12:41.  Luke  inserts  the 
words  about  the  Queen  of  the  South  (31)  in  between  the  dis- 
cussion of  Jonah  (verses  29L,  32).  Both  Solomonos  (31)  and 
Iona  (verse  32)  are  in  the  ablative  case  after  the  comparative 
pleion  (more,  something  more). 

33.  In  a  cellar  {eis  krupten).  A  crypt  (same  word)  or 
hidden  place  from  krupto,  to  hide.  Late  and  rare  word  and 
here  only  in  the  N.T.  These  other  words  (lamp,  luchnon, 
bushel,  modion,  stand,  luchnian)  have  all  been  discussed  pre- 
viously (Matt.  5:15).  Luke  11:33  is  uke  Matt.  6:221.,  which 
see  for  details. 

35.  Whether  not  (me).  This  use  of  me  in  an  indirect  ques- 
tion is  good  Greek  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  1045).  It  is  a 
pitiful  situation  if  the  very  light  is  darkness.  This  happens 
when  the  eye  of  the  soul  is  too  diseased  to  see  the  light  of 
Christ. 

36.  With  its  bright  shining  (tei  astrapei).  Instrumental 
case,  as  if  by  a  flash  of  lightning  the  light  is  revealed  in  him. 
See  on  10:18. 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  165 

37.  Now  as  he  spake  {en  de  tbi  lalesai).  Luke's  common 
idiom,  en  with  the  articular  infinitive  (aorist  active  infinitive) 
but  it  does  not  mean  "after  he  had  spoken"  as  Plummer 
argues,  but  simply  "in  the  speaking,"  no  time  in  the  aorist 
infinitive.  See  3:21  for  similar  use  of  aorist  infinitive  with 
en.  Asketh  (erotdi).  Present  active  indicative,  dramatic 
present.  Request,  not  question.  To  dine  {hopos  aristesei). 
Note  hopos  rather  than  the  common  hina.  Aorist  active 
subjunctive  rather  than  present,  for  a  single  meal.  The 
verb  is  from  ariston  (breakfast).  See  distinction  between 
ariston  and  deipnon  (dinner  or  supper)  in  Luke  14:12.  It  is 
the  morning  meal  (breakfast  or  lunch)  after  the  return  from 
morning  prayers  in  the  synagogue  (Matt.  22:4),  not  the 
very  early  meal  called  akratisma.  The  verb  is,  however, 
used  for  the  early  meal  on  the  seashore  in  John  21:12,  15. 
With  him  {par1  autbi).  By  his  side.  Sat  down  to  meat  {anepe- 
sen).  Second  aorist  active  indicative  of  anapipto,  old  verb,  to 
recline,  to  fall  back  on  the  sofa  or  lounge.  No  word  here  for 
"to  meat." 

38.  That  he  had  not  first  washed  before  dinner  {hoti  ou  proton 
ebaptisthe  pro  tou  aristou).  The  verb  is  first  aorist  passive 
indicative  of  baptizo,  to  dip  or  to  immerse.  Here  it  is  applied 
to  the  hands.  It  was  the  Jewish  custom  to  dip  the  hands  in 
water  before  eating  and  often  between  courses  for  ceremonial 
purification.  In  Galilee  the  Pharisees  and  scribes  had 
sharply  criticized  the  disciples  for  eating  with  unwashed 
hands  (Mark  7:1-23  =  Matt.  15:1-20)  when  Jesus  had  de- 
fended their  liberty  and  had  opposed  making  a  necessity  of 
such  a  custom  (tradition)  in  opposition  to  the  command  of 
God.  Apparently  Jesus  on  this  occasion  had  himself  re- 
clined at  the  breakfast  (not  dinner)  without  this  ceremonial 
dipping  of  the  hands  in  water.  The  Greek  has  "first  before" 
{proton  pro),  a  tautology  not  preserved  in  the  translation. 

39.  The  Lord  {ho  kurios).  The  Lord  Jesus  plainly  and  in 
the  narrative  portion  of  Luke.    Now  {nun).    Probably  refers 


1 66      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

to  him.  You  Pharisees  do  now  what  was  formerly  done. 
The  platter  (tou  pinakos).  The  dish.  Old  word,  rendered 
"the  charger"  in  Matt.  14:8.  Another  word  for  "platter" 
(paropsis)  in  Matt.  23:25  means  "side-dish."  But  your 
inward  part  {to  de  esbthen  humon).  The  part  within  you 
(Pharisees).  They  keep  the  external  regulations,  but  their 
hearts  are  full  of  plunder  (harpages,  from  harpazo,  to  seize) 
and  wickedness  (ponerias,  from  poneros,  evil  man).  See 
Matt.  23  :25  for  a  like  indictment  of  the  Pharisees  for  care 
for  the  outside  of  the  cup  but  neglect  of  what  is  on  the 
inside.  Both  inside  and  outside  should  be  clean,  but  the 
inside  first. 

40.  Howbeit  (plen).  See  Luke  6:24.  Instead  of  devoting 
so  much  attention  to  the  outside.  Those  things  which  are 
within  (ta  enonta).  Articular  neuter  plural  participle  from 
eneimi,  to  be  in,  common  verb.  This  precise  phrase  only 
here  in  the  N.T.  though  in  the  papyri,  and  it  is  not  clear 
what  it  means.  Probably,  give  as  alms  the  things  within  the 
dishes,  that  is  have  inward  righteousness  with  a  brotherly 
spirit  and  the  outward  becomes  "clean"  (kathara).  Properly 
understood,  this  is  not  irony  and  is  not  Ebionism,  but  good 
Christianity    (Plummer). 

42.  Tithe  (apodekatoute).  Late  verb  for  the  more  common 
dekateuo.  So  in  Matt.  23:23.  Take  a  tenth  off  (apo-).  Rue 
(peganon).  Botanical  term  in  late  writers  from  pegnumi,  to 
make  fast  because  of  its  thick  leaves.  Here  Matt.  23 :23  has 
"anise."  Every  herb  (pan  lachanon).  General  term  as  in 
Mark4:32.  Matthew  has  "cummin."  Passby  (parerchesthe). 
Present  middle  indicative  of  parerchomai,  common  verb,  to 
go  by  or  beside.  Matt.  23:23  has  "ye  have  left  undone" 
(aphekate).  Luke  here  has  "love"  (agapen),  not  in  Matthew. 
Ought  (edei).  As  in  Matthew.  Imperfect  of  a  present  obliga- 
tion, not  lived  up  to  just  like  our  "ought"  (owed,  not  paid). 
Pareinai,  as  in  Matthew,  the  second  aorist  active  infinitive 
of  abhiemi.  to  leave  off.    Common  verb.    Luke  does  not  have 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  167 

the  remark  about  straining  out  the  gnat  and  swallowing  the 
camel  (Matt.  23:34).  It  is  plain  that  the  terrible  exposure 
of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  in  Matt.  23  in  the  temple  was 
simply  the  culmination  of  previous  conflicts  such  as  this  one. 

43.  The  chief  seats  in  the  synagogues  {ten  protokathedrian 
en  tais  sunagogais).  Singular  here,  plural  in  Matt.  23:6. 
This  semi-circular  bench  faced  the  congregation.  Matt. 
23 :6  has  also  the  chief  place  at  feasts  given  by  Luke  also  in 
that  discourse  (20:46)  as  well  as  in  14:7,  a  marked  character- 
istic of  the  Pharisees. 

44.  The  tombs  which  appear  not  {ta  mneneia  ta  adela). 
These  hidden  graves  would  give  ceremonial  defilement  for 
seven  days  (Num.  19:16).  Hence  they  were  usually  white- 
washed as  a  warning.  So  in  Matt.  23  127  the  Pharisees  are 
called  "whited  sepulchres."  Men  do  not  know  how  rotten 
they  are.  The  word  adelos  {a  privative  and  delos,  apparent 
or  plain)  occurs  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  I  Cor.  14:8, 
though  an  old  and  common  word.  Here  men  walking  around 
{peripatountes)  walk  over  the  tombs  without  knowing  it. 
These  three  woes  cut  to  the  quick  and  evidently  made  the 
Pharisees  wince. 

45.  Thou  reproachest  us  also  {kai  hemas  hubrizeis).  Be- 
cause the  lawyers  (scribes)  were  usually  Pharisees.  The 
verb  hubrizo  is  an  old  one  and  common  for  outrageous  treat- 
ment, a  positive  insult  (so  Luke  18:32;  Matt.  22:6;  Acts 
14:5;  I  Thess.  2:2).  So  Jesus  proceeds  to  give  the  lawyers 
three  woes  as  he  had  done  to  the  Pharisees. 

46.  Grievous  to  be  borne  {dusbastakta) .  A  late  word  in  LXX 
and  Plutarch  {dus  and  bastazo).  Here  alone  in  text  of  West- 
cott  and  Hort  who  reject  it  in  Matt.  23  14  where  we  have 
"heavy  burdens"  {phortia  bared).  In  Gal.  6:2  we  have  bare 
with  a  distinction  drawn.  Here  we  have  phortizete  (here  only 
in  the  N.T.  and  Matt.  11:28)  for  "lade,"  phortia  as  cognate 
accusative  and  then  phortiois  (dative  after  ou  prospsauete, 
touch  not).     It  is  a  fierce  indictment  of  scribes  (lawyers)  for 


l68      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

their  pettifogging  interpretations  of  the  written  law  in  their 
oral  teaching  (later  written  down  as  Mishna  and  then  as 
Gemarah),  a  terrible  load  which  these  lawyers  did  not  pretend 
to  carry  themselves,  not  even  "with  one  of  their  fingers"  to 
"touch"  (prospsauo,  old  verb  but  only  here  in  the  N.T.), 
touch  with  the  view  to  remove.  Matt.  23  :\  has  kinesai, 
to  move.  A  physician  would  understand  the  meaning  of 
prospauo  for  feeling  gently  a  sore  spot  or  the  pulse. 

48.  Consent  (suneudokeite).  Double  compound  (sun,  eu, 
dokeo),  to  think  well  along  with  others,  to  give  full  approval. 
A  late  verb,  several  times  in  the  N.T.,  in  Acts  8:1  of  Saul's 
consenting  to  and  agreeing  to  Stephen's  death.  It  is  a  some- 
what subtle,  but  just,  argument  made  here.  Outwardly  the 
lawyers  build  tombs  for  the  prophets  whom  their  fathers 
(forefathers)  killed  as  if  they  disapproved  what  their  fathers 
did.  But  in  reality  they  neglect  and  oppose  what  the  proph- 
ets teach  just  as  their  fathers  did.  So  they  are  "witnes- 
ses" (martures)  against  themselves  (Matt.  23:31). 

49.  The  wisdom  of  God  (he  sophia  tou  theou).  In  Matt. 
23  134  Jesus  uses  "I  send"  (ego  apostellb)  without  this  phrase 
"the  wisdom  of  God."  There  is  no  book  to  which  it  can 
refer.  Jesus  is  the  wisdom  of  God  as  Paul  shows  (I  Cor. 
1:30),  but  it  is  hardly  likely  that  he  so  describes  himself 
here.  Probably  he  means  that  God  in  his  wisdom  said,  but 
even  so  "Jesus  here  speaks  with  confident  knowledge  of  the 
Divine  counsels"  (Plummer).  See  Luke  10:22;  15:7,  10. 
Here  the  future  tense  occurs,  "I  will  send"  (apostelo).  Some 
of  them  (ex  autbri).  No  "some"  (tinas)  in  the  Greek,  but 
understood.  They  will  act  as  their  fathers  did.  They  will 
kill  and  persecute. 

50.  That  .  .  .  may  be  required  (hina  .  .  .  ekzetethei).  Di- 
vinely ordered  sequence,  first  aorist  passive  subjunctive  of 
ekzeteo,  a  late  and  rare  verb  outside  of  LXX  and  N.T.,  re- 
quiring as  a  debt  the  blood  of  the  prophets.  Which  was  shed 
(to  ekkechumenon).    Perfect  passive  participle  of  ekcheb  and 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  169 

ekchunno  (an  Aeolic  form  appearing  in  the  margin  of  Westcott 
and  Hort  here,  ekchunnomenon,  present  passive  participle). 
If  the  present  passive  is  accepted,  it  means  the  blood  which 
is  perpetually  shed  from  time  to  time.  From  the  foundation 
of  the  world  (apo  kataboles  kosmou).  See  also  Matt.  25:34; 
John  17:24;  Eph.  1:4,  etc.  It  is  a  bold  metaphor  for  the 
purpose  of  God. 

51.  From  the  blood  of  Abel  to  the  blood  of  Zachariah  {apo 
haimatos  Abel  heos  haimatos  Zachariou).  The  blood  of  Abel 
is  the  first  shed  in  the  Old  Testament  (Gen.  4:10),  that  of 
Zacharias  the  last  in  the  O.T.  canon  which  ended  with 
Chronicles  (II  Chron.  24:22).  Chronologically  the  murder 
of  Uriah  by  Jehoiakim  was  later  (Jer.  26:23),  but  this  climax 
is  from  Genesis  to  II  Chronicles  (the  last  book  in  the  canon). 
See  on  Matt.  23:35  for  discussion  of  Zachariah  as  "the  son 
of  Barachiah"  rather  than  "the  son  of  Jehoiada."  Between 
the  altar  and  the  sanctuary  (metaxu  tou  thusiasteriou  kai  tou 
oikou).  Literally,  between  the  altar  and  the  house  (Matt. 
23:35  has  temple,  naou). 

52.  Ye  took  away  the  key  of  knowledge  (erate  ten  kleida  tes 
gnoseos).  First  aorist  active  indicative  of  airo,  common 
verb.  But  this  is  a  flat  charge  of  obscurantism  on  the  part 
of  these  scribes  (lawyers),  the  teachers  (rabbis)  of  the  people. 
They  themselves  (autoi)  refused  to  go  into  the  house  of 
knowledge  (beautiful  figure)  and  learn.  They  then  locked 
the  door  and  hid  the  key  to  the  house  of  knowledge  and 
hindered  (ekolusate,  effective  aorist  active)  those  who  were 
trying  to  enter  (tons  eiserchomenous,  present  participle, 
conative  action).  It  is  the  most  pitiful  picture  imaginable 
of  blind  ecclesiastics  trying  to  keep  others  as  blind  as  they 
were,  blind  leaders  of  the  blind,  both  falling  into  the  pit. 

53.  From  thence  (kakeithen).  Out  of  the  Pharisee's  house. 
What  became  of  the  breakfast  we  are  not  told,  but  the  rage 
of  both  Pharisees  and  lawyers  knew  no  bounds.  To  press 
upon  him  (enechein).    An  old  Greek  verb  to  hold  in,  to  be 


I70      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

enraged  at,  to  have  it  in  for  one.  It  is  the  same  verb  used 
of  the  relentless  hatred  of  Herodias  for  John  the  Baptist 
(Mark  6:19).  To  provoke  him  to  speak  (apostomatizein) .  From 
apo  and  stoma  (mouth).  Plato  uses  it  of  repeating  to  a  pupil 
for  him  to  recite  from  memory,  then  to  recite  by  heart 
(Plutarch).  Here  (alone  in  the  N.T.)  the  verb  means  to 
ply  with  questions,  to  entice  to  answers,  to  catechize.  Of 
many  things  {peri  pleionbn).  "Concerning  more  (compara- 
tive) things."  They  were  stung  to  the  quick  by  these  woes 
which  laid  bare  their  hollow  hypocrisy. 

54.  Laying  wait  for  him  (enedreuontes  auton).  An  old 
verb  from  en  and  hedra,  a  seat,  so  to  lie  in  ambush  for  one. 
Here  only  and  Acts  23  :2i  in  the  N.T.  Vivid  picture  of  the 
anger  of  these  rabbis  who  were  treating  Jesus  as  if  he  were 
a  beast  of  prey.  To  catch  something  out  of  his  mouth  {thereu- 
sai  to  ek  tou  stomatos  autou).  An  old  Greek  verb,  though 
here  only  in  the  N.T.,  from  thera  (cf.  Rom.  11 19),  to  ensnare, 
to  catch  in  hunting,  to  hunt.  These  graphic  words  from  the 
chase  show  the  rage  of  the  rabbis  toward  Jesus.  Luke  gives 
more  details  here  than  in  20:45-47  =  Matt.  23:1-7,  but 
there  is  no  reason  at  all  why  Jesus  should  not  have  had 
this  conflict  at  the  Pharisee's  breakfast  before  that  in  the 
temple  in  the  great  Tuesday  debate. 


CHAPTER  XII 

I.  In  the  meantime  {en  hois).  It  is  a  classic  idiom  to  start 
a  sentence  or  even  a  paragraph  as  here  with  a  relative,  "in 
which  things  or  circumstances,"  without  any  expressed 
antecedent  other  than  the  incidents  in  n:53f.  In  12:3 
Luke  actually  begins  the  sentence  with  two  relatives  anth' 
hon  hosa  (wherefore  whatsoever).  Many  thousands  {muria- 
don).  Genitive  absolute  with  episunachtheison  (first  aorist 
passive  participle  feminine  plural  because  of  muriadon), 
a  double  compound  late  verb,  episunago,  to  gather  together 
unto.  The  word  "myriads"  is  probably  hyperbolical  as  in 
Acts  21:20,  but  in  the  sense  of  ten  thousand,  as  in  Acts 
19:19,  it  means  a  very  large  crowd  apparently  drawn  to- 
gether by  the  violent  attacks  of  the  rabbis  against  Jesus. 
Insomuch  that  they  trode  one  upon  another  {hoste  katapatein 
allelous).  The  imagination  must  complete  the  picture  of 
this  jam.  Unto  his  disciples  first  of  all  {pros  tous  mathetas 
autou  proton).  This  long  discourse  in  Luke  12  is  really  a 
series  of  separate  talks  to  various  groups  in  the  vast  crowds 
around  Jesus.  This  particular  talk  goes  through  verse  12. 
Beware  of  {prosechete  heautois  apo).  Put  your  mind  {noun 
understood)  for  yourselves  (dative)  and  avoid  {apo  with  the 
ablative).  The  leaven  of  the  Pharisees  which  is  hypocrisy 
{tes  zumes  hetis  estin  hupocrisis  ton  Pharisaion).  In  Mark 
8:15  Jesus  had  coupled  the  lesson  of  the  Pharisees  with  that 
of  Herod,  in  Matt.  16:6  with  that  of  the  Sadducees  also.  He 
had  long  ago  called  the  Pharisees  hypocrites  (Matt.  6:2,  5, 
16).  The  occasion  was  ripe  here  for  this  crisp  saying.  In 
Matt.  13 :33  leaven  does  not  have  an  evil  sense  as  here,  which 
see.  See  Matt.  23:13  for  hypocrites.  Hypocrisy  was  the 
leading  Pharisaic  vice  (Bruce)  and  was  a  mark  of  sanctity 
to  hide  an  evil  heart. 

171 


172      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

2.  Covered  up  (sugkekalummenon  estin).  Periphrastic 
perfect  passive  indicative  of  sugkalupto,  an  old  verb,  but 
here  only  in  the  N.T.,  to  cover  up  on  all  sides  and  so  com- 
pletely. Verses  2  to  9  here  are  parallel  with  Matt.  10:26- 
33  spoken  to  the  Twelve  on  their  tour  of  Galilee,  illustrating 
again  how  often  Jesus  repeated  his  sayings  unless  we  prefer 
to  say  that  he  never  did  so  and  that  the  Gospels  have  hope- 
lessly jumbled  them  as  to  time  and  place.  See  the  passage 
in  Matthew  for  discussion  of  details. 

3.  In  the  inner  chambers  {en  tois  tameiois).  Old  form  ta- 
mieion,  a  store  chamber  (Luke  12:24),  secret  room  (Matt. 
6:6;  Luke  12:3). 

4.  Unto  you  my  friends  {humin  tois  philois).  As  opposed 
to  the  Pharisees  and  lawyers  in  11:43,  46,  53.  Be  not  afraid 
of  {me  phobethete  apo).  First  aorist  passive  subjunctive  with 
me,  ingressive  aorist,  do  not  become  afraid  of,  with  apo  and 
the  ablative  like  the  Hebrew  min  and  the  English  "be 
afraid  of,"  a  translation  Hebraism  as  in  Matt.  10:28  (Moul- 
ton,  Prolegomena,  p.  102).  Have  no  more  that  they  can  do 
{me  echonton  perissoteron  ti  poiesai).  Luke  often  uses  the 
infinitive  thus  with  echo,  a  classic  idiom  (7:40,  42;  12:4,  50; 
14:14;  Acts  4:14,  etc.). 

5.  Whom  ye  shall  fear  {tina  phobethete).  First  aorist  pas- 
sive subjunctive  deliberative  retained  in  the  indirect  ques- 
tion. Tina  is  the  accusative,  the  direct  object  of  this  tran- 
sitive passive  verb  (note  apo  in  verse  4).  Fear  him  who 
{phobethete  ton).  First  aorist  passive  imperative,  differing 
from  the  preceding  form  only  in  the  accent  and  governing  the 
accusative  also.  After  he  hath  killed  {meta  to  apokteinai). 
Preposition  meta  with  the  articular  infinitive.  Literally, 
"After  the  killing"  (first  aorist  active  infinitive  of  the  com- 
mon verb  apokteino,  to  kill.  Into  hell  {eis  ten  geennan).  See 
on  Matt.  5 :22.  Gehenna  is  a  transliteration  of  Ge-Hinnom, 
Valley  of  Hinnon  where  the  children  were  thrown  on  to  the 
red-hot  arms  of  Molech.    Josiah  (II  Kings  23:10)  abolished 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  173 

these  abominations  and  then  it  was  a  place  for  all  kinds  of 
refuse  which  burned  ceaselessly  and  became  a  symbol  of 
punishment  in  the  other  world.  This  one  fear  {touton  pho- 
bethete).    As  above. 

6.  Is  forgotten  {estin  epilele  smenon) .  Periphrastic  per- 
fect passive  indicative  of  epilanthanomai,  common  verb  to 
forget.    See  Matt.  10:29  f°r  a  different  construction. 

7.  Numbered  {erithmentai) .  Perfect  passive  indicative. 
Periphrastic  form  in  Matt.  10:30  which  see  for  details  about 
sparrows,  etc. 

8.  Everyone  who  shall  confess  me  {pas  hos  an  homologesei 
en  emoi).  Just  like  Matt.  10:32  except  the  use  of  an  here 
which  adds  nothing.  The  Hebraistic  use  of  en  after  homo- 
logeo  both  here  and  in  Matthew  is  admitted  by  even  Moul- 
ton  {Prolegomena,  p.  104).  The  Son  of  man  {ho  huios  tou 
anthrbpou).  Here  Matt.  10:32  has  k'ago  (I  also)  as  the 
equivalent. 

9.  Shall  be  denied  {aparnethesetai).  First  future  passive 
of  the  compound  verb  aparneomai.  Here  Matt.  10:33  has 
arnesomai  simply.  Instead  of  "in  the  presence  of  the  angels 
of  God"  {emprosthen  ton  aggelbn  tou  theou)  Matt.  10:33  has 
"before  my  Father  who  is  in  heaven." 

10.  But  unto  him  that  blasphemeth  against  the  Holy  Spirit 
{toi  de  eis  to  hagion  pneuma  blaspheme santi).  This  un- 
pardonable sin  is  given  by  Mark  3:28f.  =  Matt.  12:3 if. 
immediately  after  the  charge  that  Jesus  was  in  league  with 
Beelzebub.  Luke  here  separates  it  from  the  same  charge 
made  in  Judea  (11:15-20).  As  frequently  said,  there  is  no 
sound  reason  for  saying  that  Jesus  only  spoke  his  memor- 
able sayings  once.  Luke  apparently  finds  a  different  en- 
vironment here.  Note  the  use  of  eis  here  in  the  sense  of 
"against." 

11.  Be  not  anxious  {me  merimnesete).  First  aorist  active 
subjunctive  with  me  in  prohibition.  Do  not  become  anxious. 
See  a  similar  command  to  the  Twelve  on  their  Galilean  tour 


174      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

(Matt.  io:i9f.)  and  in  the  great  discourse  on  the  Mount  of 
Olives  at  the  end  (Mark  13:11  =  Luke  21  :i4f.),  given  twice 
by  Luke  as  we  see.  How  or  what  ye  shall  answer  (pos  e  ti 
apologesesthe).  Indirect  question  and  retaining  the  delibera- 
tive subjunctive  apologesesthe  and  also  eipete  (say). 

12.  What  ye  ought  to  say  (ha  dei  eipein).  Literally,  what 
things  it  is  necessary  (dei)  to  say.  This  is  no  excuse  for  neg- 
lect in  pulpit  preparation.  It  is  simply  a  word  for  courage 
m  a  crisis  to  play  the  man  for  Christ  and  to  trust  the  issue 
with  God  without  fear. 

13.  Bid  my  brother  (eipe  toi  adelphbi  mou).  This  volunteer 
from  the  crowd  draws  attention  to  the  multitude  (verses 
13-21).  He  does  not  ask  for  arbitration  and  there  is  no 
evidence  that  his  brother  was  willing  for  that.  He  wants  a 
decision  by  Jesus  against  his  brother.  The  law  (Deut.  21  :ij) 
was  two-thirds  to  the  elder,  one-third  to  the  younger. 

14.  A  judge  or  a  divider  (kriten  e  meristen).  Jesus  repudi- 
ates the  position  of  judge  or  arbiter  in  this  family  fuss.  The 
language  reminds  one  of  Ex.  2:14.  Jesus  is  rendering  unto 
Caesar  the  things  of  Caesar  (Luke  20:25)  an<^  shows  that 
his  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world  (John  18:36).  The  word 
for  divider  or  arbiter  (meristes)  is  a  late  word  from  merizomai 
(verse  13)  and  occurs  here  only  in  the  N.T. 

15.  From  all  covetousness  (apo  pases  pleonexias).  Ablative 
case.  From  every  kind  of  greedy  desire  for  more  (pleon, 
more,  hexia,  from  echo,  to  have)  an  old  word  which  we  have 
robbed  of  its  sinful  aspects  and  refined  to  mean  business 
thrift.  In  the  abundance  of  the  things  which  he  possesseth 
(en  toi  peris seuein  tini  ek  ton  huparchonton  autoi).  A  rather 
awkward  Lukan  idiom:  "In  the  abounding  (articular  in- 
finitive) to  one  out  of  the  things  belonging  (articular  parti- 
ciple) to  him." 

16.  A  parable  unto  them  (parabolen  pros  autous).  The 
multitude  of  verses  13  and  15.  A  short  and  pungent  parable 
suggested   by  the   covetousness  of  the   man  of  verse   13. 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  175 

Brought  forth  plentifully  {euphoresen).  Late  word  from 
euphoros  (bearing  well),  in  medical  writers  and  Josephus, 
here  only  in  the  N.T. 

17.  Reasoned  within  himself  (dielogizeto  en  hautoi).  Im- 
perfect middle,  picturing  his  continued  cogitations  over  his 
perplexity.  Where  to  bestow  {pou  sunaxb).  Future  indicative 
deliberative,  where  I  shall  gather  together.  My  fruits  {tous 
karpous  mou).  So  it  is  with  the  rich  fool:  my  fruits,  my 
barns,  my  corn,  my  goods,  just  like  Nabal  whose  very  name 
means  fool  (I  Sam.  25:11),  whether  a  direct  reference  to  him 
or  not. 

18.  /  will  pull  down  (kathelo).  Future  active  of  kathaireo, 
an  old  verb,  the  usual  future  being  kathaireso.  This  second 
form  from  the  second  aorist  katheilon  (from  obsolete  held) 
like  aphelei  in  Rev.  22:19.  My  barns  {mou  tas  apothekas). 
From  apotithemi,  to  lay  by,  to  treasure.  So  a  granary  or 
storehouse,  an  old  word,  six  times  in  the  N.T.  (Matt.  3:12; 
6:26;  13:30;  Luke  3:17;  12:18,  24).  All  my  corn  (panta  ton 
siton).  Better  grain  (wheat,  barley),  not  maize  or  Indian 
corn.  My  goods  [ta  agatha  mou).  Like  the  English,  my  good 
things.    So  the  English  speak  of  goods  (freight)  train. 

19.  Laid  up  for  many  years  {keimena  eis  ete  polla).  Not  in 
D  and  some  other  Latin  MSS.  The  man's  apostrophe  to  his 
"soul"  (psuche)  is  thoroughly  Epicurean,  for  his  soul  feeds 
on  his  goods.  The  asyndeton  here  (take  thine  ease,  eat, 
drink,  be  merry)  shows  his  eagerness.  Note  difference  in 
tenses  {anapauou,  keep  on  resting,  phage,  eat  at  once,  pie, 
drink  thy  fill,  euphrainou,  keep  on  being  merry),  first  and 
last  presents,  the  other  two  aorists. 

20.  Thou  foolish  one  {aphrbn).  Fool,  for  lack  of  sense  (a 
privative  and  phren,  sense)  as  in  11:40  and  II  Cor.  11:19. 
Old  word,  used  by  Socrates  in  Xenophon.  Nominative  form 
as  vocative.  Is  thy  soul  required  of  thee  {ten  psuchen  sou 
aitousin  apo  sou).  Plural  active  present,  not  passive:  "They 
are  demanding  thy  soul  from  thee."    The  impersonal  plural 


176      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

(aitousin)  is  common  enough  (Luke  6:38;  I2:li;  16:9;  23:31). 

The  rabbis  used  "they"  to  avoid  saying  "God." 

21.  Not  rich  toward  God  (me  eis  theon  plouton).  The  only 
wealth  that  matters  and  that  lasts.  Cf.  16:9  and  Matt. 
6:191.  Some  MSS.  do  not  have  this  verse.  Westcott  and 
Hort  bracket  it. 

22.  Unto  his  disciples  (pros  tous  mathetas  autou).  So 
Jesus  turns  from  the  crowd  to  the  disciples  (verses  22  to  40, 
when  Peter  interrupts  the  discourse).  From  here  to  the  end 
of  the  chapter  Luke  gives  material  that  appears  in  Matthew, 
but  not  in  one  connection  as  here.  In  Matthew  part  of  it 
is  in  the  charge  to  the  Twelve  on  their  tour  in  Galilee,  part 
in  the  eschatological  discourse  on  the  Mount  of  Olives. 
None  of  it  is  in  Mark.  Hence  Q  or  the  Logia  seems  to  be  the 
source  of  it.  The  question  recurs  again  whether  Jesus  re- 
peated on  other  occasions  what  is  given  here  or  whether 
Luke  has  here  put  together  separate  discourses  as  Matthew 
is  held  by  many  to  have  done  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount. 
We  have  no  way  of  deciding  these  points.  We  can  only  say 
again  that  Jesus  would  naturally  repeat  his  favourite  sayings 
like  other  popular  preachers  and  teachers.  So  Luke  12 122-3 1 
corresponds  to  Matt.  6:25-33,  which  see  for  detailed  dis- 
cussion. The  parable  of  the  rich  fool  was  spoken  to  the 
crowd,  but  this  exhortation  to  freedom  from  care  (22-31) 
is  to  the  disciples.  So  the  language  in  Luke  12:22  is  precisely 
that  in  Matt.  6:25.  See  there  for  me  merimndte  (stop  being 
anxious)  and  the  deliberative  subjunctive  retained  in  the 
indirect  question  (phagete,  endusesthe).  So  verse  23  here  is 
the  same  in  Matt.  6:25  except  that  there  it  is  a  question  with 
ouch  expecting  the  affirmative  answer,  whereas  here  it  is 
given  as  a  reason  (gar,  for)  for  the  preceding  command. 

24.  The  ravens  (tous  korakas).  Nowhere  else  in  the  N.T. 
The  name  includes  the  whole  crow  group  of  birds  (rooks  and 
jackdaws).  Like  the  vultures  they  are  scavengers.  Matt. 
6:26   has   simply   "the   birds"    (ta  peteina).      Storechamber 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  177 

(tameion).  Not  in  Matt.  6:26.  Means  secret  chamber  in 
Luke  12:3.  Of  how  much  more  (posoi  motion).  Matt.  6:26 
has  question,  ouch  mallon. 

25.  A  cubit  (pechun).  Matt.  6:27  has  pechun  hena  (one 
cubit,  though  hena  is  sometimes  merely  the  indefinite  article. 
Stature  (helikian)  as  in  Matthew,  which  see. 

26.  Not  able  to  do  even  that  which  is  least  (oude  elachiston 
dunasthe).  Negative  oude  in  the  condition  of  the  first  class. 
Elative  superlative,  very  small.  This  verse  not  in  Matthew 
and  omitted  in  D.  Verse  27  as  in  Matt.  6:28,  save  that  the 
verbs  for  toil  and  spin  are  plural  in  Matthew  and  singular 
here  (neuter  plural  subject,  ta  krina). 

28.  Clothe  (amphiazei).  Late  Greek  verb  in  the  Koine 
(papyri)  for  the  older  form  amphiennumi  (Matt.  6:30).  See 
Matthew  for  discussion  of  details.  Matthew  has  "the  grass 
of  the  field"  instead  of  "the  grass  in  the  field"  as  here. 

29.  Seek  not  ye  (humeis  me  zeteite).  Note  emphatic  posi- 
tion of  "ye"  (humeis).  Stop  seeking  (me  and  present  im- 
perative active).  Matt.  6:31  has:  "Do  not  become  anxious" 
(me  merimnesete),  me  and  ingressive  subjunctive  occur  as 
direct  questions  (What  are  we  to  eat?  What  are  we  to  drink? 
What  are  we  to  put  on?)  whereas  here  they  are  in  the  indi- 
rect form  as  in  verse  22  save  that  the  problem  of  clothing  is 
not  here  mentioned :  Neither  be  ye  of  doubtful  mind  (kai  me 
meteor  izesthe).  Me  and  present  passive  imperative  (stop 
being  anxious)  of  meteorizb.  An  old  verb  from  metebros  in 
midair,  high  (our  meteor),  to  lift  up  on  high,  then  to  lift 
oneself  up  with  hopes  (false  sometimes),  to  be  buoyed  up, 
to  be  tossed  like  a  ship  at  sea,  to  be  anxious,  to  be  in  doubt 
as  in  late  writers  (Polybius,  Josephus).  This  last  meaning 
is  probably  true  here.  In  the  LXX  and  Philo,  but  here  only 
in  the  N.T. 

31.  See  Matt.  6:33  for  this  verse.  Luke  does  not  have 
"first"  nor  "his  righteousness"  nor  "all." 

32.  Little  flock  (to  mikron  poimnion).    Vocative  with  the 


178      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

article  as  used  in  Hebrew  and  often  in  the  Koine  and  so  in 
the  N.T.  See  both  pater  and  ho  pater  in  the  vocative  in  Luke 
10:21.  See  Robertson,  Grammar,  pp.  4651".  Poimnion 
(flock)  is  a  contraction  from  poimenion  from  poimen  (shep- 
herd) instead  of  the  usual  poimne  (flock).  So  it  is  not  a 
diminutive  and  mikron  is  not  superfluous,  though  it  is  pa- 
thetic. For  it  is  your  Father's  good  pleasure  (hoti  eudokesen 
ho  pater  humbn).  First  aorist  active  indicative  of  eudokeb. 
Timeless  aorist  as  in  Luke  3 :22.  This  verse  has  no  parallel 
in  Matthew. 

33.  Sell  that  ye  have  {Poles ate  ta  huparchonta  humbn).  Not 
in  Matthew.     Did  Jesus  mean  this  literally  and  always? 

\  Luke  has  been  charged  with  Ebionism,  but  Jesus  does  not 
condemn  property  as  inherently  sinful.  ''The  attempt  to 
keep  the  letter  of  the  rule  here  given  (Acts  2:44,  45)  had 
disastrous  effects  on  the  church  of  Jerusalem,  which  speedily 
became  a  church  of  paupers,  constantly  in  need  of  alms 
(Rom.  15:25,  26;  I  Cor.  16:3;  II  Cor.  8:4;  9:1)"  (Plummer). 
Purses  which  wax  not  old  (ballantia  me  palaioumena) .  So 
already  ballantion  in  Luke  10:4.  Late  verb  palaiob  from 
palaios,  old,  to  make  old,  declare  old  as  in  Heb.  8:13,  is  pas- 
sive to  become  old  as  here  and  Heb.  1:11.  That  faileth  not 
(anekleipton).  Verbal  from  a  privative  and  ekleipb,  to  fail. 
Late  word  in  Diodorus  and  Plutarch.  Only  here  in  the  N.T. 
or  LXX,  but  in  papyri.  "I  prefer  to  believe  that  even  Luke 
sees  in  the  words  not  a  mechanical  rule,  but  a  law  for  the 
spirit"  (Bruce).  Draweth  near  (eggizei).  Instead  of  Matt. 
6:19  "dig  through  and  steal."  Destroyelh  (diaphtheirei) .  In- 
stead of  "doth  consume"  in  Matt.  6:19. 

34.  Will  be  (estai).  Last  word  in  the  sentence  in  Luke. 
Otherwise  like  Matt.  6.21.  See  I  Cor.  7:32-34  for  similar 
principle. 

35.  Be  girded  about  (estbsan  periezbsmenai).  Periphrastic 
perfect  passive  imperative  third  plural  of  the  verb  perizbn- 
numi  or  perizbnnub  (later  form),  an  old  verb,  to  gird  around, 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  179 

to  fasten  the  garments  with  a  girdle.  The  long  garments  of 
the  orientals  made  speed  difficult.  It  was  important  to  use 
the  girdle  before  starting.  Cf.  17:8;  Acts  12:8.  Burning 
(kaiomenoi).  Periphrastic  present  middle  imperative,  al- 
ready burning  and  continuously  burning.  The  same  point 
of  the  Parable  of  the  Ten  Virgins  (Matt.  25:1-13)  is  found 
here  in  condensed  form.  This  verse  introduces  the  parable 
of  the  waiting  servants  (Luke  12:35-40). 

36.  When  he  shall  return  from  the  marriage  feast  (pote 
analusei  ek  ton  gamon).  The  interrogative  conjunction  pote 
and  the  deliberative  aorist  subjunctive  retained  in  the  in- 
direct question.  The  verb  analuo,  very  common  Greek  verb, 
but  only  twice  in  the  N.T.  (here  and  Phil.  1 123).  The  figure 
is  breaking  up  a  camp  or  loosening  the  mooring  of  a  ship, 
to  depart.  Perhaps  here  the  figure  is  from  the  standpoint  of 
the  wedding  feast  (plural  as  used  of  a  single  wedding  feast  in 
Luke  14:8),  departing  from  there.  See  on  Matt.  22:2.  When 
he  cometh  and  knocketh  (elthontos  kai  krousantos).  Genitive 
absolute  of  the  aorist  active  participle  without  autou  and  in 
spite  of  autbi  (dative)  being  used  after  anoixbsin  (first  aorist 
active  subjunctive  of  anoigb). 

37.  He  shall  gird  himself  (perizosetai) .  Direct  future  mid- 
dle. Jesus  did  this  (John  13  4),  not  out  of  gratitude,  but  to 
give  the  apostles  an  object  lesson  in  humility.  See  the  usual 
course  in  Luke  17:7-10  with  also  the  direct  middle  (verse  8) 
of  perisbnnub. 

38.  And  if  (k,an  =  kai-\- ean).  Repeated.  Elthei  and 
heurei,  both  second  aorist  subjunctive  with  ean,  condition 
of  the  third  class,  undetermined,  but  with  prospect  of 
being  determined.  Blessed  (makarioi).  Beatitude  here  as  in 
verse  37. 

39.  The  thief  (ho  kleptes).  The  change  here  almost  makes 
a  new  parable  to  illustrate  the  other,  the  parable  of  the 
housebreaking  (verses  39  and  40)  to  illustrate  the  parable 
of  the  waiting  servants  (35-38).    This  same  language  appears 


180      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

in  Matt.  24 143 f.  "The  Master  returning  from  a  wedding  is 
replaced  by  a  thief  whose  study  it  is  to  come  to  the  house 
he  means  to  plunder  at  an  unexpected  time"  (Bruce).  The 
parallel  in  Matt.  24:43-51  with  Luke  12:39-46  does  not  have 
the  interruption  by  Peter.  He  would  have  watched  (egregore- 
sen  an).  Apodosis  of  second-class  condition,  determined  as 
unfulfilled,  made  plain  by  use  of  an  with  aorist  indicative 
which  is  not  repeated  with  ouk  apheken  (first  aorist  active 
indicative  of  aphiemi,  k  aorist),  though  it  is  sometimes  re- 
peated (Matt.  24:43). 

40.  Be  ye  {ginesthe).  Present  middle  imperative,  keep  on 
becoming.  Cometh  (erchetai).  Futuristic  present  indicative. 
See  Matt.  24:43  to  51  for  details  in  the  comparison  with 
Luke. 

41.  Peter  said  (Eipen  de  ho  Petros).  This  whole  paragraph 
from  verse  22  to  verse  40  had  been  addressed  directly  to  the 
disciples.  Hence  it  is  not  surprising  to  find  Peter  putting  in 
a  question.  This  incident  confirms  also  the  impression  that 
Luke  is  giving  actual  historical  data  in  the  environment  of 
these  discourses.  He  is  certain  that  the  Twelve  are  meant, 
but  he  desires  to  know  if  others  are  included,  for  he  had 
spoken  to  the  multitude  in  verses  13  to  21.  Recall  Mark 
13:37.  This  interruption  is  somewhat  like  that  on  the 
Mount  of  Transfiguration  (Luke  9:33)  and  is  characteristic 
of  Peter.  Was  it  the  magnificent  promise  in  verse  37  that 
stirred  Peter's  impulsiveness?  It  is  certainly  more  than  a 
literary  device  of  Luke.  Peter's  question  draws  out  a 
parabolic  reply  by  Jesus  (42-48). 

42.  Who  then  (tis  ara).  Jesus  introduces  this  parable  of 
the  wise  steward  (42-48)  by  a  rhetorical  question  that 
answers  itself.  Peter  is  this  wise  steward,  each  of  the  Twelve 
is,  anyone  is  who  acts  thus.  The  faithful  and  wise  steward 
(ho  pistos  oikonomos  ho  phronimos).  The  faithful  steward, 
the  wise  one.  A  steward  is  house  manager  (oikos,  nemo,  to 
manage).    Each  man  is  a  steward  in  his  own  responsibilities. 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  l8j 

Household  (therapeias).  Literally,  service  from  therapeuo, 
medical  service  as  in  Luke  9:11,  by  metonymy  household 
(a  body  of  those  domestics  who  serve).  Their  portion  of  food 
{to  sitometrion) .  Late  word  from  sitometreo  (Gen.  47:12)  for 
the  Attic  ton  siton  metreo,  to  measure  the  food,  the  rations. 
Here  only  in  the  N.T.  or  anywhere  else  till  Deissmann 
(Bible  Studies,  p.  158)  found  it  in  an  Egyptian  papyrus  and 
then  an  inscription  in  Lycia  (Light  from  the  Ancient  East, 
p.  104). 

44.  Over  all  (epi  pasin).  See  Matt.  24-47  for  epi  with 
locative  in  this  sense.  Usually  with  genitive  as  in  verse  42 
and  sometimes  with  accusative  as  in  verse  14. 

45.  Shall  say  (eipei).  Second  aorist  subjunctive,  with 
ean,  condition  of  the  third  class,  undetermined,  but  with 
prospect  of  being  determined.  Delay eth  (chronizei).  From 
chronos,  time,  spends  time,  lingers.  Shall  begin  (arxetai). 
First  aorist  middle  subjunctive  with  ean  and  the  same 
condition  as  eipei,  above.  The  menservants  (tous  paidas) 
and  the  maidservants  (kai  tas  paidiskas).  Paidiske  is  a 
diminutive  of  pais  for  a  young  female  slave  and  occurs  in 
the  papyri,  orginally  just  a  damsel.  Here  pais  can  mean 
slave  also  though  strictly  just  a  boy. 

46.  Shall  cut  him  asunder  (dichotomesei).  An  old  and 
somewhat  rare  word  from  dichotomos  and  that  from  dicha 
and  temnb,  to  cut,  to  cut  in  two.  Used  literally  here.  In 
the  N.T.  only  here  and  Matt.  24:51.  With  the  unfaithful 
(meta  ion  apistbn).  Not  here  "the  unbelieving"  though  that 
is  a  common  meaning  of  apistos  (a  privative  and  pistos,  from 
peitho),  but  the  unreliable,  the  untrustworthy.  Here  Matt. 
24:51  has  "with  the  hypocrites,"  the  same  point.  The  paral- 
lel with  Matt.  24:43-51  ends  here.  Matt.  24:51  adds  the 
saying  about  the  wailing  and  the  gnashing  of  teeth.  Clearly 
there  Luke  places  the  parable  of  the  wise  steward  in  this 
context  while  Matthew  has  it  in  the  great  eschatological 
discourse.     Once  again  we  must  either  think  that  Jesus 


1 82      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

repeated  the  parable  or  that  one  of  the  writers  has  misplaced 
it.    Luke  alone  preserves  what  he  gives  in  verses  47  and  48. 

47.  Which  knew  (ho  gnous).  Articular  participle  (second 
aorist  active,  punctiliar  and  timeless).  The  one  who  knows. 
So  as  to  me  hetoimasas  e  poiesas  (does  not  make  ready  or  do). 
Shall  be  beaten  with  many  stripes  (daresetai  pollas).  Second 
future  passive  of  dero,  to  skin,  to  beat,  to  flay  (see  on  Matt. 
21:35;  Mark  12:3,  5).  The  passive  voice  retains  here  the 
accusative  pollas  (supply  plegas,  present  in  Luke  10:30). 
The  same  explanation  applies  to  oligas  in  verse  48. 

48.  To  whomsoever  much  is  given  (panti  de  hoi  edothe  polu). 
Here  is  inverse  attraction  from  hoi  to  panti  (Robertson, 
Grammar,  pp.  767L).  Note  par'  autou  (from  him)  without 
any  regard  to  panti.  They  commit  (parethento) .  Second  ao- 
rist middle  indicative,  timeless  or  gnomic  aorist.  Note  the 
impersonal  plural  after  the  passive  voice  just  before. 

49.  /  came  to  cast  fire  (Pur  elthon  balein).  Suddenly  Jesus 
lets  the  volcano  in  his  own  heart  burst  forth.  The  fire  was 
already  burning.  "Christ  came  to  set  the  world  on  fire, 
and  the  conflagration  had  already  begun"  (Plummer).  The 
very  passion  in  Christ's  heart  would  set  his  friends  on  fire 
and  his  foes  in  opposition  as  we  have  just  seen  (Luke  11 : 
53L).  It  is  like  the  saying  of  Jesus  that  he  came  to  bring  not 
peace,  but  a  sword,  to  bring  cleavage  among  men  (Matt. 
10:34-36).  And  what  will  I,  if  it  is  already  kindled?  (kai  ti 
thelb  ei  ede  anephthe;).  It  is  not  clear  what  this  passage 
means.  Probably  ti  is  be  taken  in  the  sense  of  "how" 
(pos).  How  I  wish.  Then  ei  can  be  taken  as  equal  to  hoti. 
How  I  wish  that  it  were  already  kindled.  Anephthe  is  first 
aorist  passive  of  anapto,  to  set  fire  to,  to  kindle,  to  make 
blaze.  Probably  Luke  means  the  conflagration  to  come  by 
his  death  on  the  Cross  for  he  changes  the  figure  and  refers  to 
that  more  plainly. 

50.  /  have  a  baptism  (baptisma  de  echo).  Once  again 
Jesus  will  call  his  baptism  the  baptism  of  blood  and  will 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  183 

challenge  James  and  John  to  it  (Mark  io:32f.  =  Matt. 
20:22f.).  So  here.  "Having  used  the  metaphor  of  fire, 
Christ  now  uses  the  metaphor  of  water.  The  one  sets  forth 
the  result  of  his  coming  as  it  affects  the  world,  the  other  as 
it  affects  himself.  The  world  is  lit  up  with  flames  and  Christ 
is  bathed  in  blood"  (Plummer).  And  how  I  am  straitened 
{kai  pos  sunechomai).  See  this  same  vivid  verb  sunechomai 
in  Luke  8:37  and  in  Acts  18:5  and  in  Phil.  1:23  where  Paul 
uses  it  of  his  desire  for  death  just  as  Jesus  does  here.  The 
urge  of  the  Cross  is  upon  Jesus  at  the  moment  of  these  words. 
We  catch  a  glimpse  of  the  tremendous  passion  in  his  soul  that 
drove  him  on.  Till  it  be  accomplished  iheos  hotou  telesthei). 
First  aorist  passive  subjunctive  of  teleo  with  heos  hotou 
(until  which  time),  the  common  construction  for  the  future 
with  this  conjunction. 

51.  But  rather  division  {alV  e  diamerismon) .  Peace  at  any 
price  is  not  the  purpose  of  Christ.  It  is  a  pity  for  family  jars 
to  come,  but  loyalty  to  Christ  counts  more  than  all  else. 
These  ringing  words  (Luke  12:51-53)  occur  in  Matt.  10:34-36 
in  the  address  to  the  Twelve  for  the  Galilean  tour.  See  dis- 
cussion of  details  there.  These  family  feuds  are  inevitable 
where  only  part  cleave  to  Christ.  In  Matthew  we  have  kata 
with  the  genitive  whereas  in  Luke  it  is  epi  with  the  dative 
(and  accusative  once). 

54.  To  the  multitudes  also  {kai  tois  ochlois).  After  the 
strong  and  stirring  words  just  before  with  flash  and  force 
Jesus  turns  finally  in  this  series  of  discourses  to  the  multi- 
tudes again  as  in  verse  15.  There  are  similar  sayings  to  these 
verses  54-59  in  Matt.  i6:if.  and  5:25^  There  is  a  good  deal 
of  difference  in  phraseology  whether  that  is  due  to  difference 
of  source  or  different  use  of  the  same  source  (Q  or  Logia)  we 
do  not  know.  Not  all  the  old  MSS.  give  Matt.  16:2  and  3. 
In  Matthew  the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees  were  asking  for  a 
sign  from  heaven  as  they  often  did.  These  signs  of  the 
weather,  "a  shower"  (ombros,  Luke   12:54)  due  to  clouds 


1 84      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

in  the  west,  "a  hot  wave"  {kausbn,  verse  55)  due  to  a 
south  wind  (noton)  blowing,  "fair  weather"  {eudia,  Matt. 
16:2)  when  the  sky  is  red,  are  appealed  to  today.  They  have 
a  more  or  less  general  application  due  to  atmospheric  and 
climatic  conditions. 

56.  To  interpret  this  time  {ton  kairon  touton  dokimazein). 
To  test  dokimazein  as  spiritual  chemists.  No  wonder  that 
Jesus  here  calls  them  "hypocrites"  because  of  their  blindness 
when  looking  at  and  hearing  him.  So  it  is  today  with  those 
who  are  willfully  blind  to  the  steps  of  God  among  men.  This 
ignorance  of  the  signs  of  the  times  is  colossal. 

57.  Even  of  yourselves  {kai  apW  heautbn).  Without  the 
presence  and  teaching  of  Jesus  they  had  light  enough  to  tell 
what  is  right  {to  dikaion)  and  so  without  excuse  as  Paul 
argued  in  Rom.  1  to  3. 

58.  Give  diligence  to  be  quit  of  him  {dos  ergasian  apellachthai 
ap'  autou).  Second  aorist  active  imperative  dos  from  didbmi. 
Apellachthai,  perfect  passive  infinitive  of  apallassb  an  old 
verb  common,  but  only  twice  in  the  N.T.  (here  and  Acts 
19:12).  Used  here  in  a  legal  sense  and  the  tense  emphasizes 
a  state  of  completion,  to  be  rid  of  him  for  good.  Hale  thee 
{katasurei).  Drag  down  forcibly,  old  verb,  only  here  in  the 
N.T.  To  the  officer  {tbi  praktori).  The  doer,  the  proctor, 
the  exactor  of  fines,  the  executor  of  punishment.  Old  word, 
only  here  in  the  N.T. 

59.  Till  thou  have  paid  {hebs  apodbis).  Second  aorist  ac- 
tive subjunctive  of  apodidbmi,  to  pay  back  in  full.  The  last 
mite  {to  eschaton  lepton).  From  lepb,  to  peel  off  the  bark. 
Very  small  brass  coin,  one-eighth  of  an  ounce.  In  the  N.T. 
only  here  and  Luke  21:2  =  Mark  12:42  (the  poor  widow's 
mite)  which  see. 


CHAPTER  XIII 

1.  At  that  very  season  {en  autbi  tbi  kairbi).  Luke's  fre- 
quent idiom,  "at  the  season  itself."  Apparently  in  close 
connexion  with  the  preceding  discourses.  Probably  "were 
present"  (paresan,  imperfect  of  pareimi)  means  "came," 
"stepped  to  his  side,"  as  often  (Matt.  26:50;  Acts  12:20; 
John  11:28).  These  people  had  a  piece  of  news  for  Jesus. 
Whose  blood  Pilate  had  mingled  with  their  sacrifices  (hon  to 
haima  Peilatos  emixen  meta  ton  thusibn  autbn).  The  verb 
emixen  is  first  aorist  active  (not  past  perfect)  of  mignumi, 
a  common  verb.  The  incident  is  recorded  nowhere  else, 
but  is  in  entire  harmony  with  Pilate's  record  for  outrages. 
These  Galileans  at  a  feast  in  Jerusalem  may  have  been  in- 
volved in  some  insurrection  against  the  Roman  government, 
the  leaders  of  whom  Pilate  had  slain  right  in  the  temple 
courts  where  the  sacrifices  were  going  on.  Jesus  comments 
on  the  incident,  but  not  as  the  reporters  had  expected.  In- 
stead of  denunciation  of  Pilate  he  turned  it  into  a  parable 
for  their  own  conduct  in  the  uncertainty  of  life. 

2.  Sinners  above  all  (hamartoloi  para  pantas).  Para  means 
"beside,"  placed  beside  all  the  Galileans,  and  so  beyond  or 
above  (with  the  accusative).  Have  suffered  (peponthasin). 
Second  perfect  active  indicative  third  plural  from  pascho, 
common  verb,  to  experience,  suffer.  The  tense  notes  that 
it  is  "an  irrevocable  fact"  (Bruce). 

3.  Except  ye  repent  {ean  me  metanoete).  Present  active 
subjunctive  of  metanoeo,  to  change  mind  and  conduct,  linear 
action,  keep  on  changing.  Condition  of  third  class,  unde- 
termined, but  with  prospect  of  determination.  Ye  shall 
perish  (apoleisthe) .  Future  middle  indicative  of  apollumi 
and  intransitive.    Common  verb. 

lis 


1 86      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

4.  The  tower  in  Siloam  {ho  purgos  en  Siloam).  Few  sites 
have  been  more  clearly  located  than  this.  Jesus  mentions 
this  accident  (only  in  Luke)  of  his  own  accord  to  illustrate 
still  further  the  responsibility  of  his  hearers.  Jesus  makes 
use  of  public  events  in  both  these  incidents  to  teach  spiritual 
lessons.  He  gives  the  "moral"  to  the  massacre  of  the  Gali- 
lean pilgrims  and  the  "moral"  of  the  catastrophe  at  Siloam. 
Offenders  {opheiletai).  Literally,  debtors,  not  sinners  as  in 
verse  2  and  as  the  Authorized  Version  renders  here.  See 
7:41;  11:4;  Matt.  6:12;  18:24-34. 

5.  Except  ye  repent  (ean  me  metanoesete).  First  aorist 
active  subjunctive,  immediate  repentance  in  contrast  to 
continued  repentance,  metanoete  in  verse  3,  though  Westcott 
and  Hort  put  metanoete  in  the  margin  here.  The  interpreta- 
tion of  accidents  is  a  difficult  matter,  but  the  moral  pointed 
out  by  Jesus  is  obvious. 

6.  Planted  {pephuteumenen).  Perfect  passive  participle 
of  phuteuo,  to  plant,  an  old  verb,  from  phuton,  a  plant,  and 
that  from  phuo,  to  grow.  But  this  participle  with  eichen 
(imperfect  active  of  echo)  does  not  make  a  periphrastic  past 
perfect  like  our  English  "had  planted."  It  means  rather, 
he  had  a  fig  tree,  one  already  planted  in  his  vineyard. 

7.  The  vinedresser  {ton  ampelourgon).  Old  word,  but  here 
only  in  the  N.T.,  from  ampelos,  vine,  and  ergon,  work.  These 
three  years  I  come  {tria  ete  apW  hou  erchomai).  Literally, 
"three  years  since  (from  which  time)  I  come."  These  three 
years,  of  course,  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  three  years  of 
Christ's  public  ministry.  The  three  years  are  counted  from 
the  time  when  the  fig  tree  would  normally  be  expected  to 
bear,  not  from  the  time  of  planting.  The  Jewish  nation  is 
meant  by  this  parable  of  the  barren  fig  tree.  In  the  wither- 
ing of  the  barren  fig  tree  later  at  Jerusalem  we  see  parable 
changed  to  object  lesson  or  fact  (Mark  11  :I2-I4  =  Matt. 
2i:i8f.).  Cut  it  down  {ekkopson).  "Cut  it  out,"  the  Greek 
has  it,  out  of  the  vineyard,  perfective  use  of  ek  with  the 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  187 

effective  aorist  active  imperative  of  kopto,  where  we  prefer 
"down."  Why?  (hina  ti).  Ellipsis  here  of  genetai  of  which 
ti  is  subject  (Robertson,  Grammar,  pp.  739,  916).  Also 
(kai).  Besides  bearing  no  fruit.  Doth  cumber  the  ground 
{ten  gen  katargei).  Makes  the  ground  completely  idle,  of 
no  use  (kata,  argeb,  from  argos,  a  privative  and  ergon, 
work).  Late  verb,  here  only  in  the  N.T.  except  in  Paul's 
Epistles. 

8.  Till  I  shall  dig  (heos  hotou  skapsc).  First  aorist  active 
subjunctive  like  bald  (second  aorist  active  subjunctive  of 
ballo),  both  common  verbs.  Dung  it  (bald  kopria).  Cast 
dung  around  it,  manure  it.  Kopria,  late  word,  here  alone 
in  the  N.T. 

9.  And  if  it  bear  fruit  thenceforth  (kan  men  poiesei  karpon 
eis  to  mellon).  Aposiopesis,  sudden  breaking  off  for  effect 
(Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  1203).  See  it  also  in  Mark  11:32; 
Acts  23  :g.  Trench  (Parables)  tells  a  story  like  this  of  inter- 
cession for  the  fig  tree  for  one  year  more  which  is  widely 
current  among  the  Arabs  today  who  say  that  it  will  certainly 
bear  fruit  this  time. 

10.  He  was  teaching  (en  didaskbn).  Periphrastic  imper- 
fect active. 

11.  A  spirit  of  infirmity  (pneuma  astheneias).  A  spirit 
that  caused  the  weakness  (astheneias,  lack  of  strength)  like 
a  spirit  of  bondage  (Rom.  8:15),  genitive  case.  She  was 
bowed  together  (en  sunkuptousa).  Periphrastic  imperfect 
active  of  sunkuptb,  old  verb,  here  only  in  the  N.T.,  to  bend 
together,  medical  word  for  curvature  of  the  spine.  And 
could  in  no  wise  lift  herself  up  (kai  me  dunamene  anakupsai 
eis  to  panteles).  Negative  form  of  the  previous  statement. 
Anakupsai,  first  aorist  active  infinitive  of  anakuptb  (ana, 
kupto,  same  verb  above  compounded  with  sun).  Unable  to 
bend  herself  up  or  back  at  all  (eis  to  panteles,  wholly  as  in 
Heb.  7:25  only  other  passage  in  the  N.T.  where  it  occurs). 
The  poor  old  woman  had  to  come  in  all  bent  over- 


1 88      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

12.  He  called  her  {pros ephbne sen) .  To  come  to  him  (pros). 
Thou  art  loosed  (apolelusai).  Perfect  passive  indicative  of 
apoluo,  common  verb,  loosed  to  stay  free.  Only  N.T.  ex- 
ample of  use  about  disease. 

13.  He  laid  his  hands  upon  her  (epetheken  autei  tas  cheiras). 
First  aorist  active  indicative  of  epitithemi.  As  the  Great 
Physician  with  gentle  kindness.  She  was  made  straight 
(anorthothe) .  First  aorist  (effective)  passive  indicative  of 
anorthoo,  old  verb,  but  only  three  times  in  the  N.T.  (Luke 
13:13;  Heb.  12:12;  Acts  15:16),  to  make  straight  again. 
Here  it  has  the  literal  sense  of  making  straight  the  old 
woman's  crooked  back.  She  glorified  God  (edoxazen  ton 
theon).  Imperfect  active.  Began  it  (inchoative)  and  kept 
it  up. 

14.  Answered  (apokritheis).  First  aorist  passive  participle 
of  apokrinomai.  No  one  had  spoken  to  him,  but  he  felt 
his  importance  as  the  ruler  of  the  synagogue  and  was  indig- 
nant (aganakton,  from  agan  and  achomai,  to  feel  much  pain). 
His  words  have  a  ludicrous  sound  as  if  all  the  people  had  to 
do  to  get  their  crooked  backs  straightened  out  was  to  come 
round  to  his  synagogue  during  the  week.  He  forgot  that 
this  poor  old  woman  had  been  coming  for  eighteen  years 
with  no  result.  He  was  angry  with  Jesus,  but  he  spoke  to 
the  multitude  (toi  ochloi).  Ought  (dei).  Really,  must,  nec- 
essary, a  direct  hit  at  Jesus  who  had  "worked"  on  the  sab- 
bath in  healing  this  old  woman.  And  not  (kai  me).  Instead 
of  kai  ou,  because  in  the  imperative  clause. 

15.  The  Lord  answered  him  (apekrithe  de  auibi  ho  Kurios). 
Note  use  of  "the  Lord"  of  Jesus  again  in  Luke's  narrative. 
Jesus  answered  the  ruler  of  the  synagogue  who  had  spoken 
to  the  crowd,  but  about  Jesus.  It  was  a  crushing  and  over- 
whelming reply.  Hypocrites  (hupokritai) .  This  pretentious 
faultfinder  and  all  who  agree  with  him.  Each  of  you  (hekas- 
tos  humon).  An  argumentum  ad  hominen.  These  very 
critics  of  Jesus  cared  too  much  for  an  ox  or  an  ass  to  leave 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  189 

it  all  the  sabbath  without  water.  Stall  (phatnes).  Old 
word,  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Luke  2:7,  12,  16  the  manger 
where  the  infant  Jesus  was  placed.  To  watering  (potizei). 
Old  verb,  causative,  to  give  to  drink. 

16.  Daughter  of  Abraham  (thugatera  Abraam).  Triple 
argument,  human  being  and  not  an  ox  or  ass,  woman, 
daughter  of  Abraham  (Jewess),  besides  being  old  and  ill. 
Ought  not  (ouk  edei).  Imperfect  active.  Of  necessity.  Jesus 
simply  had  to  heal  her  even  if  on  the  sabbath.  Whom  Satan 
bound  (hen  edesen  ho  Satanas).  Definite  statement  that  her 
disease  was  due  to  Satan. 

17.  Were  put  to  shame  (kateischunonto) .  Imperfect  pas- 
sive of  kataischuno,  old  verb,  to  make  ashamed,  make  one 
feel  ashamed.  Passive  here,  to  blush  with  shame  at  their 
predicament.  Rejoiced  (echairen).  Imperfect  active.  Sharp 
contrast  in  the  emotions  of  the  two  groups.  Were  done 
(ginomenois) .  Present  middle  participle,  were  continually 
being  done. 

18.  He  said  therefore  (elegen  oun).  It  is  not  clear  to  what 
to  refer  "therefore,"  whether  to  the  case  of  the  woman  in 
verse  11,  the  enthusiasm  of  the  crowd  in  verse  17,  or  to 
something  not  recorded  by  Luke. 

19.  A  grain  of  mustard  seed  (kokkoi  sinapeos).  Either 
the  sinapis  nigra  or  the  salvadora  persica,  both  of  which 
have  small  seeds  and  grow  to  twelve  feet  at  times.  The 
Jews  had  a  proverb:  "Small  as  a  mustard  seed."  Given 
by  Mark  4:30-32  and  Matt.  13  :3if.  in  the  first  great  group 
of  parables,  but  just  the  sort  to  be  repeated.  Cast  into  his 
own  garden  (ebalen  eis  kepon  heautou).  Different  from 
"earth"  (Mark)  or  "field"  (Matthew.)"  Kepos,  old  word 
for  garden,  only  here  in  the  N.T.  and  John  19:1,  26;  19:41. 
Became  a  tree  (egeneto  eis  dendron).  Common  Hebraism, 
very  frequent  in  LXX,  only  in  Luke  in  the  N.T.,  but  does 
appear  in  Koine  though  rare  in  papyri;  this  use  of  eis  after 
words  like  ginomai.    It  is  a  translation  Hebraism  in  Luke. 


190      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Lodged    (kateskenbsen).      Mark    and   Matthew    have    kata- 
skenoin  infinitive  of  the  same  verb,  to  make  tent  (or  nest). 

20.  Whereunto  shall  I  liken?  (Tini  homoioso;).  This 
question  alone  in  Luke  here  as  in  verse  18.  But  the  parable 
is  precisely  like  that  in  Matt.  13:33,  which  see  for  details. 

22.  Journeying  on  unto  Jerusalem  (poreian  poioumenos  eis 
Ierosoluma).  Making  his  way  to  Jerusalem.  Note  tenses 
here  of  continued  action,  and  distributive  use  of  kata  with 
cities  and  villages.  This  is  the  second  of  the  journeys  to 
Jerusalem  in  this  later  ministry  corresponding  to  that  in 
John  11. 

23.  Are  they  jew  that  be  saved?  (ei  oligoi  hoi  sozomenoi;). 
Note  use  of  ei  as  an  interrogative  which  can  be  explained  as 
ellipsis  or  as  ei  =  e  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  1024).  This  was 
an  academic  theological  problem  with  the  rabbis,  the  num- 
ber of  the  elect. 

24.  Strive  (agonize sthe).  Jesus  makes  short  shrift  of  the 
question.  He  includes  others  (present  middle  plural  of 
agbnizomai,  common  verb,  our  agonize).  Originally  it  was 
to  contend  for  a  prize  in  the  games.  The  kindred  word 
agbnia  occurs  of  Christ's  struggle  in  Gethsemane  (Luke  22: 
44).  The  narrow  gate  appears  also  in  Matt.  7:13,  only  there 
it  is  an  outside  gate  [pules)  while  here  it  is  the  entrance  to 
the  house,  "the  narrow  door"  (thuras). 

25.  When  once  (aph*  hou  an).  Possibly  to  be  connected 
without  break  with  the  preceding  verse  (so  Westcott  and 
Hort),  though  Bruce  argues  for  two  parables  here,  the 
former  (verse  24)  about  being  in  earnest,  while  this  one 
(verses  25-30)  about  not  being  too  late.  The  two  points  are 
here  undoubtedly.  It  is  an  awkward  construction,  aph> 
hou  =  apo  toutou  hote  with  an  and  the  aorist  subjunctive 
(egerthei  and  apokleisei).  See  Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  978. 
Hath  shut  to  (apokleisei),  first  aorist  active  subjunctive  of 
apokleio,  old  verb,  but  only  here  in  the  N.T.  Note  effective 
aorist  tense  and  perfective  use  of  apo,  slammed  the  door  fast. 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  191 

And  ye  begin  (kai  arxesthe).  First  aorist  middle  subjunctive 
of  archomai  with  apK  hou  an  like  egerthei  and  apokleisei. 
To  stand  (hestanai).  Second  perfect  active  infinitive  of 
histemi,  intransitive  tense  and  to  knock  (kai  krouein).  Pres- 
ent active  infinitive,  to  keep  on  knocking.  Open  to  us 
(anoixon  hemin).  First  aorist  active  imperative,  at  once  and 
urgent.  He  shall  say  (erei).  Future  active  of  eipon  (defective 
verb).    This  is  probably  the  apodosis  of  the  aph'  hou  clause. 

26.  Shall  ye  begin  (arxesthe).  Future  middle,  though  West- 
cott  and  Hort  put  arxesthe  (aorist  middle  subjunctive  of 
archomai)  and  in  that  case  a  continuation  of  the  apK  hou 
construction.  It  is  a  difficult  passage  and  the  copyists  had 
trouble  with  it.  In  thy  presence  (enopion  sou).  As  guests  or 
hosts  or  neighbours  some  claim,  or  the  master  of  the  house. 
It  is  grotesque  to  claim  credit  because  Christ  taught  in  their 
streets,  but  they  are  hard  run  for  excuses  and  claims. 

27.  I  know  not  whence  ye  are  (ouk  oida  pothen  este).  This 
blunt  statement  cuts  the  matter  short  and  sweeps  away  the 
flimsy  cobwebs.  Acquaintance  with  Christ  in  the  flesh  does 
not  open  the  door.  Jesus  quotes  Psa.  8:9  as  in  Matt.  7:23, 
there  as  in  the  LXX,  here  with  pantes  ergatai  adikias,  there 
with  hoi  ergazomenoi  ten  anomian.  But  aposiete  (second 
aorist  active  imperative)  here,  and  there  apochoreite  (present 
active  imperative). 

28.  There  (ekei).  Out  there,  outside  the  house  whence 
they  are  driven.  When  ye  shall  see  (hotan  opsesthe).  First 
aorist  middle  subjunctive  (of  a  late  aorist  bpsamen)  of  horao, 
though  opsesthe  (future  middle)  in  margin  of  Westcott  and 
Hort,  unless  we  admit  here  a  "future"  subjunctive  like 
Byzantine  Greek  (after  Latin).  And  yourselves  cast  forth 
without  (humas  de  ekballomenous  exo).  Present  passive 
participle,  continuous  action,  "you  being  cast  out"  with  the 
door  shut.    See  on  Matt.  8:1  if.  for  this  same  picture. 

29.  Shall  sit  down  (anaklithesontai).  Future  passive  in- 
dicative third  plural.    Recline,  of  course,  is  the  figure  of  this 


192      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

heavenly  banquet.  Jesus  does  not  mean  that  these  will  be 
saved  in  different  ways,  but  only  that  many  will  come  from 
all  the  four  quarters  of  the  earth. 

30.  Last  (eschatoi).  This  saying  was  repeated  many  times 
(Matt.  i9:3o  =  Mark  10:31;  Matt.  20:16). 

31.  In  that  very  hour  (en  autei  tei  hbrai).  Luke's  favourite 
notation  of  time.  Pharisees  (Pharisaioi).  Here  we  see  the 
Pharisees  in  a  new  role,  warning  Jesus  against  the  machina- 
tions of  Herod,  when  they  are  plotting  themselves. 

32.  That  fox  (tei  alopeki  tautei).  This  epithet  for  the  cun- 
ning and  cowardice  of  Herod  shows  clearly  that  Jesus  un- 
derstood the  real  attitude  and  character  of  the  man  who  had 
put  John  the  Baptist  to  death  and  evidently  wanted  to  get 
Jesus  into  his  power  in  spite  of  his  superstitious  fears  that 
he  might  be  John  the  Baptist  redivivus.  The  message  of 
Jesus  means  that  he  is  independent  of  the  plots  and  schemes 
of  both  Herod  and  the  Pharisees.  The  preacher  is  often  put 
in  a  tight  place  by  politicians  who  are  quite  willing  to  see  him 
shorn  of  all  real  power.  Cures  (iaseis).  Old  word,  but  in  the 
N.T.  only  here  and  Acts  4:22,  30.  /  am  perfected  (teleioumai) . 
Present  passive  indicative  of  teleioo,  old  verb  from  teleios,  to 
bring  to  perfection,  frequent  in  the  N.T.  Used  in  Heb.  2:  10 
of  the  Father's  purpose  in  the  humanity  of  Christ.  Perfect 
humanity  is  a  process  and  Jesus  was  passing  through  that, 
without  sin,  but  not  without  temptation  and  suffering.  It 
is  the  prophetic  present  with  the  sense  of  the  future. 

33.  The  day  following  (tei  echomenei).  See  Acts  20:15. 
The  same  as  the  third  day  in  verse  32.  A  proverb.  It  cannot 
be  (ouk  endechetai).  It  is  not  accepted,  it  is  inadmissible. 
A  severely  ironical  indictment  of  Jerusalem.  The  shadow 
of  the  Cross  reaches  Perea  where  Jesus  now  is  as  he  starts 
toward  Jerusalem. 

34.  0  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem  (Ierousalem,  lerousalem). 
In  Matt.  23 :37f.  Jesus  utters  a  similar  lament  over  Jerusa- 
lem.   The  connection  suits  both  there  and  here,  but  Plummer 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  193 

considers  it  "rather  a  violent  hypothesis"  to  suppose  that 
Jesus  spoke  these  words  twice.  It  is  possible,  of  course, 
though  not  like  Luke's  usual  method,  that  he  put  the  words 
here  because  of  the  mention  of  Jerusalem.  In  itself  it  is  not 
easy  to  see  why  Jesus  could  not  have  made  the  lament  both 
here  and  in  Jerusalem.  The  language  of  the  apostrophe  is 
almost  identical  in  both  places  (Luke  13:34^  =  Matt.  23: 
37-39)-  For  details  see  on  Matthew.  In  Luke  we  have 
episunaxai  (late  first  aorist  active  infinitive)  and  in  Matthew 
episunagagein  (second  aorist  active  infinitive),  both  from 
episunago,  a  double  compound  of  late  Greek  (Polybius). 
Both  have  "How  often  would  I"  (posakis  ethelesa).  How 
often  did  I  wish.  Clearly  showing  that  Jesus  made  repeated 
visits  to  Jerusalem  as  we  know  otherwise  only  from  John's 
Gospel.  Even  as  (hon  tropon).  Accusative  of  general  refer- 
ence and  in  Matt.  23:37  also.  Incorporation  of  antecedent 
into  the  relative  clause.  Brood  (nossian)  is  in  Luke  while 
Matthew  has  chickens  (nossia),  both  late  forms  for  the  older 
neossia.  The  adjective  desolate  (eremos)  is  wanting  in  Luke 
13:35  and  is  doubtful  in  Matt.  23:39. 


CHAPTER  XIV 

1.  When  he  went  {en  toi  elthein  auton).  Luke's  favourite 
temporal  clause  =  "on  the  going  as  to  him."  That  (kai). 
Another  common  Lukan  idiom,  kai  =  hoti  after  egeneto,  like 
Hebrew  wav.  They  (autoi).  Emphatic.  Were  watching 
(esanparateroumenoi).  Periphrastic  imperfect  middle.  Note 
force  of  autoi,  middle  voice,  and  para-.  They  were  them- 
selves watching  on  the  side  (on  the  sly),  watching  insidiously, 
with  evil  intent  as  in  Mark  3:2  (active). 

2.  Which  had  the  dropsy  (hudropikos) .  Late  and  medical 
word  from  hudor  (water),  one  who  has  internal  water  (hu- 
drops) .  Here  only  in  the  N.T.  and  only  example  of  the  disease 
healed  by  Jesus  and  recorded. 

3.  Answering  (apokritheis).  First  aorist  passive  participle 
without  the  passive  meaning.  Jesus  answered  the  thoughts 
of  those  mentioned  in  verse  1.  Here  "lawyers  and  Phar- 
isees" are  treated  as  one  class  with  one  article  (tous)  whereas 
in  7:30  they  are  treated  as  two  classes  with  separate  articles. 
Or  not  (e  ou) .  The  dilemma  forestalled  any  question  by  them. 
They  held  their  peace  (hesuchasan).  Ingressive  aorist  active 
of  old  verb  hesuchazo.  They  became  silent,  more  so  than 
before. 

4.  Took  him  (epilabomenos).  Second  aorist  middle  par- 
ticiple of  epilambano,  an  old  verb,  only  in  the  middle  in  the 
N.T.  It  is  not  redundant  use,  "took  and  healed,"  but  "took 
hold  of  him  and  healed  him."  Only  instance  in  the  N.T.  of 
its  use  in  a  case  of  healing.  Let  him  go  (apelusen).  Probably, 
dismissed  from  the  company  to  get  him  away  from  these 
critics. 

5.  An  ass  or  an  ox  (onos  e  bous).  But  Westcott  and  Hort 
huios  e  bous  {a  son  or  an  ox).    The  manuscripts  are  much 

194 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  195 

divided  between  huios  (son)  and  onos  (ass)  which  in  the  ab- 
breviated uncials  looked  much  alike  (TC,  OC)  and  were 
much  alike.  The  sentence  in  the  Greek  reads  literally  thus: 
Whose  ox  or  ass  of  you  shall  fall  (peseitai,  future  middle  of 
pipio)  into  a  well  and  he  (the  man)  will  not  straightway  draw 
him  up  (anaspasei,  future  active  of  anaspao)  on  the  sabbath 
day?  The  very  form  of  the  question  is  a  powerful  argument 
and  puts  the  lawyers  and  the  Pharisees  hopelessly  on  the 
defensive. 

6.  Could  not  answer  again  (ouk  ischusan  antapokrithenai). 
Did  not  have  strength  to  answer  back  or  in  turn  (anti-)  as 
in  Rom.  9:20.  They  could  not  take  up  the  argument  and 
were  helpless.  They  hated  to  admit  that  they  cared  more 
for  an  ox  or  ass  or  even  a  son  than  for  this  poor  dropsical 
man. 

7.  A  parable  for  those  which  were  bidden  {pros  tous  kekle- 
menous  parabolen).  Perfect  passive  participle  of  kaleo,  to 
call,  to  invite.  This  parable  is  for  the  guests  who  were  there 
and  who  had  been  watching  Jesus.  When  he  marked  (epe- 
chon).  Present  active  participle  of  epecho  with  ton  noun 
understood,  holding  the  mind  upon  them,  old  verb  and 
common.  They  chose  out  (exelegonto).  Imperfect  middle, 
were  picking  out  for  themselves.  The  chief  seats  [tas  proto- 
klisias).  The  first  reclining  places  at  the  table.  Jesus  con- 
demned the  Pharisees  later  for  this  very  thing  (Matt.  23 :6  = 
Mark  12:39  =  Luke  20:46).  On  a  couch  holding  three  the 
middle  place  was  the  chief  one.  At  banquets  today  the  name 
of  the  guests  are  usually  placed  at  the  plates.  The  place 
next  to  the  host  on  the  right  was  then,  as  now,  the  post  of 
honour. 

8.  Sit  not  down  (me  kataklitheis) .  First  aorist  (ingressive) 
passive  subjunctive  of  kataklino,  to  recline.  Old  verb,  but 
peculiar  to  Luke  in  the  N.T.  (7:36;  9:14;  14:8;  24:30).  Be 
bidden  (ei  keklemenos).  Periphrastic  perfect  passive  sub- 
junctive of  kaleo  after  me  pote. 


196      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

9.  And  say  {kai  erei).  Changes  to  future  indicative  with 
me  pote  as  in  12:58.  Shalt  begin  with  shame  {arxei  meta 
aischunes).  The  moment  of  embarrassment.  To  take  the 
lowest  place  {ton  eschaton  topon  katechein).  To  hold  down 
the  lowest  place,  all  the  intermediate  ones  being  taken. 

10.  Sit  down  (anapese).  Second  aorist  active  imperative 
of  anapipto,  to  fall  up  or  back,  to  lie  back  or  down.  Late 
Greek  word  for  anaklinb  (cf.  kataklino  in  verse  8).  He  that 
hath  bidden  thee  {ho  keklekos  se).  Perfect  active  participle  as 
in  verse  12  {toi  keklekoti)  with  which  compare  ho  kalesas  in 
verse  9  (first  aorist  active  participle).  He  may  say  {erei). 
The  future  indicative  with  hina  does  occur  in  the  KoinS 
(papyri)  and  so  in  the  N.T.  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  984). 
Go  up  higher  {prosanabethi).  Second  aorist  active  imperative 
second  singular  of  prosanabaino,  an  old  double  compound 
verb,  but  here  cnly  in  the  N.T.  Probably,  "Come  up 
higher,"  because  the  call  comes  from  the  host  and  because 
of  pros. 

11.  Shall  be  humbled  {tapeinbthesetai).  First  future  pas- 
sive. One  of  the  repeated  sayings  of  Jesus  (18:14;  Matt. 
23:12). 

12.  A  dinner  or  a  supper  {ariston  e  deipnon).  More  ex- 
actly, a  breakfast  or  a  dinner  with  distinction  between  them 
as  already  shown.  This  is  a  parable  for  the  host  as  one  had 
just  been  given  for  the  guests,  though  Luke  does  not  term 
this  a  parable.  Call  not  {me  phbnei).  Me  and  the  present 
imperative  active,  prohibiting  the  habit  of  inviting  oaly 
Iriends. Itis  the  exclusive  invitation  of  such  guests  that 
Jesus  condemns.  There  is  a  striking  parallel  to  this  in 
Plato's  Phaedrus  233.  Recompense  {antapodoma) .  In  the 
form  of  a  return  invitation.  Like  anti  in  "bid  thee  again" 
{antikalesosin) . 

13.  When  thou  makest  a  feast  {hotan  dochen  poieis).  Hotan 
and  the  present  subjunctive  in  an  indefinite  temporal  clause. 
Doche  means  reception  as  in  Luke  5:29,  late  word,  only  in 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  197 

these  two  passages  in  the  N.T.  Note  absence  of  article  with 
these  adjectives  in  the  Greek  (poor  people,  maimed  folks, 
lame  people,  blind  people). 

14.  To  recompense  thee  (antapodounai  sot).  Second  aorist 
active  infinitive  of  this  old  and  common  double  compound 
verb,  to  give  back  in  return.  The  reward  will  come  at  the 
resurrection  if  not  before  and  thou  shalt  be  happy. 

15.  Blessed  (makarios) .  Happy,  same  word  in  the  Beati- 
tudes of  Jesus  (Matt.  5 :3ff.)-  This  pious  platitude  whether 
due  to  ignorance  or  hypocrisy  was  called  forth  by  Christ's 
words  about  the  resurrection.  It  was  a  common  figure  among 
the  rabbis,  the  use  of  a  banquet  for  the  bliss  of  heaven.  This 
man  may  mean  that  this  is  a  prerogative  of  the  Pharisees. 
He  assumed  complacently  that  he  will  be  among  the  num- 
ber of  the  blest.  Jesus  himself  uses  this  same  figure  of  the 
spiritual  banquet  for  heavenly  bliss  (Luke  22:29).  Shall  eat 
(phagetai).  Future  middle  from  esthio,  defective  verb,  from 
stem  of  the  aorist  (ephagon)  like  edomai  of  the  old  Greek. 

16.  Made  {epoiei).  Imperfect  active,  was  on  the  point  of 
making  (inchoative).  Great  supper  {deipnon).  Or  dinner, 
a  formal  feast.  Jesus  takes  up  the  conventional  remark  of 
the  guest  and  by  this  parable  shows  that  such  an  attitude 
was  no  guarantee  of  godliness  (Bruce).  This  parable  of  the 
marriage  of  the  King's  son  (Luke  14:15-24)  has  many  points 
of  likeness  to  the  parable  of  the  wedding  garment  (Matt. 
22:1-14)  and  as  many  differences  also.  The  occasions  are 
very  different,  that  in  Matthew  grows  out  of  the  attempt  to 
arrest  Jesus  while  this  one  is  due  to  the  pious  comment  of  a 
guest  at  the  feast  and  the  wording  is  also  quite  different. 
Hence  we  conclude  that  they  are  distinct  parables.  And  he 
bade  many  {kai  ekalesen  pollous).  Aorist  active,  a  distinct 
and  definite  act  following  the  imperfect  epoiei. 

17.  His  servant  {ton  doulon  autou).  His  bondservant. 
Vocator  or  Summoner  (Esth.  5:8;  6:14).  This  second  sum- 
mons was  the  custom  then  as  now  with  wealthy  Arabs. 


198      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Tristram  {Eastern  Customs,  p.  82)  says:  "To  refuse  the 
second  summons  would  be  an  insult,  which  is  equivalent 
among  the  Arab  tribes  to  a  declaration  of  war." 

18.  With  one  consent  (apo  mias).  Some  feminine  sub- 
stantive like  gnomes  or  psuches  has  to  be  supplied.  This 
precise  idiom  occurs  nowhere  else.  It  looked  like  a  con- 
spiracy for  each  one  in  his  turn  did  the  same  thing.  To  make 
excuse  {paraiteisthai).  This  common  Greek  verb  is  used  in 
various  ways,  to  ask  something  from  one  (Mark  15:6),  to 
deprecate  or  ask  to  avert  (Heb.  12:19),  to  refuse  or  decline 
(Acts  25:11),  to  shun  or  to  avoid  (II  Tim.  2:23),  to  beg 
pardon  or  to  make  excuses  for  not  doing  or  to  beg  (Luke 
14:186*".).  All  these  ideas  are  variations  of  aiteo,  to  ask  in  the 
middle  voice  with  para  in  composition.  The  first  {ho  protos). 
In  order  of  time.  There  are  three  of  the  "many"  ("all"), 
whose  excuses  are  given,  each  more  flimsy  than  the  other.  / 
must  needs  {echo  anagken).  I  have  necessity.  The  land 
would  still  be  there,  a  strange  "necessity."  Have  me  excused 
{eche  me  pareitemenon).  An  unusual  idiom  somewhat  like 
the  English  perfect  with  the  auxiliary  "have"  and  the  mod- 
ern Greek  idiom  with  echo,  but  certainly  not  here  a 
Greek  periphrasis  for  pareiteso.  This  perfect  passive  parti- 
ciple is  predicate  and  agrees  with  me.  See  a  like  idiom  in 
Mark  3:1;  Luke  12:19  (Robertson,  Grammar,  pp.  902L). 
The  Latin  had  a  similar  idiom,  habe  me  excusatum.  Same 
language  in  verse  19. 

19.  To  prove  them  {dokimasai  auto).  He  could  have  tested 
them  before  buying.  The  oxen  would  not  run  away  or  be 
stolen. 

20.  /  cannot  come  {ou  dunamai  elthein).  Less  polite  than 
the  others  but  a  more  plausible  pretence  if  he  wanted  to  make 
it  so.  The  law  excused  a  newly  married  man  from  war 
(Deut.  24:5),  "but  not  from  social  courtesy"  (Ragg).  The 
new  wife  would  probably  have  been  glad  to  go  with  him  to 
the  feast  if  asked.     But  see  I  Cor.  7:33.    There  is  here  as 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  199 

often  a  sharp  difference  between  the  excuses  offered  and  the 
reasons  behind  them. 

21.  Being  angry  (orgistheis).  First  aorist  (ingressive) 
passive,  becoming  angry.  Quickly  (tachebs).  The  dinner  is 
ready  and  no  time  is  to  be  lost.  The  invitation  goes  still 
to  those  in  the  city.  Streets  and  lanes  (tas  plateias  kai  rhumas) . 
Broadways  and  runways  (broad  streets  and  narrow  lanes). 
Maimed  (anapeirous).  So  Westcott  and  Hort  for  the  old 
word  anaperous,  due  to  itacism  (ei=e  in  pronunciation). 
The  word  is  compounded  of  ana  and  peros,  lame  all  the  way 

up- 

22.  And  yet  there  is  room  {kai  eti  topos  estin).  The  Master 
had  invited  "many"  (verse  16)  who  had  all  declined.  The 
servant  knew  the  Master  wished  the  places  to  be  filled. 

23.  The  highways  and  hedges  (tas  hodous  kai  phragmous). 
The  public  roads  outside  the  city  of  Judaism  just  as  the 
streets  and  lanes  were  inside  the  city.  The  heathen  are  to  be 
invited  this  time.  Hedges  is  fenced  in  places  from  phrasso, 
to  fence  in  (Rom.  3:19).  Compel  (anagkason).  First  aorist 
active  imperative  of  anagkazo,  from  anagke  (verse  18).  By 
persuasion  of  course.  There  is  no  thought  of  compulsory  sal- 
vation. "Not  to  use  force,  but  to  constrain  them  against  the 
reluctance  which  such  poor  creatures  would  feel  at  accept- 
ing the  invitation  of  a  great  lord"  (Vincent).  As  examples 
of  such  "constraint"  in  this  verb  see  Matt.  14:22;  Acts 
26:11;  Gal.  6:12.  That  my  house  may  be  filled  (hina  gemisthei 
mou  ho  oikos).  First  aorist  passive  subjunctive  of  gemizo, 
to  fill  full,  old  verb  from  gemo,  to  be  full.  Effective  aorist. 
Subjunctive  with  hina  in  final  clause.  The  Gentiles  are  to 
take  the  place  that  the  Jews  might  have  had  (Rom.  11:25). 
Bengel  says:  Nee  natura  nee  gratia  patitur  vacuum. 

24.  My  supper  (mou  tou  deipnou).  Here  it  is  still  the 
Master  of  the  feast  who  is  summing  up  his  reasons  for  his 
conduct.  We  do  not  have  to  say  that  Jesus  shuts  the  door 
now  in  the  face  of  the  Jews  who  may  turn  to  him. 


200      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

25.  And  he  turned  {kai  strapheis).  Second  aorist  passive 
participle  of  strepho,  common  verb.  It  is  a  dramatic  act  on 
the  part  of  Jesus,  a  deliberate  effort  to  check  the  wild  and 
unthinking  enthusiasm  of  the  crowds  who  followed  just  to 
be  following.  Note  "many  multitudes"  {ochloi  polloi)  and 
the  imperfect  tense  suneporeuonto,  were  going  along  with 
him. 

26.  Hateth  not  {ou  misei).  An  old  and  very  strong  verb 
miseo,  to  hate,  detest.  The  orientals  use  strong  language 
where  cooler  spirits  would  speak  of  preference  or  indifference. 
But  even  so  Jesus  does  not  here  mean  that  one  must  hate  his 
father  or  mother  of  necessity  or  as  such,  for  Matt.  15 14  proves 
the  opposite.  It  is  only  where  the  element  of  choice  comes 
in  (cf.  Matt.  6:24)  as  it  sometimes  does,  when  father  or 
mother  opposes  Christ.  Then  one  must  not  hesitate.  The 
language  here  is  more  sharply  put  than  in  Matt.  10:37.  The 
ou  here  coalesces  with  the  verb  misei  in  this  conditional 
clause  of  the  first  class  determined  as  fulfilled.  It  is  the 
language  of  exaggerated  contrast,  it  is  true,  but  it  must  not 
be  watered  down  till  the  point  is  gone.  In  mentioning  "and 
wife"  Jesus  has  really  made  a  comment  on  the  excuse  given 
in  verse  20  (I  married  a  wife  and  so  I  am  not  able  to  come). 
And  his  own  life  also  (eti  te  kai  ten  psuchen  heautou).  Note 
te  kai,  both — and.  "The  te  (B  L)  binds  all  the  particulars  into 
one  bundle  of  renuncianda"  (Bruce).  Note  this  same  triple 
group  of  conjunctions  {eti  te  kai)  in  Acts  21:28,  "And  more- 
over also,"  "even  going  as  far  as  his  own  life."  Martyrdom 
should  be  an  ever-present  possibility  to  the  Christian,  not  to 
be  courted,  but  not  to  be  shunned.  Love  for  Christ  takes 
precedence  "over  even  the  elemental  instinct  of  self-preser- 
vation" (Ragg). 

27.  His  own  cross  {ton  stauron  heautou).  This  familiar 
figure  we  have  had  already  (Luke  9:23;  Mark  8:34;  Matt. 
10:38;  16:24).  Each  follower  has  a  cross  which  he  must  bear 
as  Jesus  did  his.     Bastazb  is  used  of  cross  bearing  in  the  N.T. 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  201 

only  here  (figuratively)  and  John  19:17  literally  of  Jesus. 
Crucifixion  was  common  enough  in  Palestine  since  the  days 
of  Antiochus  Epiphanes  and  Alexander  Jannaeus. 

28.  Build  a  tower  (purgon  oikodomesai).  A  common 
metaphor,  either  a  tower  in  the  city  wall  like  that  by  the 
Pool  of  Siloam  (Luke  13:4)  or  a  watchtower  in  a  vineyard 
(Matt.  21:33)  or  a  tower-shaped  building  for  refuge  or  or- 
nament as  here.  This  parable  of  the  rash  builder  has  the 
lesson  of  counting  the  cost.  Sit  down  (kathisas).  Attitude  of 
deliberation.  First  {proton).  First  things  first.  So  in  verse 
31.  Count  (psephizei).  Common  verb  in  late  writers,  but 
only  here  and  Rev.  13:18  in  the  N.T.  The  verb  is  from 
psephos,  a  stone,  which  was  used  in  voting  and  so  counting. 
Calculate  is  from  the  Latin  calculus,  a  pebble.  To  vote  was 
to  cast  a  pebble  (tithemi psephon).  Luke  has  Paul  using  "de- 
posit a  pebble"  for  casting  his  vote  (Acts  26:10).  The  cost 
(ten  dapanen).  Old  and  common  word,  but  here  only  in  the 
N.T.  from  dapto,  to  tear,  consume,  devour.  Expense  is 
something  which  eats  up  one's  resources.  Whether  he  hath 
wherewith  to  complete  it  (ei  echei  eis  apartismon).  If  he  has 
anything  for  completion  of  it.  Apartismon  is  a  rare  and  late 
word  (in  the  papyri  and  only  here  in  the  N.T.).  It  is  from 
apartizo,  to  finish  off  (ap-  and  artizo  like  our  articulate),  to 
make  even  or  square.    Cf.  exertismenos  in  II  Tim.  3:17. 

29.  Lest  haply  (hina  mepote).  Double  final  particles  (posi- 
tive and  negative  with  addition  of  pote).  Used  here  with 
aorist  middle  subjunctive  in  arxontai  (begin).  When  he  hath 
laid  .  .  .  and  was  not  able  (thentos  autou  .  .  .  kai  me  ischu- 
ontos)  to  finish  (ektelesai).  First  aorist  active  infinitive. 
Note  perfective  use  of  ek,  to  finish  out  to  the  end.  Two 
genitive  absolutes,  first,  second  aorist  active  participle 
thentos;  second,  present  active  participle  ischuontos.  To 
mock  him  (autoi  empaizein).  An  old  verb,  em-paizb,  to  play 
like  a  child  (pais),  at  or  with,  to  mock,  scoff  at,  to  trifle 
with  like  Latin  illudere. 


202      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

30.  This  man  (houtos  ho  anthropos).  This  fellow,  contemp- 
tuous or  sarcastic  use  of  houtos. 

31.  To  encounter  (sunbalein).  Second  aorist  active  in- 
finitive of  sunballo,  old  and  common  verb,  to  throw  or  bring 
together,  to  dispute,  to  clash  in  war  as  here.  Another  king 
(heterbi  basilei),  to  grapple  with  another  king  in  war  or  for  war 
(eis  polemon).  Associative  instrumental  case.  Take  counsel 
(bouleusetai) .  Future  middle  indicative  of  old  and  common 
verb  bouleuo,  from  boule,  will,  counsel.  The  middle  means  to 
take  counsel  with  oneself,  to  deliberate,  to  ponder.  With  ten 
thousand  {en  deka  chiliasin).  Literally,  in  ten  thousand. 
See  this  so-called  instrumental  use  of  en  in  Jude  14. 
Equipped  in  or  with  ten  thousand.  See  Luke  1:17.  Note 
meta  eikosi  chiliadon  just  below  (midst  of  twenty  thousand). 
To  meet  (hupantesai).  Common  verb  (like  apantao)  from 
antao  (anta,  end,  face  to  face,  from  which  anti)  with  preposi- 
tion hupo  (or  apo),  to  go  to  meet.  Here  it  has  a  military 
meaning. 

32.  Or  else  {ei  de  mege).  Same  idiom  in  5  '.^6.  Luke  is  fond 
of  this  formula.  An  ambassage  (presbeian) .  Old  and  com- 
mon word  for  the  office  of  ambassador,  composed  of  old  men 
(presbeis)  like  Japanese  Elder  Statesmen  who  are  supposed 
to  possess  wisdom.  In  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Luke  19:14. 
Asketh  conditions  of  peace  (erbtai  pros  eirenen).  The  use  of 
erotao  in  this  sense  of  beg  or  petition  is  common  in  the  papyri 
and  Koine  generally.  The  original  use  of  asking  a  question 
survives  also.  The  text  is  uncertain  concerning  pros  eirenen 
which  means  with  erotao,  to  ask  negotiations  for  peace.  In 
B  we  have  eis  instead  of  pros  like  verse  28.  Most  MSS.  have 
ta  before  pros  or  eis,  but  not  in  Aleph  and  B.  It  is  possible 
that  the  ta  was  omitted  because  of  preceding  tai  (homoeote- 
leuton),  but  the  sense  is  the  same.  See  Rom.  14:19  ta  tes 
eirenes,  the  things  of  peace,  which  concern  or  look  towards 
peace,  the  preliminaries  of  peace. 

33.  Renounceth  not  {ouk  apotassetai).    Old  Greek  word  to 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  203 

set  apart  as  in  a  military  camp,  then  in  the  middle  voice  to 
separate  oneself  from,  say  good-bye  to  (Luke  9:61),  to  re- 
nounce, forsake,  as  here.  All  that  he  hath  (pasin  tots  heautou 
huparchousin).  Dative  case,  says  good-bye  to  all  his  prop- 
erty, "all  his  own  belongings"  (neuter  plural  participle  used 
as  substantive)  as  named  in  verse  26.  This  verse  gives  the 
principle  in  the  two  parables  of  the  rash  builder  and  of  the 
rash  king.  The  minor  details  do  not  matter.  The  spirit  of 
self-sacrifice  is  the  point. 

35.  Dunghill  (koprian).  Later  word  in  the  Ko ine  vernac- 
ular. Here  only  in  the  N.T.,  though  in  the  LXX.  Men  cast 
it  out  (exo  ballousin  auto).  Impersonal  plural.  This  saying 
about  salt  is  another  of  Christ's  repeated  sayings  (Matt. 
5:13;  Mark  9:50).  Another  repeated  saying  is  the  one  here 
about  having  ears  to  hear  (Luke  8:8;  14:35,  Matt.  11:15, 
I3:43)- 


CHAPTER  XV 

1.  All  the  publicans  and  sinners  (pantes  hoi  telonai  kai  hoi 
hamartoloi).  The  two  articles  separate  the  two  classes  (all 
the  publicans  and  the  sinners).  They  are  sometimes  grouped 
together  (5:30;  Matt.  9:11),  but  not  here.  The  publicans 
are  put  on  the  same  level  with  the  outcasts  or  sinners.  So 
in  verse  2  the  repeated  article  separates  Pharisees  and  scribes 
as  not  quite  one.  The  use  of  "all"  here  may  be  hyperbole 
for  very  many  or  the  reference  may  be  to  these  two  classes 
in  the  particular  place  where  Jesus  was  from  time  to  time. 
Were  drawing  near  unto  him  (esan  auibi  eggizontes).  Peri- 
phrastic imperfect  of  eggizo,  from  eggus  (near),  late  verb. 
For  to  hear  (akouein).  Just  the  present  active  infinitive  of 
purpose. 

2.  Both  .  .  .  and  {te  .  .  .  kai).  United  in  the  complaint. 
Murmured  (diegogguzon) .  Imperfect  active  of  diagogguzo,  late 
Greek  compound  in  the  LXX  and  Byzantine  writers.  In 
the  N.T.  only  here  and  Luke  19:7.  The  force  of  dia  here  is 
probably  between  or  among  themselves.  It  spread  (imper- 
fect tense)  whenever  these  two  classes  came  in  contact  with 
Jesus.  As  the  publicans  and  the  sinners  were  drawing  near  to 
Jesus  just  in  that  proportion  the  Pharisees  and  the  scribes 
increased  their  murmurings.  The  social  breach  is  here  an 
open  yawning  chasm.  This  man  Qioutos).  A  contemptuous 
sneer  in  the  use  of  the  pronoun.  They  spoke  out  openly  and 
probably  pointed  at  Jesus.  Receiveth  (prosdechetai).  Present 
middle  indicative  of  the  common  verb  prosdechomai.  In 
12:36  we  had  it  for  expecting,  here  it  is  to  give  access  to  one- 
self, to  welcome  like  hupedexato  of  Martha's  welcome  to 
Jesus  (Luke  10:38).  The  charge  here  is  that  this  is  the  habit 
of  Jesus.  He  shows  no  sense  of  social  superiority  to  these 
outcasts  (like  the  Hindu  "untouchables"  in  India).     And 

204 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  205 

eateth  with  them  {kai  sunesthiei  autois).  Associative  instru- 
mental case  {autois)  after  sun-  in  composition.  This  is  an 
old  charge  (Luke  5 130)  and  a  much  more  serious  breach  from 
the  standpoint  of  the  Pharisees.  The  implication  is  that 
Jesus  prefers  these  outcasts  to  the  respectable  classes  (the 
Pharisees  and  the  scribes)  because  he  is  like  them  in  character 
and  tastes,  even  with  the  harlots.  There  was  a  sting  in  the 
charge  that  he  was  the  "friend"  {philos)  of  publicans  and 
sinners  (Luke  7:34). 

3.  This  parable  {ten  parabolen  tauten).  The  Parable  of  the 
Lost  Sheep  (15:3-7).  This  is  Christ's  way  of  answering  the 
cavilling  of  these  chronic  complainers.  Jesus  gave  this  same 
parable  for  another  purpose  in  another  connection  (Matt. 
18:12-14).  The  figure  of  the  Good  Shepherd  appears  also  in 
John  10:1-18.  "No  simile  has  taken  more  hold  upon  the 
mind  of  Christendom  "  (Plummer) .  Jesus  champions  the  lost 
and  accepts  the  challenge  and  justifies  his  conduct  by  these 
superb  stories.  "The  three  Episodes  form  a  climax:  The 
Pasture — the  House — the  Home;  the  Herdsman — the  House- 
wife— the  Father;  the  Sheep — the  Treasure — the  Beloved 
Son"  (Ragg). 

4.  In  the  wilderness  {en  tei  eremoi).  Their  usual  pasturage, 
not  a  place  of  danger  or  peril.  It  is  the  owner  of  the  hundred 
sheep  who  cares  so  much  for  the  one  that  is  lost.  He  knows 
each  one  of  the  sheep  and  loves  each  one.  Go  after  that  which 
is  lost  {poreuetai  epi  to  apololos).  The  one  lost  sheep  {apololos, 
second  perfect  active  participle  of  apollumi,  to  destroy,  but 
intransitive,  to  be  lost).  There  is  nothing  more  helpless  than 
a  lost  sheep  except  a  lost  sinner.  The  sheep  went  off  by  its 
own  ignorance  and  folly.  The  use  of  epi  for  the  goal  occurs 
also  in  Matt.  22:9;  Acts  8:26;  9:11.  Until  he  find  it  {hebs 
heurei  auto).  Second  aorist  active  subjunctive  of  heurisko, 
common  verb,  with  heos,  common  Greek  idiom.  He  keeps  on 
going  {poreuetai,  linear  present  middle  indicative)  until  suc- 
cess comes  (effective  aorist,  heurei). 


206      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

5.  On  his  shoulders  (epi  tous  omous  autou).  He  does  it 
himself  in  exuberant  affection  and  of  necessity  as  the  poor 
lost  sheep  is  helpless.  Note  the  plural  shoulders  showing  that 
the  sheep  was  just  back  of  the  shepherd's  neck  and  drawn 
around  by  both  hands.  The  word  for  shoulder  (omos)  is  old 
and  common,  but  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Matt.  23:4. 
Rejoicing  (chairbn).  "There  is  no  upbraiding  of  the  wander- 
ing sheep,  nor  murmuring  at  the  trouble"  (Plummer). 

6.  Rejoice  with  me  (suncharete  moi).  Second  aorist  passive 
of  sunchairo,  an  old  and  common  verb  for  mutual  joy  as  in 
Phil.  2:iyi.  Joy  demands  fellowship.  Same  form  in  verse 
9.  So  the  shepherd  calls  together  (sunkalei,  note  sun  again) 
both  his  friends  and  his  neighbours.  This  picture  of  the  Good 
Shepherd  has  captured  the  eye  of  many  artists  through  the 
ages. 

7.  Over  one  sinner  that  repenteth  (epi  heni  hamartbloi 
metanoounti) .  The  word  sinner  points  to  verse  1.  Repenting 
is  what  these  sinners  were  doing,  these  lost  sheep  brought 
to  the  fold.  The  joy  in  heaven  is  in  contrast  with  the  grum- 
bling Pharisees  and  scribes.  More  than  over  (e  epi).  There  is 
no  comparative  in  the  Greek.  It  is  only  implied  by  a  com- 
mon idiom  like  our  "rather  than."  Which  need  no  repentance 
(hoitines  ou  chreian  echousin  metanoias).  Jesus  does  not 
mean  to  say  that  the  Pharisees  and  the  scribes  do  not  need 
repentance  or  are  perfect.  He  for  the  sake  of  argument 
accepts  their  claims  about  themselves  and  by  their  own 
words  condemns  them  for  their  criticism  of  his  efforts  to 
save  the  lost  sheep.  It  is  the  same  point  that  he  made  against 
them  when  they  criticized  Jesus  and  the  disciples  for  being 
at  Levi's  feast  (Luke  5 13 if.).  They  posed  as  "righteous." 
Very  well,  then.  That  shuts  their  mouths  on  the  point  of 
Christ's  saving  the  publicans  and  sinners. 

8.  Ten  pieces  of  silver  (drachmas  deka).  The  only  instance 
in  the  N.T.  of  this  old  word  for  a  coin  of  65.5  grains  about 
the  value  of  the  common  denarius  (about  eighteen  cents), 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  207 

a  quarter  of  a  Jewish  shekel.  The  double  drachma  (di- 
drachmon)  occurs  in  the  N.T.  only  in  Matt.  17:24.  The  root 
is  from  drassomai,  to  grasp  with  the  hand  (I  Cor.  3  119),  and 
so  a  handful  of  coin.  Ten  drachmas  would  be  equal  to  nearly 
two  dollars,  but  in  purchasing  power  much  more.  Sweep 
(saroi).  A  late  colloquial  verb  saroo  for  the  earlier  sairo,  to 
clear  by  sweeping.  Three  times  in  the  N.T.  (Luke  11:25; 
15:8;  Matt.  12:44).  The  house  was  probably  without  win- 
dows (only  the  door  for  light  and  hence  the  lamp  lit)  and 
probably  also  a  dirt  floor.  Hence  Bengel  says:  non  sine 
pulvere.    This  parable  is  peculiar  to  Luke. 

9.  Her  friends  and  neighbours  (tas  philas  kai  geitonas) .  Note 
single  article  and  female  friends  (feminine  article  and  philas). 
Heos  hou  eurei  here  as  in  verse  4,  only  hou  added  after  heos 
(until  which  time)  as  often.  Which  I  lost  {hen  apblesa). 
First  aorist  active  indicative  of  apollumi.  She  lost  the  coin 
(note  article) .    The  shepherd  did  not  lose  the  one  sheep. 

10.  There  is  joy  (ginetai  char  a).  More  exactly,  joy  arises. 
Futuristic  present  of  ginomai  (cf.  estai  in  verse  7).  In  the 
presence  of  the  angels  of  God  (enopion  ton  aggelon  tou  theou). 
That  is  to  say,  the  joy  of  God  himself.  The  angels  are  in  a 
sense  the  neighbours  of  God. 

11.  Had  (eichen).  Imperfect  active.  Note  echon  (verse 
4),  echousa  (verse  8),  and  now  eichen.  The  self-sacrificing 
care  is  that  of  the  owner  in  each  case.  Here  (verses  II  to  32) 
we  have  the  most  famous  of  all  the  parables  of  Jesus,  the 
Prodigal  Son,  which  is  in  Luke  alone.  We  have  had  the 
Lost  Sheep,  the  Lost  Coin,  and  now  the  Lost  Son.  Bruce 
notes  that  in  the  moral  sphere  there  must  be  self-recovery  to 
give  ethical  value  to  the  rescue  of  the  son  who  wandered 
away.    That  comes  out  beautifully  in  this  allegory. 

12.  The  portion  (to  meros).  The  Jewish  law  alloted  one- 
half  as  much  to  the  younger  son  as  to  the  elder,  that  is  to 
say  one-third  of  the  estate  (Deut.  21:17)  at  tne  death  of  the 
father.    The  father  did  not  have  to  abdicate  in  favour  of  the 


208      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

sons,  but  "this  very  human  parable  here  depicts  the  im- 
patience of  home  restraints  and  the  optimistic  ambition  of 
youth"  (Ragg).  And  he  divided  (ho  de  dieilen).  The  second 
aorist  active  indicative  of  diaireb,  an  old  and  common  verb 
to  part  in  two,  cut  asunder,  divide,  but  in  the  N.T.  only  here 
and  I  Cor.  12:11.  The  elder  son  got  his  share  also  of  the 
"substance"  or  property  or  estate  (tes  ousias),  "the  living" 
(ton  bion)  as  in  Mark  12:44,  not  "life"  as  in  Luke  8:14. 

13.  Not  many  days  after  (met*  ou  pollas  hemeras).  Liter- 
ally, after  not  many  days.  Luke  is  fond  of  this  idiom  (7:6; 
Acts  1:5).  Took  his  journey  (apedemesen).  First  aorist 
active  indicative  of  apodemeb  (from  apodemos,  away  from 
home).  Common  verb.  In  the  N.T.  here  and  Matt.  21 133; 
25:14;  Mark  12:1;  Luke  20:9.  He  burned  all  his  bridges 
behind  him,  gathering  together  all  that  he  had.  Wasted 
(dieskorpisen).  First  aorist  active  indicative  of  diaskorpizo, 
a  somewhat  rare  verb,  the  very  opposite  of  "gathered  to- 
gether" (sunagogbn).  More  exactly  he  scattered  his  prop- 
erty. It  is  the  word  used  of  winnowing  grain  (Matt.  25:24). 
With  riotous  living  (zbn  asbtbs).  Living  dissolutely  or  prof- 
ligately. The  late  adverb  asbtbs  (only  here  in  the  N.T.)  from 
the  common  adjective  asbtos  (a  privative  and  sbzb),  one 
that  cannot  be  saved,  one  who  does  not  save,  a  spendthrift, 
an  abandoned  man,  a  profligate,  a  prodigal.  He  went  the 
limit  of  sinful  excesses.  It  makes  sense  taken  actively  or 
passively  (prodigus  or  perditus),  active  probably  here. 

14.  When  he  had  spent  (dapanesantos  autou).  Genitive  ab- 
solute. The  verb  is  here  used  in  a  bad  sense  as  in  James  4:3. 
See  on  dapane  Luke  14:28.  He  (autos).  Emphasis.  To  be 
in  want  (hustereisthai).  The  verb  is  from  husteros,  behind  or 
later  (comparative).  We  use  "fall  behind"  (Vincent)  of 
one  in  straitened  circumstances.  Plummer  notes  the  coinci- 
dences of  Providence.  The  very  land  was  in  a  famine  when 
the  boy  had  spent  all. 

15.  Joined   himself   (ekollethe).      First   aorist   passive   of 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  209 

kollao,  an  old  verb  to  glue  together,  to  cleave  to.  In  the  N.T. 
only  the  passive  occurs.  He  was  glued  to,  was  joined  to. 
It  is  not  necessary  to  take  this  passive  in  the  middle  re- 
flexive sense.  The  citizens  (ton  politon).  Curiously  enough 
this  common  word  citizen  (polites  from  polis,  city)  is  found 
in  the  N.T.  only  in  Luke's  writings  (15:15;  19:14;  Acts  21  39) 
except  in  Heb.  8:11  where  it  is  quoted  from  Jer.  38:34.  To 
feed  swine  (boskein  choir ous).  A  most  degrading  occupation 
for  anyone  and  for  a  Jew  an  unspeakable  degradation. 

16.  He  would  fain  have  been  filled  (epethumei  chortasthenai) . 
Literally,  he  was  desiring  (longing)  to  be  filled.  Imperfect 
indicative  and  first  aorist  passive  infinitive.  Chortasthenai 
is  from  chortazo  and  that  from  chortos  (grass),  and  so  to  feed 
with  grass  or  with  anything.  Westcott  and  Hort  put  gemisai 
ten  koilian  autou  in  the  margin  (the  Textus  Receptus). 
With  the  husks  (ek  ton  keration).  The  word  occurs  here  alone 
in  the  N.T.  and  is  a  diminutive  of  keras  (horn)  and  so  means 
little  horn.  It  is  used  in  various  senses,  but  here  refers  to  the 
pods  of  the  carob  tree  or  locust  tree  still  common  in  Palestine 
and  around  the  Mediterannean,  so  called  from  the  shape  of 
the  pods  like  little  horns,  Bockshornbaum  in  German  or 
goat's-horn  tree.  The  gelatinous  substance  inside  has  a 
sweetish  taste  and  is  used  for  feeding  swine  and  even  for 
food  by  the  lower  classes.  It  is  sometimes  called  Saint 
John's  Bread  from  the  notion  that  the  Baptist  ate  it  in  the 
wilderness.  No  man  gave  unto  him  (oudeis  edidou  autoi). 
Imperfect  active.  Continued  refusal  of  anyone  to  allow  him 
even  the  food  of  the  hogs. 

17.  But  when  he  came  to  himself  (eis  heauton  de  elthon). 
As  if  he  had  been  far  from  himself  as  he  was  from  home.  As 
a  matter  of  fact  he  had  been  away,  out  of  his  head,  and  now 
began  to  see  things  as  they  really  were.  Plato  is  quoted  by 
Ackerman  (Christian  Element  in  Plato)  as  thinking  of  re- 
demption as  coming  to  oneself.  Hired  servants  (misthioi). 
A  late  word  from  misthos  (hire).      In  the  N.T.  only  in  this 


210      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

chapter.  The  use  of  "many"  here  suggests  a  wealthy  and 
luxurious  home.  Have  bread  enough  and  to  spare  (perisseuon- 
tai  artbn).  Old  verb  from  peris sos  and  that  from  peri 
(around).  Present  passive  here,  "are  surrounded  by  loaves" 
like  a  flood.  /  perish  (ego  de  limbi  hbde  apollumai).  Every 
word  here  counts :  While  I  on  the  other  hand  am  here  perish- 
ing with  hunger.  It  is  the  linear  present  middle  of  apollumi. 
Note  ego  expressed  and  de  of  contrast. 

1 8.  /  will  arise  and  go  (anastas  proreusomai).  This  deter- 
mination is  the  act  of  the  will  after  he  comes  to  himself  and 
sees  his  real  condition.  /  did  sin  (hemarton) .  That  is  the 
hard  word  to  say  and  he  will  say  it  first.  The  word  means  to 
miss  the  mark.  I  shot  my  bolt  and  I  missed  my  aim  (com- 
pare the  high-handed  demand  in  verse  12). 

19.  No  longer  worthy  (ouketi  axios).  Confession  of  the 
facts.  He  sees  his  own  pitiful  plight  and  is  humble.  As  one 
(hos  hena).  The  hired  servants  in  his  father's  house  are  high 
above  him  now. 

20.  To  his  father  (pros  ton  patera  heautou).  Literally,  to 
his  own  father.  He  acted  at  once  on  his  decision.  Yet 
afar  off  (eti  autou  makran  apechontos).  Genitive  absolute. 
Makran  agrees  with  hodon  understood:  While  he  was  yet 
holding  off  a  distant  way.  This  shows  that  the  father  had 
been  looking  for  him  to  come  back  and  was  even  looking  at 
this  very  moment  as  he  came  in  sight.  Ran  (drambn). 
Second  aorist  active  participle  of  the  defective  verb  trecho. 
The  eager  look  and  longing  of  the  father.  Kissed  (katephile- 
jen).  Note  perfective  use  of  kata  kissed  him  much,  kissed 
him  again  and  again.    The  verb  occurs  so  in  the  older  Greek. 

21.  The  son  made  his  speech  of  confession  as  planned, 
but  it  is  not  certain  that  he  was  able  to  finish  as  a  number  of 
early  manuscripts  do  not  have  "Make  me  as  one  of  the  hired 
servants,"  though  Aleph  B  D  do  have  them.  It  is  probable 
that  the  father  interrupted  him  at  this  point  before  he  could 
finish. 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  211 

22.  The  best  robe  {stolen  ten  proten).  Stole  is  an  old  word 
for  a  fine  stately  garment  that  comes  down  to  the  feet  (from 
stello,  to  prepare,  equip),  the  kind  worn  by  kings  (Mark  16:5; 
Luke  22:46).  Literally,  "a  robe  the  first."  But  not  the 
first  that  you  find,  but  the  first  in  rank  and  value,  the  finest 
in  the  house.  This  in  contrast  with  his  shabby  clothes. 
A  ring  (daktulion) .  Common  in  classical  writers  and  the 
LXX,  but  here  only  in  the  N.T.  From  daktulos,  finger. 
See  chrusodaktulios  in  James  2 :2.  Shoes  (hupodemata) .  San- 
dals, "bound  under."  Both  sandals  and  ring  are  marks 
of  the  freeman  as  slaves  were  barefooted. 

23.  The  fatted  calf  {ton  moschon  ton  siteuton).  The  calf 
the  fatted  one.  Siteuton  is  the  verbal  adjective  of  siteub,  to 
feed  with  wheat  {sitos).  The  calf  was  kept  fat  for  festive 
occasions,  possibly  in  the  hope  of  the  son's  return.  Kill 
{thus ate).  Not  as  a  sacrifice,  but  for  the  feast.  Make  merry 
{euphranthbmen) .  First  aorist  passive  subjunctive  (volitive). 
From  euphrainb,  an  old  verb  from  eu  (well)  and  phren  (mind). 

24.  And  is  alive  {kai  anezesen).  First  aorist  active  indica- 
tive of  anazao,  to  live  again.  Literally,  he  was  dead  and  he 
came  back  to  life.  He  was  lost  {en  apololos,  periphrastic  past 
perfect  active  of  apollumi  and  intransitive,  in  a  lost  state) 
and  he  was  found  {heurethe).  He  was  found,  we  have  to  say, 
but  this  aorist  passive  is  really  timeless,  he  is  found  after  long 
waiting  (effective  aorist)  The  artists  have  vied  with  each 
other  in  picturing  various  items  connected  with  this  wonder- 
ful parable. 

25.  As  he  came  and  drew  nigh  {hos  erchomenos  eggisen). 
More  exactly,  "As,  coming,  he  drew  nigh,"  for  erchomenos 
is  present  middle  participle  and  eggisen  is  aorist  active  indica- 
tive. Music  {sumphbnias).  Our  word  "symphony."  An 
old  Greek  word  from  sumphbnos  {sun,  together,  and  phone, 
voice  or  sound),  harmony,  concord,  by  a  band  of  musicians. 
Here  alone  in  the  N.T.  And  dancing  {kai  chorbn).  An  old 
word  again,  but  here  alone  in  the  N.T.     Origin  uncertain, 


212      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

possibly  from  orchos  by  metathesis  (orcheomai,  to  dance). 
A  circular  dance  on  the  green. 

26.  Servants  (paidon).  Not  douloi  (bondslaves)  as  in  verse 
22.  The  Greeks  often  used  pais  for  servant  like  the  Latin 
puer.  It  could  be  either  a  hired  servant  (misthios,  verse  17) 
or  slave  (doulos).  He  inquired  (epunlhaneto).  Imperfect 
middle,  inquired  repeatedly  and  eagerly.  What  these  things 
might  be  (ti  an  eie  tauta).  Not  "poor"  Greek  as  Easton  holds, 
but  simply  the  form  of  the  direct  question  retained  in  the 
indirect.  See  the  direct  form  as  the  apodosis  of  a  condition 
of  the  fourth  class  in  Acts  17:18.  In  Acts  10:17  we  have  the 
construction  with  an  eie  of  the  direct  retained  in  the  indirect 
question.  So  also  in  Luke  1:62:  See  Robertson,  Grammar, 
p.   1044. 

27.  Is  come  (hekei).  Present  indicative  active,  but  a  stem 
with  perfect  sense,  old  verb  heko  retaining  this  use  after 
perfect  tenses  came  into  use  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  893). 
Hath  killed  (ethusen).  Aorist  active  indicative  and  literally 
means,  did  kill.  Difficult  to  handle  in  English  for  our  tenses 
do  not  correspond  with  the  Greek.  Hath  received  (apelaben). 
Second  aorist  active  indicative  with  similar  difficulty  of 
translation.  Note  apo  in  compositions,  like  re-  in  "receive," 
hath  gotten  him  back  (ap-).  Safe  and  sound  (hugiainonta) . 
Present  active  participle  of  hugiainb  from  hugies,  to  be  in 
good  health.  In  spite  of  all  that  he  has  gone  through  and  in 
spite  of  the  father's  fears. 

28.  But  he  was  angry  (orgisthe).  First  aorist  (ingressive) 
passive  indicative.  But  he  became  angry,  he  flew  into  a 
rage  (orge).  This  was  the  explosion  as  the  result  of  long 
resentment  towards  the  wayward  brother  and  suspicion  of 
the  father's  partiality  for  the  erring  son.  Would  not  go  in 
(ouk  ethelen  eiselthein).  Imperfect  tense  (was  not  willing, 
refused)  and  aorist  active  (ingressive)  infinitive.  Entreated 
(parekalei).     Imperfect  tense,  he  kept  on  beseeching  him. 

29.  Do  I  serve  thee  (douleuo  soi).    Progressive  present  tense 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  213 

of  this  old  verb  from  doulos  (slave)  which  the  elder  son  uses 
to  picture  his  virtual  slavery  in  staying  at  home  and  perhaps 
with  longings  to  follow  the  younger  son  (Robertson,  Gram- 
mar, p.  879).  Transgressed  (parelthon).  Second  aorist  ac- 
tive indicative  of  parerchomai,  to  pass  by.  Not  even  once 
(aorist)  in  contrast  with  so  many  years  of  service  (linear 
present).  A  kid  (eriphon).  Some  MSS.  have  eriphion, 
diminutive,  a  little  kid.  So  margin  of  Westcott  and  Hort. 
B  has  it  also  in  Matt.  25:32,  the  only  other  N.T.  passage 
where  the  word  occurs.  That  I  might  make  merry  (hina 
euphrantho).  Final  clause,  first  aorist  passive  subjunctive 
of  the  same  verb  used  in  verses  23,  25. 

30.  This  thy  son  {ho  huios  sou  houtos).  Contempt  and 
sarcasm.  He  does  not  say:  "This  my  brother."  Came 
(elthen).  He  does  not  even  say,  came  back  or  came  home. 
Devoured  (kataphagon) .  We  say,  "eaten  up,"  but  the  Greek 
has,  "eaten  down"  (perfective  use  of  kata-).  Suggested 
by  the  feasting  going  on.  With  harlots  (meta  pornon).  This 
may  be  true  (verse  13),  but  the  elder  son  did  not  know  it  to 
be  true.  He  may  reflect  what  he  would  have  done  in  like 
case. 

31.  Son  (Teknon).  Child.  Thou  (su).  Expressed  and  in 
emphatic  position  in  the  sentence.  He  had  not  appreciated 
his  privileges  at  home  with  his  father. 

32.  It  was  meet  (edei).  Imperfect  tense.  It  expressed  a 
necessity  in  the  father's  heart  and  in  the  joy  of  the  return 
that  justifies  the  feasting.  Euphranthenai  is  used  again 
(first  aorist  passive  infinitive)  and  charenai  (second  aorist 
passive  infinitive)  is  more  than  mere  hilarity,  deep-seated  joy. 
The  father  repeats  to  the  elder  son  the  language  of  his  heart 
used  in  verse  24  to  his  servants.  A  real  father  could  do  no 
less.  One  can  well  imagine  how  completely  the  Pharisees 
and  scribes  (verse  1)  were  put  to  silence  by  these  three  marvel- 
lous parables.  The  third  does  it  with  a  graphic  picture  of 
their  own  attitude  in  the  case  of  the  surly  elder  brother. 


214      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Luke  was  called  a  painter  by  the  ancients.  Certainly  he  has 
produced  a  graphic  pen  picture  here  of  God's  love  for  the 
lost  that  justifies  forever  the  coming  of  Christ  to  the  world  to 
seek  and  to  save  the  lost.  It  glorifies  also  soul-saving  on  the 
part  of  his  followers  who  are  willing  to  go  with  Jesus  after 
the  lost  in  city  and  country,  in  every  land  and  of  every  race. 


CHAPTER  XVI 

1.  Unto  the  disciples  {kai  pros  tous  mathetas).  The  three 
preceding  parables  in  chapter  15  exposed  the  special  faults 
of  the  Pharisees,  "their  hard  exclusiveness,  self-righteous- 
ness, and  contempt  for  others"  (Plummer).  This  parable 
is  given  by  Luke  alone.  The  "kai"  (also)  is  not  translated 
in  the  Revised  Version.  It  seems  to  mean  that  at  this  same 
time,  after  speaking  to  the  Pharisees  (chapter  15),  Jesus 
proceeds  to  speak  a  parable  to  the  disciples  (16:1-13),  the 
parable  of  the  Unjust  Steward.  It  is  a  hard  parable  to  ex- 
plain, but  Jesus  opens  the  door  by  the  key  in  verse  9.  Which 
had  a  steward  (hos  eichen  oikonomon).  Imperfect  active, 
continued  to  have.  Steward  is  house-manager  or  overseer 
of  an  estate  as  already  seen  in  Luke  12:42.  Was  accused 
(dieblethe).  First  aorist  indicative  passive,  of  diaballo,  an 
old  verb,  but  here  only  in  the  N.T.  It  means  to  throw  across 
or  back  and  forth,  rocks  or  words  and  so  to  slander  by  gos- 
sip. The  word  implies  malice  even  if  the  thing  said  is  true. 
The  word  diabolos  (slanderer)  is  this  same  root  and  it  is 
used  even  of  women,  she-devils  (I  Tim.  3:11).  That  he  was 
wasting  {hos  diaskorpizon).  For  the  verb  see  on  15:13.  The 
use  of  hos  with  the  participle  is  a  fine  Greek  idiom  for  giving 
the  alleged  ground  of  a  charge  against  one.  His  goods  (ta 
huparchonta  autou).    "His  belongings,"  a  Lukan  idiom. 

2.  What  is  this  that  I  hear?  (ti  touto  akouo;).  There  are 
several  ways  of  understanding  this  terse  Greek  idiom.  The 
Revised  Version  (above)  takes  ti  to  be  equal  to  ti  estin 
touto  ho  akouo;  That  is  a  possible  use  of  the  predicate 
touto.  Another  way  is  to  take  ti  to  be  exclamatory,  which 
is  less  likely.  Still  another  view  is  that  ti  is  "Why": 
"Why  do  I  hear  this  about  thee?"     See  Acts  14:15  where 

215 


216      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

that  is  the  idiom  employed.  Render  {apodos).  Second  aorist 
active  imperative  of  apodidomi,  Give  back  (and  at  once). 
The  account  {ton  logon).  The  reckoning  or  report.  Common 
use  of  logos.  Stewardship  {oikonomias) .  Same  root  as  oiko- 
nomos  (steward).  This  demand  does  not  necessarily  mean 
dismissal  if  investigation  proved  him  innocent  of  the  charges. 
But  the  reason  given  implies  that  he  is  to  be  dismissed: 
Thou  canst  no  longer  {ou  gar  dunei). 

3.  Within  himself  {en  heautoi).  As  soon  as  he  had  time 
to  think  the  thing  over  carefully.  He  knew  that  he  was 
guilty  of  embezzlement  of  the  Master's  funds.  Taketh 
away  {aphaireitai) .  Present  (linear)  middle  indicative  of 
aphaireo,  old  verb  to  take  away.  Here  the  middle  present 
means,  He  is  taking  away  for  himself.  To  beg  I  am  not 
ashamed  {epaitein  aischunomai).  The  infinitive  with  ais- 
chunomai  means  ashamed  to  begin  to  beg.  The  participle, 
epaitbn  aischunomai  would  mean,  ashamed  while  begging, 
ashamed  of  begging  while  doing  it. 

4.  /  am  resolved  {egnon).  Second  aorist  active  indicative 
of  ginosko.  A  difficult  tense  to  reproduce  in  English.  I 
knew,  I  know,  I  have  known,  all  miss  it  a  bit.  It  is  a  burst 
of  daylight  to  the  puzzled,  darkened  man:  I've  got  it,  I 
see  into  it  now,  a  sudden  solution.  What  to  do  {ti  poieso). 
Either  deliberative  first  aorist  active  subjunctive  or  delib- 
erative future  active  indicative.  When  I  am  put  out  {hotan 
metastatho).  First  aorist  passive  subjunctive  of  methistemi, 
{meta,  histemi),  old  verb,  to  transpose,  transfer,  remove.  He 
is  expecting  to  be  put  out.  They  may  receive  me  {dexontai). 
First  aorist  middle  subjunctive  of  dechomai,  common  verb. 
Subjunctive  with  final  particle  hina.  He  wishes  to  put  the 
debtors  under  obligation  to  himself.  Debtors  {ton  chreophile- 
ton).  A  late  word.  In  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Luke  7:41 
from  chreos,  loan,  and  opheiletes,  debtor.  It  is  probable  that 
he  dealt  with  "each  one"  separately. 

6.  Measures   {batous).     Transliterated  word  for  Heb-ew 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  217 

bath,  between  eight  and  nine  gallons.  Here  alone  in  the 
N.T.  Not  the  same  word  as  batos  (bush)  in  Luke  6:44. 
Thy  bond  (sou  ta  grammata).  Thy  writings,  thy  contracts, 
thy  note.  Quickly  (tachebs).  It  was  a  secret  arrangement 
and  speed  was  essential. 

7.  Measures  (korous).  Another  Hebrew  word  for  dry 
measure.  The  Hebrew  cor  was  about  ten  bushels.  Data 
are  not  clear  about  the  Hebrew  measures  whether  liquid 
(bath)  or  dry  (cor). 

8.  His  lord  commended  (epeinesen  ho  kurios).  The  stew- 
ard's lord  praised  him  though  he  himself  had  been  wronged 
again  (see  verse  1  "wasting  his  goods").  The  unrighteous 
steward  (ton  oikonomon  tes  adikias).  Literally,  the  steward 
of  unrighteousness.  The  genitive  is  the  case  of  genus, 
species,  the  steward  distinguished  by  unrighteousness  as 
his  characteristic.  See  "the  mammon  of  unrighteousness" 
in  verse  9.  See  "the  forgetful  hearer"  in  James  1:25.  It 
is  a  vernacular  idiom  common  to  Hebrew,  Aramaic,  and  the 
Koine.  Wisely  (phronimos).  An  old  adverb,  though  here 
alone  in  the  N.T.  But  the  adjective  phronimos  from  which 
it  comes  occurs  a  dozen  times  as  in  Matt.  10:16.  It  is  from 
phroneo  and  that  from  phren,  the  mind  (I  Cor.  14:20),  the 
discerning  intellect.  Perhaps  "shrewdly"  or  "discreetly" 
is  better  here  than  "wisely."  The  lord  does  not  absolve 
the  steward  from  guilt  and  he  was  apparently  dismissed 
from  his  service.  His  shrewdness  consisted  in  finding  a  place 
to  go  by  his  shrewdness.  He  remained  the  steward  of  un- 
righteousness even  though  his  shrewdness  was  commended. 
For  (hoti).  Probably  by  this  second  hoti  Jesus  means  to 
say  that  he  cites  this  example  of  shrewdness  because  it 
illustrates  the  point.  "This  is  the  moral  of  the  whole  para- 
ble. Men  of  the  world  in  their  dealings  with  men  like  them- 
selves are  more  prudent  than  the  children  of  light  in  their 
intercourse  with  one  another"  (Plummer).  We  all  know 
how  stupid  Christians  can  be  in  their  co-operative  work 


21 8      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

in  the  kingdom  of  God,  to  go  no  further.  Wiser  than 
{phronimbteroi  huper).  Shrewder  beyond,  a  common  Greek 
idiom. 

9.  By  the  mammon  of  unrighteousness  (ek  tou  mambna  ies 
adikias).  By  the  use  of  what  is  so  often  evil  (money). 
In  Matt.  6:24  mammon  is  set  over  against  God  as  in  Luke 
16:13  below.  Jesus  knows  the  evil  power  in  money,  but 
servants  of  God  have  to  use  it  for  the  kingdom  of  God. 
They  should  use  it  discreetly  and  it  is  proper  to  make  friends 
by  the  use  of  it.  When  it  shall  fail  (hotan  eklipei).  Second 
aorist  active  subjunctive  with  hotan,  future  time.  The 
mammon  is  sure  to  fail.  That  they  may  receive  you  into  the 
eternal  tabernacles  ihina  dexbntai  humas  eis  tas  aibnious 
skenas).  This  is  the  purpose  of  Christ  in  giving  the  advice 
about  their  making  friends  by  the  use  of  money.  The  pur- 
pose is  that  those  who  have  been  blessed  and  helped  by  the 
money  may  give  a  welcome  to  their  benefactors  when  they 
reach  heaven.  There  is  no  thought  here  of  purchasing  an 
entrance  into  heaven  by  the  use  of  money.  That  idea  is 
wholly  foreign  to  the  context.  These  friends  will  give  a 
hearty  welcome  when  one  gives  him  mammon  here.  The 
wise  way  to  lay  up  treasure  in  heaven  is  to  use  one's  money 
for  God  here  on  earth.  That  will  give  a  cash  account  there 
of  joyful  welcome,  not  of  purchased  entrance. 

10.  Faithful  in  a  very  little  {pistos  en  elachistbi).  Elative 
superlative.  One  of  the  profoundest  sayings  of  Christ.  We 
see  it  in  business  life.  The  man  who  can  be  trusted  in  a 
very  small  thing  will  be  promoted  to  large  responsibilities. 
That  is  the  way  men  climb  to  the  top.  Men  who  embezzle 
in  large  sums  began  with  small  sums.  Verses  10  to  13  here 
explain  the  point  of  the  preceding  parables. 

11.  Faithful  in  the  unrighteous  mammon  {en  tbi  adikoi 
mambnai).  In  the  use  of  what  is  considered  "unrighteous" 
as  it  so  often  is.  Condition  of  the  first  class,  "if  ye  did  not 
prove  to  be"  {ex  ouk  egenesthe).    Failure  here  forfeits  conn- 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  219 

dence  in  "the  true  riches"  (to  alethinon).  There  is  no  sad- 
der story  than  to  see  a  preacher  go  down  by  the  wrong  use 
of  money,  caught  in  this  snare  of  the  devil. 

12.  That  which  is  your  own  (to  humeteron).  But  Westcott 
and  Hort  read  to  hemeteron  (our  own)  because  of  B  L  Origen. 
The  difference  is  due  to  itacism  in  the  pronunciation  of 
hu  and  he  alike  (long  i).  But  the  point  in  the  passage  calls 
for  "yours"  as  correct.  Earthly  wealth  is  ours  as  a  loan, 
a  trust,  withdrawn  at  any  moment.  It  belongs  to  another 
(en  toi  allotrioi).  If  you  did  not  prove  faithful  in  this,  who 
will  give  you  what  is  really  yours  forever?  Compare  "rich 
toward  God"  (Luke  12:21). 

13.  Servant  (oiketes).  Household  (oikos)  servant.  This 
is  the  only  addition  to  Matt.  6:24  where  otherwise  the 
language  is  precisely  the  same,  which  see.  Either  Matthew 
or  Luke  has  put  the  logion  in  the  wrong  place  or  Jesus  spoke 
it  twice.  It  suits  perfectly  each  context.  There  is  no  real 
reason  for  objecting  to  repetition  of  favourite  sayings  by 
Jesus. 

14.  Who  were  lovers  of  money  (philarguroi  huparchontes) . 
Literally,  being  lovers  of  money.  Philarguroi  is  an  old  word, 
but  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  II  Tim.  3  :2.  It  is  from  philos 
and  arguros.  Heard  (ekouon).  Imperfect  active,  were 
listening  (all  the  while  Jesus  was  talking  to  the  disciples 
(verses  1— 13).  And  they  scoffed  at  him  (kai  exemukterizon). 
Imperfect  active  again  of  ekmukterizo.  LXX  where  late 
writers  use  simple  verb.  In  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Luke 
23 135.  It  means  to  turn  out  or  up  the  nose  at  one,  to  sneer, 
to  scoff.  The  Romans  had  a  phrase,  naso  adunco  suspender  e^ 
to  hang  on  the  hooked  nose  (the  subject  of  ridicule).  These 
money-loving  Pharisees  were  quick  to  see  that  the  words 
of  Jesus  about  the  wise  use  of  money  applied  to  them.  They 
had  stood  without  comment  the  three  parables  aimed  di- 
rectly at  them  (the  lost  sheep,  the  lost  coin,  the  lost  son). 
But  now  they  do  not  remain  quiet  while  they  hear  the  fourth 


220      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

parable  spoken  to  the  disciples.  No  words  were  apparently 
spoken,  but  their  eyes,  noses,  faces  were  eloquent  with  a 
fine  disdain. 

15.  That  justify  yourselves  {hoi  dikaiountes  heautous). 
They  were  past-masters  at  that  and  were  doing  it  now  by 
upturned  noses.  An  abomination  in  the  sight  of  God  (bdelugma 
enbpion  tou  theou).  See  on  Matt.  24:15  =Mark  13:14  for 
this  LXX  word  for  a  detestable  thing  as  when  Antiochus 
Epiphanes  set  up  an  altar  to  Zeus  in  place  of  that  to  Jeho- 
vah. There  is  withering  scorn  in  the  use  of  this  phrase  by 
Jesus  to  these  pious  pretenders. 

16.  Enter eth  violently  into  it  {eis  auien  biazetai).  A  cor- 
responding saying  occurs  in  Matt.  11:12  in  a  very  different 
context.  In  both  the  verb  biazetai,  occurs  also,  but  nowhere 
else  in  the  N.T.  It  is  present  middle  here  and  can  be  middle 
or  passive  in  Matthew,  which  see.  It  is  rare  in  late  prose. 
Deissmann  (Bible  Studies,  p.  258)  cites  an  inscription  where 
biazomai  is  reflexive  middle  and  used  absolutely.  Here  the 
meaning  clearly  is  that  everyone  forces  his  way  into  the 
kingdom  of  God,  a  plea  for  moral  enthusiasm  and  spiritual 
passion  and  energy  that  some  today  affect  to  despise. 

17.  One  tittle  (mian  kerean).    See  on  Matt.  5:18. 

18.  Committeth  adultery  (moicheuei).  Another  repeated 
saying  of  Christ  (Matt.  5:32;  Mark  io:iif.  =Matt.  19:91.). 
Adultery  remains  adultery,  divorce  or  no  divorce,  remarriage 
or  no  marriage. 

19.  He  was  clothed  (enedidusketo) .  Imperfect  middle  of 
endidusko,  a  late  intensive  form  of  enduo.  He  clothed  him- 
self in  or  with.  It  was  his  habit.  Purple  (porphuran).  This 
purple  dye  was  obtained  from  the  purple  fish,  a  species  of 
mussel  or  murex  (I  Mace.  4:23).  It  was  very  costly  and  was 
used  for  the  upper  garment  by  the  wealthy  and  princes 
(royal  purple).  They  had  three  shades  of  purple  (deep  violet, 
deep  scarlet  or  crimson,  deep  blue).  See  also  Mark  15:17,  20; 
Rev.  18:12.    Fine  linen  (busson).    Byssus  or  Egyptian  flax 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  221 

(India  and  Achaia  also).  It  is  a  yellowed  flax  from  which 
fine  linen  was  made  for  undergarments.  It  was  used  for 
wrapping  mummies.  "Some  of  the  Egyptian  linen  was  so 
fine  that  it  was  called  woven  air"  (Vincent).  Here  only  in 
the  N.T.  for  the  adjective  bussinos  occurs  in  Rev.  18:12; 
19:8,  14.  Faring  sumptuously  (euphrainomenos  lampros). 
Making  merry  brilliantly.  The  verb  euphrainomai  we  have 
already  had  in  12:19;  15:23,  25,  32.  Lampros  is  an  old  ad- 
verb from  lampros,  brilliant,  shining,  splendid,  magnificent. 
It  occurs  here  only  in  the  N.T.  This  parable  apparently 
was  meant  for  the  Pharisees  (verse  14)  who  were  lovers  of 
money.    It  shows  the  wrong  use  of  money  and  opportunity. 

20.  Beggar  (ptochos).  Original  meaning  of  this  old  word. 
See  on  Matt.  5:3.  The  name  Lazarus  is  from  Eleazaros, 
"God  a  help,"  and  was  a  common  one.  Lazar  in  English 
means  one  afflicted  with  a  pestilential  disease.  Was  laid 
(ebebleto).  Past  perfect  passive  of  the  common  verb  ballo. 
He  had  been  flung  there  and  was  still  there,  "as  if  contemp- 
tuous roughness  is  implied"  (Plummer).  At  his  gate  (pros 
ton  pulona  autou).  Right  in  front  of  the  large  portico  or 
gateway,  not  necessarily  a  part  of  the  grand  house,  porch 
in  Matt.  26:71.  Full  of  sores  (heilkomenos).  Perfect  passive 
participle  of  helkoo,  to  make  sore,  to  ulcerate,  from  helkos, 
ulcer  (Latin  ulcus).  See  use  of  helkos  in  verse  21.  Common 
in  Hippocrates  and  other  medical  writers.  Here  only  in  the 
N.T. 

21.  With  the  crumbs  that  fell  (apo  ton  piptonton).  From 
the  things  that  fell  from  time  to  time.  The  language  reminds 
one  of  Luke  15  :i6  (the  prodigal  son)  and  the  Syro-Phoenician 
woman  (Mark  7:28).  Only  it  does  not  follow  that  this  beggar 
did  not  get  the  scraps  from  the  rich  man's  table.  Probably 
he  did,  though  nothing  more.  Even  the  wild  street  dogs 
would  get  them  also.  Yea,  even  the  dogs  (alia  kai  hoi  kunes). 
For  alia  kai  see  also  12:7,  24:22.  Alia  can  mean  "yea," 
though  it  often  means  "but."    Here  it  depends  on  how  one 


222      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

ponstrues  Luke's  meaning.  If  he  means  that  he  was  depend- 
ent on  casual  scraps  and  it  was  so  bad  that  even  the  wild 
dogs  moreover  were  his  companions  in  misery,  the  climax 
came  that  he  was  able  to  drive  away  the  dogs.  The  other 
view  is  that  his  hunger  was  unsatisfied,  but  even  the  dogs 
increased  his  misery.  Licked  his  sores  (epeleichon  ta  helke 
autou).  Imperfect  active  of  epileicho,  a  late  vernacular 
Koini  verb,  to  lick  over  the  surface.  It  is  not  clear  whether 
the  licking  of  the  sores  by  the  dogs  added  to  the  misery  of 
Lazarus  or  gave  a  measure  of  comfort,  as  he  lay  in  his  help- 
less condition.  "Furrer  speaks  of  witnessing  dogs  and  lepers 
waiting  together  for  the  refuse"  (Bruce).  It  was  a  scramble 
between  the  dogs  and  Lazarus. 

22.  Was  borne  (apenechthenai).  First  aorist  passive  in- 
finitive from  apophero,  a  common  compound  defective  verb. 
The  accusative  case  of  general  reference  (auton)  is  common 
with  the  infinitive  in  such  clauses  after  egeneto,  like  indirect 
discourse.  It  is  his  soul,  of  course,  that  was  so  borne  by  the 
angels,  not  his  body.  Into  Abraham's  bosom  (eis  ton  holpon 
Abraam).  To  be  in  Abraham's  bosom  is  to  the  Jew  to  be  in 
Paradise.  In  John  1:18  the  Logos  is  in  the  bosom  of  the 
Father.  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  are  in  heaven  and  wel- 
come those  who  come  (Matt.  8:ii;  IV  Mace.  14:17).  The 
beloved  disciple  reclined  on  the  bosom  of  Jesus  at  the  last 
passover  (John  13:23)  and  this  fact  indicates  special  favour. 
So  the  welcome  to  Lazarus  was  unusual.  Was  buried 
(etaphe).  Second  aorist  (effective)  passive  of  the  common 
verb  thapto.  Apparently  in  contrast  with  the  angelic  visita- 
tion to  the  beggar. 

23.  In  Hades  (en  toi  Hdidex).  See  on  Matt.  16:18  for  dis- 
cussion of  this  word.  Lazarus  was  in  Hades  also  for  both 
Paradise  (Abraham's  bosom)  and  Gehenna  are  in  the  unseen 
world  beyond  the  grave.  In  torments  (en  basanois).  The 
touchstone  by  which  gold  and  other  metals  were  tested,  then 
the  rack  for  torturing  people.    Old  word,  but  in  the  N.T. 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  223 

only  here,  Luke  16:28,  and  Matt.  4:24.  Sees  {hordi).  Dra- 
matic present  indicative.  The  Jews  believed  that  Gehenna 
and  Paradise  were  close  together.  This  detail  in  the  parable 
does  not  demand  that  we  believe  it.  The  picture  calls  for  it. 
From  afar  (apo  makrothen) .  Pleonastic  use  of  apo  as  mak- 
rothen  means  from  afar. 

24.  That  he  may  dip  (hina  bapsei).  First  aorist  active  sub- 
junctive of  bapto,  common  verb,  to  dip.  In  water  {hudatos). 
Genitive,  the  specifying  case,  water  and  not  something  else. 
Cool  (katapsuxei).  First  aorist  active  subjunctive  of  kata- 
psucho,  a  late  Greek  compound,  to  cool  off,  to  make  cool. 
Only  here  in  the  N.T.  but  common  in  medical  books.  Note 
perfective  use  of  kata-  (down).  A  small  service  that  will  be 
welcome.  For  I  am  in  anguish  {hoti  odunbmai).  The  active 
has  a  causative  sense  to  cause  intense  pain,  the  middle  to 
torment  oneself  (Luke  2:48;  Acts  20:38),  the  passive  to  be 
translated  as  here.  Common  verb,  but  no  other  examples  in 
the  N.T. 

25.  Receivedst  (apelabes).  Second  aorist  indicative  of 
apolambano,  old  verb  to  get  back  what  is  promised  and  in 
full.  See  also  Luke  6:34;  18:30;  23  141.  Evil  things  [ta  kaka). 
Not  "his,"  but  "the  evil  things"  that  came  upon  him.  Thou 
art  in  anguish  (odundsai).  Like  kauchdsai  in  Rom.  2:17. 
They  contracted  -aesai  without  the  loss  of  s.  Common  in 
the  Koine. 

26.  Beside  all  this  {en  pdsi  toutois).  In  all  these  things  (or 
regions).  Gulf  (chasma).  An  old  word  from  chaino,  to  yawn, 
our  chasm,  a  gaping  opening.  Only  here  in  the  N.T.  Is 
fixed  (esteriktai) .  Perfect  passive  indicative  of  sterizo,  old 
verb  (see  on  Luke  9:51).  Permanent  chasm.  May  not  be 
able  {me  dunontai).  Present  middle  subjunctive  of  dunamai. 
The  chasm  is  there  on  purpose  {that  not,  hopbs  me)  to  prevent 
communication. 

27.  That  you  send  him  {hina  pempseis  auton).  As  if  he  had 
not  had  a  fair  warning  and  opportunity.    The  Roman  Cath- 


224      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

olics  probably  justify  prayer  to  saints  from  this  petition  from 
the  Rich  Man  to  Abraham,  but  both  are  in  Hades  (the  other 
world).  It  is  to  be  observed  besides,  that  Abraham  makes  no 
effort  to  communicate  with  the  five  brothers.  But  heavenly 
recognition  is  clearly  assumed.  Dante  has  a  famous  descrip- 
tion of  his  visit  to  the  damned  {Purg.  iii,  1 14). 

28.  That  he  may  testify  (hopds  diamarturetai) .  An  old  verb 
for  solemn  and  thorough  (dia-)  witness.  The  Rich  Man 
labours  under  the  delusion  that  his  five  brothers  will  believe 
the  testimony  of  Lazarus  as  a  man  from  the  dead. 

29.  Let  them  hear  them  (akousatosan  auton).  Even  the 
heathen  have  the  evidence  of  nature  to  show  the  existence 
of  God  as  Paul  argues  in  Romans  so  that  they  are  without 
excuse  (Rom.  i:2of.). 

30.  They  will  repent  (metanoesousin) .  The  Rich  Man  had 
failed  to  do  this  and  he  now  sees  that  it  is  the  one  thing  lack- 
ing. It  is  not  wealth,  not  poverty,  not  alms,  not  influence, 
but  repentance  that  is  needed.  He  had  thought  repentance 
was  for  others,  not  for  all. 

31.  Neither  will  they  be  persuaded  {ouav>  peisthesontai). 
First  future  passive  of  peitho.  Gressmann  calls  attention 
to  the  fact  that  Jesus  is  saying  this  in  the  conclusion  of  the 
parable.  It  is  a  sharp  discouragement  against  efforts  today 
to  communicate  with  the  dead.  "Saul  was  not  led  to 
repentance  when  he  saw  Samuel  at  Endor  nor  were  the 
Pharisees  when  they  saw  Lazarus  come  forth  from  the  tomb. 
The  Pharisees  tried  to  put  Lazarus  to  death  and  to  explain 
away  the  resurrection  of  Jesus"  (Plummer).  Alford  com- 
ments on  the  curious  fact  that  Lazarus  was  the  name  of  the 
one  who  did  rise  from  the  dead  but  whose  return  from  the 
dead  "was  the  immediate  exciting  cause  of  their  (Pharisees) 
crowning  act  of  unbelief." 


CHAPTER  XVII 

1.  It  is  impossible  {anendekton  estin).  See  ouk  endechetai 
in  13:33.  Alpha  privative  {an-)  and  endektos,  verbal  adjec- 
tive, from  endechomai.  The  word  occurs  only  in  late  Greek 
and  only  here  in  the  N.T.  The  meaning  is  inadmissible, 
unallowable.  But  that  occasions  of  stumbling  should  come  (tou 
ta  skandala  me  elthein).  This  genitive  articular  infinitive  is 
not  easy  to  explain.  In  Acts  10:25  there  is  another  example 
where  the  genitive  articular  infinitive  seems  to  be  used  as 
a  nominative  (Robertson,  Grammar ',  p.  1040).  The  loose 
Hebrew  infinitive  construction  may  have  a  bearing  here,  but 
one  may  recall  that  the  original  infinitives  were  either  loca- 
tives {-eni)  or  datives  (-ai).  Ta  skandala  is  simply  the  ac- 
cusative of  general  reference.  Literally,  the  not  coming  as  to 
occasions  of  stumbling.  For  skandalon  (a  trap)  see  on  Matt. 
5:29;  16:23.  ^  is  nere  only  m  Luke.  The  positive  form  of 
this  saying  appears  in  Matt.  18:7,  which  see. 

2.  It  were  well  j or  him  {lusitelei  autoi).  An  old  word,  but 
only  here  in  the  N.T.,  from  lusiteles  and  this  from  luo,  to  pay, 
and  ta  tele,  the  taxes.  So  it  pays  the  taxes,  it  returns  ex- 
penses, it  is  profitable.  Literally  here,  "It  is  profitable  for 
him"  (dative  case,  autoi).  Matthew  has  sumpherei  (it  is 
advantageous,  bears  together  for).  //  a  millstone  were 
hanged  {ei  lithos  mulikos  perikeitai).  Literally,  "if  a  mill- 
stone is  hanged."  Present  passive  indicative  from  perikei- 
mai  (to  lie  or  be  placed  around).  It  is  used  as  a  perfect 
passive  of  peritithemi.  So  it  is  a  first-class  condition,  de- 
termined as  fulfilled,  not  second-class  as  the  English  transla- 
tions imply.  Mulikos  is  simply  a  stone  {lithos),  belonging 
to  a  mill.  Here  only  in  the  text  of  Westcott  and  Hort,  not 
in  Mark  9:42  which  is  like  Matt.  18:6  mulos  onikos  where 

225 


226      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

the  upper  millstone  is  turned  by  an  ass,  which  see.  Were 
thrown  (erriptai).  Perfect  passive  indicative  from  rhipto,  old 
verb.  Literally,  is  thrown  or  has  been  thrown  or  cast  or 
hurled.  Mark  has  bebletai  and  Matthew  katapontisthei, 
which  see,  all  three  verbs  vivid  and  expressive.  Rather 
than  (e).  The  comparative  is  not  here  expressed  before  e 
as  one  would  expect.  It  is  implied  in  lusitelei.  See  the  same 
idiom  in  Luke  15:7. 

3.  //  thy  brother  sin  {ean  hamartei).  Second  aorist  (in- 
gressive)  subjunctive  in  condition  of  third  class. 

4.  Seven  times  in  a  day  (heptakis  tes  hemeras).  Seven 
times  within  the  day.  On  another  occasion  Peter's  ques- 
tion (Matt.  18:21)  brought  Christ's  answer  "seventy  times 
seven"  (verse  22),  which  see.  Seven  times  during  the  day 
would  be  hard  enough  for  the  same  offender. 

5.  Increase  (prosthes).  Second  aorist  active  imperative 
of  prostithemi,  to  add  to.  Bruce  thinks  that  this  sounds  much 
like  the  stereotyped  petition  in  church  prayers.  A  little 
reflection  will  show  that  they  should  answer  the  prayer  them- 
selves. 

6.  If  ye  have  (ei  echete).  Condition  of  the  first  class, 
assumed  to  be  true.  Ye  would  say  (elegete  an).  Imperfect 
active  with  an  and  so  a  conclusion  (apodosis)  of  the  second 
class,  determined  as  unfulfilled,  a  mixed  condition  therefore. 
Sycamine  tree  (sukaminoi).  At  the  present  time  both  the 
black  mulberry  (sycamine)  and  the  white  mulberry  (syca- 
more) exist  in  Palestine.  Luke  alone  in  the  N.T.  uses  either 
word,  the  sycamine  here,  the  sycamore  in  19:4.  The  dis- 
tinction is  not  observed  in  the  LXX,  but  it  is  observed  in 
the  late  Greek  medical  writers  for  both  trees  have  medicinal 
properties.  Hence  it  may  be  assumed  that  Luke,  as  a  physi- 
cian, makes  the  distinction.  Both  trees  differ  from  the  Eng- 
lish sycamore.  In  Matt.  17:20  we  have  "mountain"  in 
place  of  "sycamine  tree."  Be  thou  rooted  up  {ekrizotheti). 
First   aorist   passive  imperative  as  is  phuteutheti.     Would 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  227 

have  obeyed  (hupekousen  an).  First  aorist  active  indicative 
with  an,  apodosis  of  a  second-class  condition  (note  aorist 
tense  here,  imperfect  elegete). 

7.  Sit  down  to  meat  (anapese).  Recline  (for  the  meal). 
Literally,  fall  up  (or  back). 

8.  And  will  not  rather  say  {all9  ouk  erei).  But  will  not  say? 
Ouk  in  a  question  expects  the  affirmative  answer.  Gird 
thyself  (perizosamenos).  Direct  middle  first  aorist  participle 
of  perizonnumi,  to  gird  around.  Till  I  have  eaten  and  drunken 
(heos  phago  kai  pio).  More  exactly,  till  I  eat  and  drink. 
The  second  aorist  subjunctives  are  not  future  perfects  in 
any  sense,  simply  punctiliar  action,  effective  aorist.  Thou 
shalt  eat  and  drink  {phagesai  kai  piesai).  Future  middle  in- 
dicative second  person  singular,  the  uncontracted  forms 
-esai  as  often  in  the  Koine.  These  futures  are  from  the 
aorist  stems  ephagon  and  epion  without  sigma. 

9.  Does  he  thank?  {me  echei  charin;).  Me  expects  the 
negative  answer.  Echo  charin,  to  have  gratitude  toward 
one,  is  an  old  Greek  idiom  (I  Tim.  1  :i2;  II  Tim.  1 13;  Heb. 
12:28). 

10.  Unprofitable  (achreioi).  The  Syriac  Sinaitic  omits 
"unprofitable."  The  word  is  common  in  Greek  literature, 
but  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Matt.  25:30  where  it  means 
"useless"  (a  privative  and  chreios  from  chraomai,  to  use). 
The  slave  who  only  does  what  he  is  commanded  by  his 
master  to  do  has  gained  no  merit  or  credit.  "In  point  of 
fact  it  is  not  commands,  but  demands  we  have  to  deal  with, 
arising  out  of  special  emergencies"  (Bruce).  The  slavish 
spirit  gains  no  promotion  in  business  life  or  in  the  kingdom 
of  God. 

11.  Through  the  midst  of  Samaria  and  Galilee  (dia  meson 
Samarias  kai  Galilaias).  This  is  the  only  instance  in  the 
N.T.  of  dia  with  the  accusative  in  the  local  sense  of 
"through."  Xenophon  and  Plato  use  dia  me  sou  (genitive). 
Jesus  was  going  from  Ephraim  (John  1 1 :54)  north  through 


228      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

the  midst  of  Samaria  and  Galilee  so  as  to  cross  over  the 
Jordan  near  Bethshean  and  join  the  Galilean  caravan  down 
through  Perea  to  Jerusalem.  The  Samaritans  did  not  ob- 
ject to  people  going  north  away  from  Jerusalem,  but  did 
not  like  to  see  them  going  south  towards  the  city  (Luke 
9:51-56). 

12.  Which  stood  afar  off  {hoi  anestesan  porrbthen).  The 
margin  of  Westcott  and  Hort  reads  simply  estesan.  The 
compound  read  by  B  means  "rose  up,"  but  they  stood  at  a 
distance  (Lev.  13:45^).  The  first  healing  of  a  leper  (5:12- 
16)  like  this  is  given  by  Luke  only. 

13.  Lifted  up  {eran).  First  aorist  active  of  the  liquid 
verb  airb. 

14.  As  they  went  {en  tbi  hupagein  autous).  Favourite  Lukan 
idiom  of  en  with  articular  infinitive  as  in  17:11  and  often. 

16.  And  he  was  a  Samaritan  {kai  autos  en  Samareites). 
This  touch  colours  the  whole  incident.  The  one  man  who 
felt  grateful  enough  to  come  back  and  thank  Jesus  for  the 
blessing  was  a  despised  Samaritan.  The  autos  has  point 
here. 

18.  Save  this  stranger  {ei  me  ho  allogenes).  The  old  word 
was  allophulos  (Acts  10:28),  but  allogenes  occurs  in  the  LXX, 
Josephus,  and  inscriptions.  Deissmann  {Light  from  the 
Ancient  East,  p.  80)  gives  the  inscription  from  the  limestone 
block  from  the  Temple  of  Israel  in  Jerusalem  which  uses 
this  very  word  which  may  have  been  read  by  Jesus:  Let 
no  foreigner  enter  within  the  screen  and  enclosure  surround- 
ing the  sanctuary  {Methena  allogene  eisporeuesthai  entos  tou 
peri  to  hieron  truphaktou  kai  peribolou). 

20.  With  observation  {meta  paratesebs).  Late  Greek  word 
from  paraiereb,  to  watch  closely.  Only  here  in  the  N.T. 
Medical  writers  use  it  of  watching  the  symptoms  of  disease. 
It  is  used  also  of  close  astronomical  observations.  But  close 
watching  of  external  phenomena  will  not  reveal  the  signs 
of  the  kingdom  of  God. 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  229 

21.  Within  you  (entos  humon).  This  is  the  obvious,  and, 
as  I  think,  the  necessary  meaning  of  entos.  The  examples 
cited  of  the  use  of  entos  in  Xenophon  and  Plato  where  entos 
means  "among"  do  not  bear  that  out  when  investigated. 
Field  {Ot.  Norv.)  "contends  that  there  is  no  clear  instance 
of  entos  in  the  sense  of  among"  (Bruce),  and  rightly  so. 
What  Jesus  says  to  the  Pharisees  is  that  they,  as  others,  are 
to  look  for  the  kingdom  of  God  within  themselves,  not  in 
outward  displays  and  supernatural  manifestations.  It  is 
not  a  localized  display  "Here"  or  "There."  It  is  in  this 
sense  that  in  Luke  1 1 :20  Jesus  spoke  of  the  kingdom  of  God 
as  "come  upon  you"  (ephthasen  eph?  humas),  speaking  to 
Pharisees.  The  only  other  instance  of  entos  in  the  N.T. 
(Matt.  23 :26)  necessarily  means  "within"  ("the  inside  of  the 
cup").  There  is,  beside,  the  use  of  entos  meaning  "within" 
in  the  Oxyrhynchus  Papyrus  saying  of  Jesus  of  the  Third 
Century  (Deissmann,  Light  from  the  Ancient  East,  p.  426) 
which  is  interesting:  "The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  within 
you"  {entos  humon  as  here  in  Luke  17:21). 

23.  Go  not  away  nor  follow  after  them  {me  apelthete  mede 
dibxete).  Westcott  and  Hort  bracket  apelthete  mede.  Note 
aorist  subjunctive  with  me  in  prohibition,  ingressive  aorist. 
Do  not  rush  after  those  who  set  times  and  places  for  the 
second  advent.  The  Messiah  was  already  present  in  the 
first  advent  (verse  21)  though  the  Pharisees  did  not  know  it. 

24.  Lighteneth  {astraptousd).  An  old  and  common  verb, 
though  only  here  and  24:4  in  the  N.T.  The  second  coming 
will  be  sudden  and  universally  visible.  There  are  still  some 
poor  souls  who  are  waiting  in  Jerusalem  under  the  delusion 
that  Jesus  will  come  there  and  nowhere  else. 

25.  But  first  {proton  de).  The  second  coming  will  be  only 
after  the  Cross. 

27.  They  ate,  they  drank,  they  married,  they  were  given  in 
marriage  {esthion,  epinon,  egamoun,  egamizonto).  Imper- 
fects all  of  them  vividly  picturing  the  life  of  the  time  of 


230      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Noah.     But  the   other  tenses   are   aorists    (Noah   entered 
eiselthen,  the  flood  came  elthen,  destroyed  apolesen). 

28.  Note  the  same  sharp  contrast  between  the  imperfects 
here  {ate  esthion,  drank  epinon,  bought  egorazon,  sold  epoloun, 
planted  ephuteuon,  builded  oikodomoun)  and  the  aorists  in 
verse  29  {went  out  exelthen,  rained  ebrexen,  destroyed  apolesen). 

30.  Is  revealed  {apokaluptetai).  Prophetic  and  futuristic 
present  passive  indicative. 

31.  Let  him  not  go  down  {me  katabato).  Second  aorist 
active  imperative  of  katabaino  with  me  in  a  prohibition  in 
the  third  person  singular.  The  usual  idiom  here  would  be 
me  and  the  aorist  subjunctive.  See  Mark  13  :i  5f.  =  Matt. 
24:17^  when  these  words  occur  in  the  great  eschatological 
discussion  concerning  flight  before  the  destruction  of  Jeru- 
salem. Here  the  application  is  "absolute  indifference  to  all 
worldly  interests  as  the  attitude  of  readiness  for  the  Son  of 
Man"  (Plummer). 

32.  Remember  Lot's  wife  {mnemoneuete  tes  gunaikos  Lot). 
Here  only  in  the  N.T.  A  pertinent  illustration  to  warn 
against  looking  back  with  yearning  after  what  has  been 
left  behind  (Gen.  19:26). 

33.  Shall  preserve  it  {zoogonesei  auten).  Or  save  it  alive. 
Here  only  in  the  N.T.  except  I  Tim.  6:13  and  Acts  7:19. 
It  is  a  late  word  and  common  in  medical  writers,  to  bring 
forth  alive  {zoos,  geno)  and  here  to  keep  alive. 

34.  In  that  night  {tautei  tei  nukti).  More  vivid  still,  "on 
this  night,"  when  Christ  comes. 

35.  Shall  be  grinding  {esontai  alethousai).  Periphrastic 
future  active  indicative  of  aletho,  an  old  verb  only  in  the 
N.T.  here  and  Matt.  24:41.  Together  {epi  to  auto).  In  the 
same  place,  near  together  as  in  Acts  2:1. 

37.  The  eagles  {hoi  aetoi).  Or  the  vultures  attracted  by 
the  carcass.  This  proverb  is  quoted  also  in  Matt.  24:28. 
See  Job  39:27-30;  Heb.  1:8;  Hos.  8:1.  Double  compound 
{epi-sun-)  in  epi-sun-achthesontai  completes  the  picture. 


CHAPTER  XVIII 

1.  To  the  end  that  (pros  to  dein).  With  a  view  to  the  being 
necessary,  pros  and  the  articular  infinitive.  The  impersonal 
verb  dei  here  is  in  the  infinitive  and  has  another  infinitive 
loosely  connected  with  it  proseuchesthai,  to  pray.  Not  to 
faint  (me  enkakein).  Literally,  not  to  give  in  to  evil  (en, 
kakeo,  from  kakos,  bad  or  evil),  to  turn  coward,  lose  heart, 
behave  badly.  A  late  verb  used  several  times  in  the  N.T. 
(II  Cor.  4:1,  16,  etc.). 

2.  Regarded  not  (me  entrepomenos) .  Present  middle  parti- 
ciple of  entrepo,  old  verb,  to  turn  one  on  himself,  to  shame  one, 
to  reverence  one.  This  was  a  "hard-boiled"  judge  who 
knew  no  one  as  his  superior.    See  on  Matt.  21 137. 

3.  Came  oft  (ercheto).  Imperfect  tense  denotes  repetitions, 
no  adverb  for  "oft"  in  the  Greek.  Avenge  me  of  (ekdikeson 
me  apo).  A  late  verb  for  doing  justice,  protecting  one  from 
another  (note  both  ek  and  apo,  here).  Deissmann  (Light 
from  the  Ancient  East,  pp.  42off.)  quotes  a  stele  of  the  second 
century  b.c.  with  a  prayer  for  vengeance  for  a  Jewish 
girl  that  had  been  murdered  which  has  this  very  verb 
ekdikeo. 

4.  He  would  not  (ouk  ethelen).  Imperfect  tense  of  con- 
tinued refusal.  Though  (ei  kai).  Concerning  sentence,  not 
kai  ei  (even  if). 

5.  Yet  (ge).  Delicate  intensive  particle  of  deep  feeling  as 
here.  Because  this  widow  troubleth  me  (dia  to  parechein  moi 
kopon  ten  cheran  tauten).  Literally,  because  of  the  furnishing 
me  trouble  as  to  this  widow  (accusative  of  general  reference 
with  the  articular  infinitive).  Lest  she  wear  me  out  (hina  me 
hupopiazei  me).  Some  take  it  that  the  judge  is  actually 
afraid  that  the  widow  may  come  and  assault  him,  literally 

231 


232      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

beat  him  under  the  eye.    That  idea  would  be  best  expressed 
here  by  the  aorist  tense. 

6.  The  unrighteous  judge  {ho  krites  tes  adikias).  The  judge 
of  unrighteousness  (marked  by  unrighteousness),  as  in  16:8 
we  have  "the  steward  of  unrighteousness,"  the  same  idiom. 

7.  And  he  is  longsuffering  {makrothumex) .  This  present 
active  indicative  comes  in  awkwardly  after  the  aorist  sub- 
junctive poiesei  after  ou  me,  but  this  part  of  the  question  is 
positive.  Probably  kai  here  means  "and  yet"  .as  so  often 
(John  9:30;  16:32,  etc.).  God  delays  taking  vengeance  on 
behalf  of  his  people,  not  through  indifference,  but  through 
patient  forbearance. 

8.  Hozvbeit  {plen).  It  is  not  clear  whether  this  sentence  is 
also  a  question  or  a  positive  statement.  There  is  no  way  to 
decide.  Either  will  make  sense  though  not  quite  the  same 
sense.  The  use  of  dra  before  heuresei  seems  to  indicate  a 
question  expecting  a  negative  answer  as  in  Acts  8:30  and 
Rom.  14:19.  But  here  dra  comes  in  the  middle  of  the  sen- 
tence instead  of  near  the  beginning,  an  unusual  position  for 
either  inferential  ara  or  interrogative  dra.  On  the  whole  the 
interrogative  dra  is  probably  correct,  meaning  to  question 
if  the  Son  will  find  a  persistence  of  faith  like  that  of  the 
widow. 

9.  Set  all  others  at  naught  {exouthenountas  tous  loipous). 
A  late  verb  exoutheneo,  like  oudeneo,  from  outhen  (ouden),  to 
consider  or  treat  as  nothing.  In  LXX  and  chiefly  in  Luke 
and  Paul  in  the  N.T. 

10.  Stood  (statheis).  First  aorist  passive  participle  of 
histemi.  Struck  an  attitude  ostentatiously  where  he  could 
be  seen.  Standing  was  the  common  Jewish  posture  in  prayer 
(Matt.  6:5;  Mark  11:25).  Prayed  thus  {tauta  proseucheto). 
Imperfect  middle,  was  praying  these  things  (given  following). 
With  himself  {pros  heauton).  A  soliloquy  with  his  own  soul, 
a  complacent  recital  of  his  own  virtues  for  his  own  self-satis- 
faction, not  fellowship  with  God,  though  he  addresses  God. 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  233 

/  thank  thee  (eucharisto  soi).  But  his  gratitude  to  God  is  for 
his  own  virtues,  not  for  God's  mercies  to  him.  One  of  the 
rabbis  offers  a  prayer  like  this  of  gratitude  that  he  was  in  a 
class  by  himself  because  he  was  a  Jew  and  not  a  Gentile,  be- 
cause he  was  a  Pharisee  and  not  of  the  am-haaretz  or  common 
people,  because  he  was  a  man  and  not  a  woman.  Extortioners 
(harpages).  An  old  word,  harpax  from  same  root  as  harpazo, 
to  plunder.  An  adjective  of  only  one  gender,  used  of  robbers 
and  plunderers,  grafters,  like  the  publicans  (Luke  3:13), 
whether  wolves  (Matt.  7:15)  or  men  (I  Cor.  5:19^).  The 
Pharisee  cites  the  crimes  of  which  he  is  not  guilty.  Or  even 
(e  kai).  As  the  climax  of  iniquity  (Bruce),  he  points  to 
"this  publican."  Zaccheus  will  admit  robbery  (Luke  19:8). 
God  {ho  theos) .  Nominative  form  with  the  article  as  common 
with  the  vocative  use  of  theos  (so  verse  13;  and  John  20:28). 

12.  Twice  in  the  week  (dis  ton  sabbatou).  One  fast  a  year 
was  required  by  the  law  (Lev.  16:29;  Num.  29:7).  The 
Pharisees  added  others,  twice  a  week  between  passover  and 
pentecost,  and  between  tabernacles  and  dedication  of  the 
temple.  /  get  (ktomai).  Present  middle  indicative,  not 
perfect  middle  kektemai  (I  possess).  He  gave  a  tithe  of  his 
income,  not  of  his  property. 

13.  Standing  afar  off  (makrothen  hestos).  Second  perfect 
active  participle  of  histemi,  intransitive  like  statheis  above. 
But  no  ostentation  as  with  the  Pharisee  in  verse  11.  At  a 
distance  from  the  Pharisee,  not  from  the  sanctuary.  Would 
not  lift  (ouk  ethelen  oude  epdrai).  Negatives  (double)  imper- 
fect of  thelb,  was  not  willing  even  to  lift  up,  refused  to  lift 
(epdrai,  first  aorist  active  infinitive  of  the  liquid  compound 
verb,  ep-airo).  Smote  (etupte).  Imperfect  active  of  tupto,  old 
verb,  kept  on  smiting  or  beating.  Worshippers  usually  lifted 
up  their  closed  eyes  to  God.  Be  merciful  (hilastheti) .  First 
aorist  passive  imperative  of  hilaskomai,  an  old  verb,  found 
also  in  LXX  and  inscriptions  (exhilaskomai,  Deissmann, 
Bible  Studies,  p.  224).    A  sinner  (tot  hamartblbi).   The  sinner, 


234      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

not  a  sinner.  It  is  curious  how  modern  scholars  ignore  this 
Greek  article.  The  main  point  in  the  contrast  lies  in  this 
article.  The  Pharisee  thought  of  others  as  sinners.  The 
publican  thinks  of  himself  alone  as  the  sinner,  not  of  others 
at  all. 

14.  This  man  (houtos).  This  despised  publican  referred  to 
contemptuously  in  verse  11  as  "this"  (houtos)  publican. 
Rather  than  the  other  (par'  ekeinon).  In  comparison  with 
(placed  beside)  that  one.  A  neat  Greek  idiom  after  the 
perfect  passive  participle  dedikaiomenos.  For  (hoti).  This 
moral  maxim  Christ  had  already  used  in  14:11.  Plummer 
pertinently  asks:  "Why  is  it  assumed  that  Jesus  did  not  re- 
peat his  sayings?" 

15.  They  brought  (prosepheron).  Imperfect  active,  they 
were  bringing.  So  Mark  10:13.  Their  babes  (ta  brephe). 
Old  word  for  infants.  Here  Mark  10:13  and  Matt.  19:13  have 
paidia  (little  children).  Note  "also"  (kai)  in  Luke,  not  in 
Mark  and  Matthew.  That  he  should  touch  them  (hina  autbn 
haptetai).  Present  middle  subjunctive  (linear  action,  re- 
peatedly touch  or  one  after  the  other),  where  Mark  10:13  nas 
aorist  middle  subjunctive  (hapsetai).  Rebuked  (epetimbn). 
Imperfect  indicative  active.  Either  inchoative  began  to 
rebuke,  or  continued,  kept  on  rebuking.  Matthew  and  Mark 
have  the  aorist  epetimesan. 

16.  Called  (prosekalesato).  Indirect  middle  aorist  indica- 
tive, called  the  children  with  their  parents  to  himself  and 
then  rebuked  the  disciples  for  their  rebuke  of  the  parents. 
The  language  of  Jesus  is  precisely  that  of  Mark  10:14  which 
see,  and  nearly  that  of  Matt.  19:14  which  see  also.  The  plea 
of  Jesus  that  children  be  allowed  to  come  to  him  is  one  that 
many  parents  need  to  heed.  It  is  a  tragedy  to  think  of  par- 
ents "forbidding"  their  children  or  of  preachers  doing  the 
same  or  of  both  being  stumbling-blocks  to  children. 

17.  As  a  little  child  (hbs  paidion).  Jesus  makes  the  child 
the  model  for  those  who  seek  entrance  into  the  kingdom  of 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  235 

God,  not  the  adult  the  model  for  the  child.  He  does  not  say 
that  the  child  is  already  in  the  kingdom  without  coming  to 
him.  Jesus  has  made  the  child's  world  by  understanding  the 
child  and  opening  the  door  for  him. 

18.  Ruler  (archon).  Not  in  Mark  10:17  or  Matt.  19:16. 
What  shall  I  do  to  inherit?  (Ti  poiesas  kleronomesb;).  "By 
doing  what  shall  I  inherit?"  Aorist  active  participle  and 
future  active  indicative.  Precisely  the  same  question  is  asked 
by  the  lawyer  in  Luke  10:25.  This  young  man  probably 
thought  that  by  some  one  act  he  could  obtain  eternal  life. 
He  was  ready  to  make  a  large  expenditure  for  it.  Good 
(agathon).  See  on  Mark  10:17  and  Matt.  19:16  for  discussion 
of  this  adjective  for  absolute  goodness.  Plummer  observes 
that  no  Jewish  rabbi  was  called  "good"  in  direct  address. 
The  question  of  Jesus  will  show  whether  it  was  merely  ful- 
some flattery  on  the  part  of  the  young  man  or  whether  he 
really  put  Jesus  on  a  par  with  God.  He  must  at  any  rate 
define  his  attitude  towards  Christ. 

22.  One  thing  thou  lackest  yet  (eti  hen  sot  leipei).  Literally, 
one  thing  still  fails  thee  or  is  wanting  to  thee.  An  old  verb 
with  the  dative  of  personal  interest.  Mark  10:21  has  here 
husterei  se,  which  see.  It  was  an  amazing  compliment  for 
one  who  was  aiming  at  perfection  (Matt.  19:21).  The  youth 
evidently  had  great  charm  and  was  sincere  in  his  claims. 
Distribute  (diados).  Second  aorist  active  imperative  of 
diadidomi  (give  to  various  ones,  dia-).  Here  Mark  and 
Matthew  simply  have  dos  (give).  The  rest  the  same  in  all 
three  Gospels. 

23.  Became  (egenethe).  First  aorist  passive  indicative  of 
ginomai.  Like  his  countenance  fell  (stugnasas),  in  Mark 
10:22.  Exeedingly  sorrowful  (perilupos).  Old  adjective 
(peri,  lupe)  with  perfective  use  of  peri.  Very  rich  (plousios 
sphodra).    Rich  exceedingly.    Today,  a  multimillionaire. 

24.  Shall  they  enter  (eisporeuontai) .  Present  middle  in- 
dicative, futuristic  present. 


236      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

25.  Through  a  needle's  eye  (dia  tremolos  belones).  Both 
words  a~e  old.  Trema  means  a  perforation  or  hole  or  eye 
and  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Matt.  19:24.  Belone  means 
originally  the  point  of  a  spear  and  then  a  surgeon's  needle. 
Here  only  in  the  N.T.  Mark  10:25  and  Matt.  19:24  have 
rhaphidos  for  needle.  This  is  probably  a  current  proverb 
for  the  impossible.  The  Talmud  twice  speaks  of  an  elephant 
passing  through  the  eye  of  a  needle  as  being  impossible. 

26.  Then  who  (kai  tis).  Literally,  and  who.  The  kai  calls 
attention  to  what  has  just  been  said.  Wealth  was  assumed 
to  be  mark  of  divine  favour,  not  a  hindrance  to  salvation. 

27.  The  impossible  with  men  possible  with  God  (ta  adunata 
para  anthropois  dunata  para  toi  theoi).  Paradoxical,  but 
true.  Take  your  stand  "beside"  (para)  God  and  the  im- 
possible becomes  possible.  Clearly  then  Jesus  meant  the 
humanly  impossible  by  the  parabolic  proverb  about  the 
camel  going  through  the  needle's  eye.  God  can  break  the 
grip  of  gold  on  a  man's  life,  but  even  Jesus  failed  with  this 
young  ruler. 

28.  Our  own  (ta  idia).  Our  own  things  (home,  business, 
etc.).  Right  here  is  where  so  many  fail.  Peter  speaks  here 
not  in  a  spirit  of  boastfulness,  but  rather  with  his  reactions 
from  their  consternation  at  what  has  happened  and  at  the 
words  of  Jesus  (Plummer). 

30.  Shall  not  receive  (ouchi  me  label).  Very  strong  double 
negative  with  aorist  active  subjunctive  of  lambano.  Mani- 
fold more  (pollaplasiona) .  Late  Greek  word,  here  alone  in  the 
N.T.  save  Matt.  19:29  where  Westcott  and  Hort  have  it 
though  many  MSS.  there  read  hekatonplasiona  (a  hundred- 
fold) as  in  Mark  10:30. 

31.  Took  unto  him  (paralabon).  Second  aorist  active  par- 
ticiple of  paralambano.  Taking  along  with  himself.  So 
Mark  10:32.  Matt.  20:17  adds  ka£  idian  (apart).  Jesus  is 
making  a  special  point  of  explaining  his  death  to  the  Twelve. 
We  go  up  (anabainomen).    Present  active  indicative,  we  are 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  237 

going  up.  Unto  the  Son  of  man  (toi  huioi  tou  anthropou). 
Dative  case  of  personal  interest.  The  position  is  amphib- 
olous and  the  construction  makes  sense  either  with  "shall  be 
accomplished"  (telesthesetai)  or  "that  are  written"  (ta 
gegrammena),  probably  the  former.  Compare  these  minute 
details  of  the  prophecy  here  (verses  32L)  with  the  words  in 
Mark  io:33f.  =  Matt.  2o:i8f.,  which  see. 

33.  The  third  day  {tei  hemerai  tei  tritei).  The  day  the 
third.  In  Matt.  20:19  it  is  "the  third  day"  while  in  Mark 
10:34  "after  three  days"  occurs  in  the  same  sense,  which  see. 

34.  And  they  perceived  not  (kai  ouk  eginoskon).  Imperfect 
active.  They  kept  on  not  perceiving.  Twice  already  Luke 
has  said  this  in  the  same  sentence.  They  understood  none 
of  these  things  (ouden  touton  sunekan).  First  aorist  active 
indicative,  a  summary  statement.  This  saying  was  hid  from 
them  (en  to  rhema  touto  kekrummenon  ap*  anion).  Past  per- 
fect passive  indicative  (periphrastic),  state  of  completion. 
It  was  a  puzzling  experience.  No  wonder  that  Luke  tries 
three  times  to  explain  the  continued  failure  of  the  apostles 
to  understand  Jesus.  The  words  of  Christ  about  his  death 
ran  counter  to  all  their  hopes  and  beliefs. 

35.  Unto  Jericho  (eis  Iereicho).  See  on  Matt.  20:29  = 
Mark  10:46,  for  discussion  of  the  two  Jerichos  in  Mark  and 
Matt,  (the  old  and  the  new  as  here).  Begging  (epaiton). 
Asking  for  something.  He  probably  was  by  the  wayside 
between  the  old  Jericho  and  the  new  Roman  Jericho.  Mark 
gives  his  name  Bartimaeus  (10*46).  Matt.  20:30  mentions 
two. 

36.  Inquired  (epunthaneto).  Imperfect  middle.  Repeat- 
edly inquired  as  he  heard  the  tramp  of  the  passing  crowd 
going  by  (diaporeuomenou) .  What  this  meant  (Ti  eie  touto). 
Literally,  What  it  was.  Without  an  the  optative  is  due  to 
indirect  discourse,  changed  from  estin.  With  an  (margin  of 
Westcott  and  Hort)  the  potential  optative  of  the  direct  dis- 
course is  simply  retained. 


238      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

37.  Passeth  by  (parerchetai).  Present  middle  indicative 
retained  in  indirect  discourse  as  paragei  is  in  Matt.  20:30. 
No  reason  for  differences  of  English  tenses  in  the  two  pas- 
sages (was  passing  by,  passeth  by). 

38.  He  cried  (eboesen).  Old  verb,  boab,  to  shout,  as  in  9:38. 
Son  of  David  (huie  Daueid).  Shows  that  he  recognizes  Jesus 
as  the  Messiah. 

39.  That  he  should  hold  his  peace  (hina  sigesei).  Ingressive 
aorist  subjunctive.  That  he  should  become  silent,  as  with 
hina  sibpesei  in  Mark  10:48.  The  more  a  greai  deal  (polloi 
mallon).    By  much  more  as  in  Mark  10:48. 

40.  Stood  (statheis).  First  aorist  passive  where  Mark 
10:49  and  Matt.  20:32  have  stas  (second  aorist  active)  trans- 
lated "stood  still."  One  is  as  "  still "  as  the  other.  The  first 
is  that  Jesus  "stopped."  Be  brought  (achthenai).  First 
aorist  infinitive  in  indirect  command. 

41.  What  wilt  thou  that  I  should  do  unto  thee?  {Ti  soi 
theleis  poiesb;).  Same  idiom  in  Mark  10:51  =  Matt.  20:32 
which  see,  the  use  of  thelb  without  hina  with  aorist  sub- 
junctive (or  future  indicative).  See  same  references  also  for 
hina  anablepsb  "that  I  may  see  again"  without  verb  before 
hina.    Three  uses  of  anablepb  here  (verses  41,  42,  43). 

43.  Followed  (ekolouthei).  Imperfect  active  as  in  Mark 
10:52.  Either  inchoative  he  began  to  follow,  or  descriptive, 
he  was  following. 


CHAPTER  XIX 

1.  Was  passing  through  (diercheto).  Imperfect  middle. 
Now  Jesus  was  inside  the  Roman  Jericho  with  the  procession. 

2.  Chief  publican  (architelones) .  The  word  occurs  no- 
where else  apparently  but  the  meaning  is  clear  from  the  other 
words  with  archi-  like  archiereus  (chief  priest)  archipoimen 
(chief  shepherd).  Jericho  was  an  important  trading  point 
for  balsam  and  other  things  and  so  Zacchaeus  was  the  head 
of  the  tax  collections  in  this  region,  a  sort  of  commissioner 
of  taxes  who  probably  had  other  publicans  serving  under 
him. 

3.  He  sought  (ezetei).  Imperfect  active.  He  was  seeking, 
conative  idea.  Jesus  who  he  was  (Iesoun  tis  estin).  Prolepsis, 
to  see  who  Jesus  was.  He  had  heard  so  much  about  him. 
He  wanted  to  see  which  one  of  the  crowd  was  Jesus.  For  the 
crowd  (apo  tou  ochlou).  He  was  short  and  the  crowd  was 
thick  and  close.  Stature  (tei  helikiai).  No  doubt  of  that 
meaning  here  and  possibly  so  in  2:52.  Elsewhere  "age" 
except  Luke  12:25;  Matt.  6:27  where  it  is  probably  "stature" 
also. 

4.  Ran  on  before  (prodramon  eis  to  emprosthen).  Second 
aorist  active  participle  of  protrecho  (defective  verb).  "Be- 
fore" occurs  twice  (pro-  and  eis  to  emprosthen).  Into  a  syca- 
more tree  (epi  sukomorean) .  From  sukon,  fig,  and  moron,  mul- 
berry. The  fig-mulberry  and  quite  a  different  tree  from  the 
sycamine  tree  in  17:6,  which  see.  It  bore  a  poor  fruit  which 
poor  people  ate  (Amos  7:14).  It  was  a  wide  open  tree  with 
low  branches  so  that  Zacchaeus  could  easily  climb  into  it. 
That  way  (ekeines).  Feminine  for  hodos  (way)  is  understood. 
Genitive  case  with  di  in  composition  (dierchesthai)  or  as  an 
adverbial  use. 

239 


240      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

5.  Make  haste  and  come  down  {speusas  katabethi).  Simul- 
taneous aorist  active  participle  {speusas)  with  the  second 
aorist  active  imperative.    "Come  down  in  a  hurry." 

6.  He  made  haste  and  came  down  {speusas  katebe).  Luke 
repeats  the  very  words  of  Jesus  with  the  same  idiom.  Re- 
ceived him  joyfully  {hupedexato  auton  chair  on) .  The  very  verb 
used  of  Martha's  welcome  to  Jesus  (10:38).  "Joyfully"  is 
the  present  active  participle,  "rejoicing"  {chairbn). 

7.  Murmured  {diegogguzonto).  Imperfect  middle  of  this 
compound  onomatopoetic  word  dia-gogguzo.  In  Luke  5 130 
we  have  the  simple  gogguzo,  a  late  word  like  the  cooing  doves 
or  the  hum  of  bees.  This  compound  with  dia-  is  still  rarer, 
but  more  expressive.  To  lodge  {katalusai).  Jesus  was  the 
hero  of  this  crowd  from  Galilee  on  their  way  to  the  passover. 
But  here  he  had  shocked  their  sensibilities  and  those  of  the 
people  of  Jericho  by  inviting  himself  to  be  the  guest  of  this 
chief  publican  and  notorious  sinner  who  had  robbed  nearly 
everybody  in  the  city  by  exorbitant  taxes. 

8.  Stood  {statheis).  Apparently  Jesus  and  Zacchaeus  had 
come  to  the  house  of  Zacchaeus  and  were  about  to  enter  when 
the  murmur  became  such  a  roar  that  Zacchaeus  turned 
round  and  faced  the  crowd.  //  /  have  wrongfully  exacted 
aught  of  any  man  {ei  tinos  ti  esukophantesa).  A  most  signifi- 
cant admission  and  confession.  It  is  a  condition  of  the  first 
class  {ei  and  the  aorist  active  indicative)  that  assumes  it  to 
be  true.  His  own  conscience  was  at  work.  He  may  have 
heard  audible  murmurs  from  the  crowd.  For  the  verb 
sukophantein,  see  discussion  on  3  114,  the  only  two  instances 
in  the  N.T.  He  had  extorted  money  wrongfully  as  they  all 
knew.  /  return  fourfold  {apodidomi  tetraploun).  I  offer  to  do 
it  here  and  now  on  this  spot.  This  was  the  Mosaic  law 
(Ex.  22:1;  Num.  5:6f.).  Restitution  is  good  proof  of  a 
change  of  heart.  D.  L.  Moody  used  to  preach  it  with  great 
power.  Without  this  the  offer  of  Zacchaeus  to  give  half  his 
goods  to  the  poor  would  be  less  effective.    "It  is  an  odd 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  241 

coincidence,  nothing  more,  that  the  fig-mulberry  (sycamore) 
should  occur  in  connexion  with  the  fig-shewer  (sycophant)." 

10.  The  lost  (to  apolblos).  The  neuter  as  a  collective  whole, 
second  perfect  active  participle  of  apollumi,  to  destroy.  See 
Luke  1 5  for  the  idea  of  the  lost. 

11.  He  added  and  spake  (prostheis  eipen).  Second  aorist 
active  participle  of  prostithemi  with  eipen.  It  is  a  Hebrew 
idiom  seen  also  in  Luke  20:if.  he  added  to  send  (prosetheto 
pempsai)  and  in  Acts  12:3  "he  added  to  seize"  (prosetheto 
sullabein).  This  undoubted  Hebraism  occurs  in  the  N.T. 
in  Luke  only,  probably  due  to  the  influence  of  the  LXX  on 
Luke  the  Greek  Christian.  To  appear  (anaphainesthai). 
Present  passive  infinitive  of  an  old  verb  to  be  made  manifest, 
to  be  shown  up.     In  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Acts  21:3. 

12.  To  take  to  himself  a  kingdom  (labein  heautoi  basileian). 
Second  aorist  active  infinitive  of  lambano  with  the  dative 
reflexive  heautoi  where  the  middle  voice  could  have  been 
used.  Apparently  this  parable  has  the  historical  basis  of 
Archelaus  who  actually  went  from  Jerusalem  to  Rome  on  this 
very  errand  to  get  a  kingdom  in  Palestine  and  to  come  back 
to  it.  This  happened  while  Jesus  was  a  boy  in  Nazareth  and 
it  was  a  matter  of  common  knowledge. 

13.  Trade  ye  herewith  till  I  come  (pragmateusasthe  en  hoi 
erchomai) .  First  aorist  middle  imperative  of  pragmateuomai, 
an  old  verb  from  pragma,  business.  Here  only  in  the  N.T. 
Westcott  and  Hort  in  their  text  read  pragmateusasthai,  first 
aorist  middle  infinitive  (-ai  and  -e  were  pronounced  alike). 
The  infinitive  makes  it  indirect  discourse,  the  imperative 
direct.  While  I  am  coming  is  what  en  hoi  erchomai  really 
means. 

14.  His  citizens  (hoi  politai  autou).  That  actually  hap- 
pened with  Archelaus. 

15.  When  he  was  come  back  again  (en  toi  epanelthein  auton). 
"On  the  coming  back  again  as  to  him."  Luke's  favourite 
idiom  of  the  articular  infinitive  after  en  and  with  the  accusa- 


242      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

tive  of  general  reference.  Had  given  (dedokei).  Past  perfect 
active  indicative  without  augment  of  didomi.  That  he  might 
know  (hina  gnoi).  Second  aorist  active  subjunctive  of  gino- 
sko.    The  optative  would  be  gnoie. 

16.  Hath  made  (prosergasato).  Only  here  in  the  N.T. 
Note  pros-  in  addition,  besides,  more. 

17.  Have  thou  authority  (isthi  exousian  echon).  Periphrastic 
present  active  imperative.    Keep  on  having  authority. 

19.  Be  thou  also  over  (kai  su  epano  ginou).  Present  middle 
imperative.  Keep  on  becoming  over.  There  is  no  real  reason 
for  identifying  this  parable  of  the  pounds  with  the  parable 
of  the  talents  in  Matt.  25.  The  versatility  of  Jesus  needs 
to  be  remembered  by  those  who  seek  to  flatten  out  every- 
thing. 

20.  /  kept  (eichon).  Imperfect  active  of  echo.  I  kept  on 
keeping.  Laid  up  (apokeimenen) .  Present  passive  participle 
agreeing  with  hen  (which),  used  often  as  perfect  passive  of 
tithemi  as  here,  laid  away  or  off"  (apo).  It  is  not  the  peri- 
phrastic construction,  but  two  separate  verbs,  each  with  its 
own  force.  In  a  napkin  {en  soudaridi).  A  Latin  word  su- 
darium  from  sudor  (sweat)  transliterated  into  Greek,  a 
sweatcloth  handkerchief  or  napkin.  Found  in  papyrus  mar- 
riage contracts  as  part  of  the  dowry  (second  and  third  cen- 
turies a.d.,  Deissmann,  Bible  Studies,  p.  223).  Used  also 
for  swathing  the  head  of  the  dead  (John  11 144 ;  20:7). 

21.  I  feared  (ephoboumen) .  Imperfect  middle,  I  continued 
to  fear.  Austere  {austeros).  Old  Greek  word  from  auo,  to  dry 
up.  Reproduced  in  Latin  austeros  and  English  austere.  It 
means  rough  to  the  taste,  stringent.  Here  only  in  the  N.T. 
Compare  skleros  (hard)  in  Matt.  25:24.  "Harsh  in  flavour, 
then  in  disposition"  (Bruce).  Thou  layedst  not  down  (ouk 
ethekas).    Probably  a  proverb  for  a  grasping  profiteer. 

22.  Thou  knewest  (eideis).  Second  past  perfect  of  horao, 
to  see,  used  as  imperfect  of  oida,  to  know.  Either  it  must  be 
taken  as  a  question  as  Westcott  andHort  do  or  be  understood 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  243 

as  sarcasm  as  the  Revised  Version  has  it.  The  words  of 
the  wicked  {poneros)  slave  are  turned  to  his  own  condem- 
nation. 

23.  Then  wherefore  {kai  dia  ti).  Note  this  inferential  use 
of  kai-  in  that  case.  Into  the  bank  {epi  trapezan).  Literally, 
upon  a  table.  This  old  word  trapeza,  from  tetrapeza  {tetra, 
four,  pons,  foot).  It  means  then  any  table  (Mark  7:28),  food 
on  the  table  (Acts  16:34),  feast  or  banquet  (Rom.  11:9), 
table  of  the  money-changers  (John  2:15;  Mark  11:15;  Matt. 
21  :i2),  or  bank  as  here.  Our  word  bank  is  from  Old  English 
bench.  With  interest  {sun  tokoi).  Not  usury,  but  proper  and 
legal  interest.  Old  word  from  tikto,  to  bring  forth.  In  the 
N.T.  only  here  and  Matt.  25:27.  Should  have  required  it 
{an  auto  epraxa).  Conclusion  of  second-class  condition  the 
condition  or  apodosis  being  implied  in  the  participle  "com- 
ing" {elthon),  and  the  previous  question.  On  this  technical 
use  of  prasso  {epraxa)  see  Luke  3:13. 

25.  And  they  said  unto  him  {kai  eipan  autoi).  Probably 
the  eager  audience  who  had  been  listening  to  this  wonderful 
parable  interrupted  Jesus  at  this  point  because  of  this  sudden 
turn  when  the  one  pound  is  given  to  the  man  who  has  ten 
pounds.  If  so,  it  shows  plainly  how  keenly  they  followed 
the  story  which  Jesus  was  giving  because  of  their  excitement 
about  the  kingdom  (Luke  19:11). 

26.  That  hath  not  {tou  me  echontos).  The  present  tense  of 
echo  here,  that  keeps  on  not  having,  probably  approaches 
the  idea  of  acquiring  or  getting,  the  one  who  keeps  on  not 
acquiring.    This  is  the  law  of  nature  and  of  grace. 

27.  Reign  {basileusai).  First  aorist  active  infinitive, 
ingressive  aorist,  come  to  rule.  Slay  {katasphaxate) .  First 
aorist  active  imperative  of  katasphazo,  to  slaughter,  an  old 
verb,  but  only  here  in  the  N.T. 

28.  Went  on  before  {eporeueto  emprosthen).  Imperfect 
middle.  Jesus  left  the  parable  to  do  its  work  and  slowly  went 
on  his  way  up  the  hill  to  Jerusalem. 


244      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

29.  Unto  Bethphage  and  Bethany  (eis  Bethphage  kai  Betha- 
nia).  Both  indeclinable  forms  of  the  Hebrew  or  Aramaic 
names.  In  Mark  11  :i  "Bethany"  is  inflected  regularly, 
which  see.  Of  Olives  (Elaion).  As  in  Mark  11:1  and  Matt. 
2i:i,  though  some  editors  take  it  to  be,  not  the  genitive 
plural  of  elaia  (olive  tree),  but  the  name  of  the  place  Olivet. 
In  the  Greek  it  is  just  a  matter  of  accent  (circumflex  or 
acute)  Olivet  is  correct  in  Acts  1:12.  See  on  Matt.  21  :iff. 
and  Mark  11  -.iff.  for  details. 

30.  Whereon  no  man  ever  yet  sat  (eph'  hon  oudeis  popote 
anthropon  ekathisen).  Plummer  holds  that  this  fact  indicated 
to  the  disciples  a  royal  progress  into  the  city  of  a  piece  with 
the  Virgin  Birth  of  Jesus  and  the  burial  in  a  new  tomb. 

32.  As  he  had  said  unto  them  (kathos  eipen  autois).  Luke 
alone  notes  this  item. 

33.  As  they  were  loosing  (luonton  auton).  Genitive  abso- 
lute. The  owners  thereof  {hoi  kurioi  autou).  The  same  word 
kurios  used  of  the  Lord  Jesus  in  verse  31  (and  34)  and  which 
these  "owners"  would  understand.  See  on  Matt.  21:3  = 
Mark  1 1 13  for  kurios  used  by  Jesus  about  himself  with  the 
expectation  that  these  disciples  would  recognize  him  by  that 
title  as  they  did.  The  word  in  common  use  for  the  Roman 
emperor  and  in  the  LXX  to  translate  the  Hebrew  Elohim 
(God). 

35.  Set  Jesus  thereon  (epebibasan  ton  lesoun).  First 
aorist  active.  Old  verb,  to  cause  to  mount,  causative  verb 
from  baino,  to  go.  In  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Luke  10:34; 
Acts  23:24. 

36.  They  spread  (hupestronnuon).  Imperfect  active  de- 
scribing the  continued  spreading  as  they  went  on.  Hupo- 
stronnuo  is  a  late  form  of  the  old  verb  hupostorennumi.  Here 
only  in  the  N.T. 

37.  At  the  descent  (pros  tei  katabasei).  Epexegetic  of 
"drawing  nigh."  They  were  going  by  the  southern  slope 
of  the  Mount  of  Olives.    As  they  turned  down  to  the  city, 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  245 

the  grand  view  stirred  the  crowd  to  rapturous  enthusiasm. 
This  was  the  first  sight  of  the  city  on  this  route  which  is  soon 
obscured  in  the  descent.  The  second  view  bursts  out  again 
(verse  41).  It  was  a  shout  of  triumph  from  the  multitude 
with  their  long  pent-up  enthusiasm  (verse  n),  restrained  no 
longer  by  the  parable  of  the  pounds.  For  all  the  mighty  works 
which  they  had  seen  {peri  pason  eidon  dunamebn).  Neat 
Greek  idiom,  incorporation  of  the  antecedent  {dunameon) 
into  the  relative  clause  and  attraction  of  the  case  of  the  rela- 
tive from  the  accusative  has  to  the  genitive  hbn.  And  note 
"all."  The  climax  had  come,  Lazarus,  Bartimaeus,  and  the 
rest. 

38.  The  king  cometh  {ho  erchomenos,  ho  basileus).  The 
Messianic  hopes  of  the  people  were  now  all  ablaze  with  ex- 
pectation of  immediate  realization.  A  year  ago  in  Galilee 
he  had  frustrated  their  plans  for  a  revolutionary  movement 
"to  take  him  by  force  to  make  him  king"  (John  6:15). 
The  phrase  "the  coming  king"  like  "the  coming  prophet" 
(John  6:14;  Deut.  18:15)  expressed  the  hope  of  the  long- 
looked-for  Messiah.  They  are  singing  from  the  Hallel  in 
their  joy  that  Jesus  at  last  is  making  public  proclamation 
of  his  Messiahship.  Peace  in  heaven,  and  glory  in  the  highest 
{en  ouranoi  eirene  kai  doxa  en  hupsistois).  This  language 
reminds  one  strongly  of  the  song  of  the  angels  at  the  birth 
of  Jesus  (Luke  2:14).  Mark  11:10  and  Matt.  21:9  have 
"Hosannah  in  the  highest." 

39.  Some  of  the  Pharisees  {tines  ton  Pharisaion).  Luke 
seems  to  imply  by  "from  the  multitude"  {apo  tou  ochlou) 
that  these  Pharisees  were  in  the  procession,  perhaps  half- 
hearted followers  of  the  mob.  But  John  12:19  speaks  of 
Pharisees  who  stood  off  from  the  procession  and  blamed 
each  other  for  their  failure  and  the  triumph  of  Jesus.  These 
may  represent  the  bolder  spirits  of  their  same  group  who 
dared  to  demand  of  Jesus  that  he  rebuke  his  disciples. 

40.  //  these  shall  hold  their  peace  {ean  houtoi  siopesousin). 


246      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

A  condition  of  the  first  class,  determined  as  fulfilled.  The 
use  of  ean  rather  than  ei  cuts  no  figure  in  the  case  (see  Acts 
8:31;  I  Thess.  3:8;  I  John  5:15).  The  kind  of  condition  is 
determined  by  the  mode  which  is  here  indicative.  The  fu- 
ture tense  by  its  very  nature  does  approximate  the  aorist 
subjunctive,  but  after  all  it  is  the  indicative.  The  stones  will 
cry  out  {hoi  lithoi  kraxousin).  A  proverb  for  the  impossible 
happening. 

41.  Wept  {eklausen).  Ingressive  aorist  active  indicative, 
burst  into  tears.    Probably  audible  weeping. 

42.  //  thou  hadst  known  {ei  egnbs).  Second  aorist  active 
indicative  of  ginosko.  Second-class  condition,  determined 
as  unfulfilled.  Even  thou  {kai  su).  Emphatic  position  of 
the  subject.  But  now  {nun  de).  Aposiopesis.  The  conclu- 
sion is  not  expressed  and  the  sudden  breaking  off  and 
change  of  structure  is  most  impressive.  They  are  hid  {ek- 
rube).  Second  aorist  passive  indicative  of  krupto,  common 
verb,  to  hide. 

43.  Shall  cast  up  a  bank  {parembalousin  charaka).  Fu- 
ture active  indicative  of  paremballb,  a  double  compound 
{para,  en,  ballo)  of  long  usage,  finally  in  a  military  sense  of 
line  of  battle  or  in  camp.  Here  alone  in  the  N.T.  So  also 
the  word  charaka  {charax)  for  bank,  stake,  palisade,  rampart, 
is  here  alone  in  the  N.T.,  though  common  enough  in  the  old 
Greek.  Compass  thee  round  {perikuklosousin  se).  Future 
active  indicative.  Another  common  compound  to  make  a 
circle  {kuklos)  around  {peri),  though  here  only  in  the  N.T. 
Keep  thee  in  {sunexousin  se).  Shall  hold  thee  together  on 
every  side  {pantothen).    See  about  sunecho  on  4:38. 

44.  Shall  dash  to  the  ground  {edaphiousin).  Attic  future 
of  edaphizo,  to  beat  level,  to  raze  to  the  ground,  a  rare  verb 
from  edaphos,  bottom,  base,  ground  (Acts  22:7),  here  alone 
in  the  N.T.  Because  {antK  hon).  "In  return  for  which 
things."  Thou  knewest  not  {ouk  egnbs).  Applying  the  very 
words  of  the  lament  in  the  condition  in  verse  42.     This 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  247 

vivid  prophecy  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  is  used  by 
those  who  deny  predictive  prophecy  even  for  Jesus  as  proof 
that  Luke  wrote  the  Gospel  after  the  destruction  of  Jeru- 
salem. But  it  is  no  proof  at  all  to  those  who  concede  to 
Jesus  adequate  knowledge  of  his  mission  and  claims. 

45.  Began  to  cast  out  (erxato  ekballein).  So  Mark  11:15 
whereas  Matt.  21:12  has  simply  "he  cast  out."  See  Mark 
and  Matthew  for  discussion  of  this  second  cleansing  of  the 
temple  at  the  close  of  the  public  ministry  in  relation  to  the 
one  at  the  beginning  in  John  2:14-22.  There  is  nothing 
gained  by  accusing  John  or  the  Synoptics  of  a  gross  chrono- 
logical blunder.  There  was  abundant  time  in  these  three 
years  for  all  the  abuses  to  be  revived. 

47.  He  was  teaching  (en  didaskon).  Periphrastic  imperfect. 
Daily  (to  kath>  hemeran).  Note  the  accusative  neuter  arti- 
cle, "as  to  the  according  to  the  day,"  very  awkward  Eng- 
lish surely,  but  perfectly  good  Greek.  The  same  idiom 
occurs  in  11:3.  Sought  (ezetoun).  Imperfect  active,  cona- 
tive  imperfect,  were  seeking,  trying  to  seek.  The  principal 
men  of  the  people  (hoi  protoi  tou  laou).  The  first  men  of  the 
people.  The  position  after  the  verb  and  apart  from  the 
chief  priests  and  the  scribes  calls  special  attention  to  them. 
Some  of  these  "first  men"  were  chief  priests  or  scribes,  but 
not  all  of  them.  The  lights  and  leaders  of  Jerusalem  were 
bent  on  the  destruction  (apolesai)  of  Jesus.  The  raising  of 
Lazarus  from  the  dead  brought  them  together  for  this 
action  (John  11:47-53;  12:9-11). 

48.  They  could  not  find  (ouch  heuriskon).  Imperfect  ac- 
tive. They  kept  on  not  finding.  What  they  might  do  (to 
ti  poiesosm).  First  aorist  active  deliberative  subjunctive 
in  a  direct  question  retained  in  the  indirect.  Note  the  arti- 
cle to  (neuter  accusative)  with  the  question.  Hung  upon 
him  (exekremeto  autou).  Imperfect  middle  of  ekkremamai, 
an  old  verb  (mi  form)  to  hang  from,  here  only  in  the  N.T. 
The  form  is  an  omega  form  from  ekkremomai,  a  constant 


248      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

tendency  to  the  omega  form  in  the  Koine.  It  pictures  the 
whole  nation  (save  the  leaders  in  verse  47)  hanging  upon 
the  words  of  Jesus  as  if  in  suspense  in  mid-air,  rapt  atten- 
tion that  angered  these  same  leaders.  Tyndal  renders  it 
"stuck  by  him." 


CHAPTER  XX 

1.  On  one  of  the  days  {en  miai  ton  hemerbn).  Luke's  favour- 
ite way  of  indicating  time.  It  was  the  last  day  of  the  temple 
teaching  (Tuesday).  Luke  20:1-19  is  to  be  compared  with 
Mark  27-12:12  and  Matt.  21:23-46.  There  came  upon  him 
{epestesan).  Second  aorist  active  indicative,  ingressive 
aorist  of  ephistemi,  old  and  common  verb,  stood  up  against 
him,  with  the  notion  of  sudden  appearance.  These  leaders 
(cf.  19:47)  had  determined  to  attack  Jesus  on  this  morning, 
both  Sadducees  (chief  priests)  and  Pharisees  (scribes),  a 
formal  delegation  from  the  Sanhedrin. 

2.  Tell  us  {eipon  hemin).  Luke  adds  these  words  to  what 
Mark  and  Matthew  have.  Second  aorist  active  imperative 
for  the  old  form  eipe  and  with  ending  -on  of  the  first  aorist 
active.  Westcott  and  Hort  punctuate  the  rest  of  the  sen- 
tence as  an  indirect  question  after  eipon,  but  the  Revised 
Version  puts  a  semicolon  after  "us"  and  retains  the  direct 
question.    The  Greek  manuscripts  have  no  punctuation. 

3.  Question  {logon).  Literally,  word.  So  in  Mark  1 1 129  = 
Matt.  21 :24. 

5.  They  reasoned  with  themselves  {sunelogisanto).  First 
aorist  middle  of  sullogizomai,  to  bring  together  accounts, 
an  old  word,  only  here  in  the  N.T.  Mark  and  Matthew  have 
dielogizonto  (imperfect  middle  of  dialogizomai,  a  kindred 
verb,  to  reckon  between  one  another,  confer).  This  form 
{dielogizonto)  in  verse  14  below.  7/  we  shall  say  {ean  eipo- 
men).  Third-class  condition  with  second  aorist  active  sub- 
junctive.   Suppose  we  say!    So  in  verse  6. 

6.  Will  stone  us  {katalithasei).  Late  verb  and  here  only 
in  the  N.T.  Literally,  will  throw  stones  down  on  us,  stone 
us  down,  overwhelm  us  with  stones.     They  be  persuaded 

249 


250      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

(pepeismenos  estin).  Periphrastic  perfect  passive  indicative 
of  peitho,  to  persuade,  a  settled  state  of  persuasion,  "is  per- 
suaded" (no  reason  for  use  of  "be"  here).  That  John  was  a 
prophet  (Ibanen  propheten  einai).  Accusative  and  infinitive 
in  indirect  assertion. 

7.  That  they  knew  not  (me  eidenai).  Accusative  and  in- 
finitive in  indirect  assertion  again  with  the  negative  me 
rather  than  ou. 

9.  Vineyard  (ampelbnd) .  Late  word  from  ampelos  (vine), 
place  of  vines.  So  in  Mark  12:1  =  Matt.  21:33.  Let  it 
out  (exedeto).  Second  aorist  middle  of  ekdidomi,  but  with 
variable  vowel  e  in  place  of  0  of  the  stem  do  (exedoto).  Same 
form  in  Mark  and  Matthew.  For  a  long  time  (chronous 
hikanous).  Accusative  of  extent  of  time,  considerable 
times  or  periods  of  time.  Not  in  Mark  and  Matthew,  though 
all  three  have  apedemesen  (went  off  from  home).  See  on 
Luke  7:6  for  hikanos. 

10.  At  the  season  (kairoi).  The  definite  season  for  the 
Fruit  like  ho  kairos  ton  karpon  (Matt.  21:34).  That  they 
should  give  (hina  dbsousin).  Future  indicative  with  hina 
for  purpose  like  the  aorist  subjunctive,  though  not  so  fre- 
quent. 

1.1.  He  sent  yet  another  (prosetheto  heteron  pempsai).  Lit- 
erally, he  added  to  send  another.  A  clear  Hebraism  repeated 
in  verse  12  and  also  in  19:11. 

12.  They  wounded  {traumatis antes).  First  aorist  active 
participle  of  traumatizo.  An  old  verb,  from  trauma,  a  wound, 
but  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Acts  19:16. 

13.  What  shall  I  dot  (Ti  poieso;).  Deliberative  future 
indicative  or  aorist  subjunctive  (same  form).  This  detail 
only  in  Luke.  Note  the  variations  in  all  three  Gospels. 
All  three  have  "will  reverence"  (entrapesontai)  for  which 
see  Matthew  and  Mark.  It  may  be  (isos).  Perhaps,  from 
isos,  equal.    Old  adverb,  but  only  here  in  the  N.T. 

14.  That  the  inheritance  may  be  ours  (hina  hembn  genetai 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  251 

he  kleronomia) .  That  the  inheritance  may  become  (genetai, 
second  aorist  middle  subjunctive  of  ginomai).  Here  Matt. 
21:39  has  schbmen  "let  us  get,  ingressive  aorist  active  sub- 
junctive." Cf.  echbmen,  present  subjunctive  of  the  same 
verb  echo  in  Rom.  5:1;  Mark  12:7  has  "and  it  will  be  ours" 
(estai) . 

16.  God  forbid  (me  genoito).  Optative  of  wish  about  the 
future  with  me.  Literally,  may  it  not  happen.  No  word 
"God"  in  the  Greek.  This  was  the  pious  protest  of  the  de- 
feated members  of  the  Sanhedrin  who  began  to  see  the  turn 
of  the  parable  against  themselves. 

17.  He  looked  upon  them  (emblepsas  autois).  Not  in  Mark 
and  Matthew.  First  aorist  active  participle  of  emblepb,  to 
look  on.  It  was  a  piercing  glance.  The  scripture  quoted 
is  from  Psa.  118:22  and  is  in  Mark  11:10  =  Matt.  21:42, 
which  see  for  the  inverted  attraction  of  the  case  lithon 
(stone)  to  that  of  the  relative  hon  (which). 

18.  Shall  be  broken  to  pieces  (sunthlasthesetai).  Future 
passive  indicative  of  sunthlab,  a  rather  late  compound, 
only  here  in  the  N.T.  unless  verse  44  in  Matt.  21  is  genuine. 
It  means  to  shatter.  Will  scatter  him  as  dust  (likmesei). 
From  likmab,  an  old  verb  to  winnow  and  then  to  grind  to 
powder.  Only  here  in  the  N.T.  unless  verse  44  in  Matt.  21 
is  genuine,  which  see. 

19.  To  lay  hands  on  him  (epibalein  epf  auton  tas  cheiras). 
Second  aorist  active  infinitive  of  epiballb,  an  old  verb  and 
either  transitively  as  here  or  intransitively  as  in  Mark  4:37. 
Vivid  picture  here  where  Mark  12:12  =  Matt.  21:46  has 
"to  seize"  (kratesai).  In  that  very  hour  (en  auiei  iei  horai). 
Luke's  favourite  idiom,  in  the  hour  itself.  Not  in  Mark  or 
Matthew  and  shows  that  the  Sanhedrin  were  angry  enough 
to  force  the  climax  then.  And  they  feared  (kai  ephobethesan). 
Adversative  use  of  kai  =  but  they  feared.  Hence  they  re- 
frained. For  they  perceived  (egnbsan  gar).  The  reason  for 
their    rage.      Second    aorist   active   indicative   of    ginbskb. 


252      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

J  gainst  them  {pros  autous).    As  in  Mark  12:12.     The  cap 
fitted  them  and  they  saw  it. 

20.  They  watched  him  (paraieres antes).  First  aorist  active 
participle  of  paratereo,  a  common  Greek  verb  to  watch  on  the 
side  or  insidiously  or  with  evil  intent  as  in  Luke  6:7  (pare- 
terounto)  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees.  See  on  Mark  3:2. 
There  is  no  "him"  in  the  Greek.  They  were  watching  their 
chance.  Spies  (enkathetous).  An  old  verbal  adjective  from 
enkathiemi,  to  send  down  in  or  secretly.  It  means  Hers  in 
wait  who  are  suborned  to  spy  out,  one  who  is  hired  to  trap 
one  by  crafty  words.  Only  here  in  the  N.T.  Feigned  them- 
selves (hupokrinomenous  heautous).  Hypocritically  professing 
to  be  "righteous"  (dikaious).  "They  posed  as  scrupulous 
persons  with  a  difficulty  of  conscience"  (Plummer).  That 
they  might  take  hold  of  his  speech  (hina  epilabontai  autou  logon). 
Second  aorist  middle  of  epilambano,  an  old  verb  for  seizing 
hold  with  the  hands  and  uses  as  here  the  genitive  case.  These 
spies  are  for  the  purpose  of  (hina)  catching  hold  of  the  talk 
of  Jesus  if  they  can  get  a  grip  anywhere.  This  is  their  direct 
purpose  and  the  ultimate  purpose  or  result  is  also  stated,  "so 
as  to  deliver  him  up  "  (hbste  paradounai  auton) .  Second  aorist 
active  infinitive  of  paradidomi,  to  hand  over,  to  give  from 
one's  side  to  another.  The  trap  is  all  set  now  and  ready  to  be 
sprung  by  these  "spies."  Of  the  governor  (ton  hegemonos). 
The  Sanhedrin  knew  that  Pilate  would  have  to  condemn 
Jesus  if  he  were  put  to  death.  So  then  all  their  plans  focus 
on  this  point  as  the  goal.  Luke  alone  mentions  this  item 
here. 

21.  Rightly  (orthos).  Matthew  (22:16)  notes  that  these 
"spies"  were  "disciples"  (students)  of  the  Pharisees  and 
Mark  (12:13)  adds  that  the  Herodians  are  also  involved  in 
the  plot.  These  bright  theologues  are  full  of  palaver  and 
flattery  and  openly  endorse  the  teaching  of  Jesus  as  part  of 
their  scheme.  Acceptest  not  the  person  of  any  (ou  lambaneis 
prosopon).    Dost  not  take  the  face  (or  personal  appearance) 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  253 

as  the  test.  It  is  a  Hebraism  from  which  the  word  prosopo- 
lempsia  (James  2:1)  comes.  Originally  it  meant  to  lift  the  face, 
to  lift  the  countenance,  to  regard  the  face,  to  accept  the  face 
value.  See  Mark  12:13-17  and  Matt.  22:15-22  for  discussion 
of  details  here.    They  both  have  blepeis  here. 

22.  Tribute  (phoron).  Old  word  for  the  annual  tax  on  land, 
houses,  etc.  Mark  and  Matthew  have  kenson,  which  see  for 
this  Latin  word  in  Greek  letters.  The  picture  on  the  coin  may 
have  been  that  of  Tiberius. 

23 .  Perceived  (katanoesas) .  From  katanoeo,  to  put  the  mind 
down  on.  Mark  has  eidos,  "knowing,"  and  Matthew  gnous, 
coming  to  know  or  grasping  (second  aorist  active  participle 
of  ginbsko).  Craftiness  {panourgian).  Old  word  for  doing 
any  deed.  Matthew  has  "wickedness"  (ponerian)  and  Mark 
"hypocrisy"  (hupokrisin).  Unscrupulous  they  certainly 
were.    They  would  stoop  to  any  trick  and  go  the  limit. 

26.  They  were  not  able  {puk  ischusan).  They  did  not  have 
strength.  An  old  verb  ischuo  from  ischus  (strength).  They 
failed  "to  take  hold  (cf.  verse  20)  of  the  saying  before  the 
people."  These  "crack"  students  had  made  an  ignominious 
failure  and  were  not  able  to  make  a  case  for  the  surrender  of 
Jesus  to  Pilate.  He  had  slipped  through  their  net  with  the 
utmost  ease.  Held  their  peace  (esigesan).  Ingressive  aorist 
active  of  sigao.  They  became  silent  as  they  went  back  with 
the  "dry  grins." 

27.  There  is  no  resurrection  [anastasin  me  einai).  Accusa- 
tive and  infinitive  with  negative  me  in  indirect  assertion. 
The  Sadducees  rally  after  the  complete  discomfiture  of  the 
Pharisees  and  Herodians.  They  had  a  stock  conundrum  with 
which  they  had  often  gotten  a  laugh  on  the  Pharisees.  So 
they  volunteer  to  try  it  on  Jesus.  For  discussion  of  details 
here  see  on  Matt.  22:23-33  and  Mark  12:18-27.  Only  a  few 
striking  items  remain  for  Luke. 

33.  Had  her  (eschon).  Constative  second  aorist  indicative 
of  echo  including  all  seven  seriatim.    So  Matt.  22 :28  =  Mark 


254      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

12:33.    To  wife  {gunaika).    As  wife,  accusative  in  apposition 
with  "her." 

36.  Equal  unto  the  angels  {isaggeloi).  A  rare  and  late 
word  from  isos,  equal,  and  aggelos.  Only  here  in  the  N.T. 
Mark  and  Matthew  have  "as  angels"  (hos  aggeloi).  Angels 
do  not  marry,  there  is  no  marriage  in  heaven.  Sons  of  God, 
being  sons  of  the  resurrection  (huioi  theou  tes  anastaseos  huioi 
ontes).  This  Hebraistic  phrase,  "sons  of  the  resurrection" 
defines  "sons  of  God"  and  is  a  direct  answer  to  the  Sadducees. 

37.  Even  Moses  (kai  Mouses).  Moses  was  used  by  the 
Sadducees  to  support  their  denial  of  the  resurrection.  This 
passage  (Ex.  3  :6)  Jesus  skilfully  uses  as  a  proof  of  the  resur- 
rection.   See  discussion  on  Matt.  22:32  =  Mark  I2:26f. 

39.  Certain  of  the  scribes  {tines  ton  grammatebn).  Pharisees 
who  greatly  enjoyed  this  use  by  Jesus  of  a  portion  of  the 
Pentateuch  against  the  position  of  the  Sadducees.  So  they 
praise  the  reply  of  Jesus,  hostile  though  they  are  to  him. 

40.  They  durst  not  any  more  {ouketi  etolmon  ouden).  Double 
negative  and  imperfect  active  of  tolmab.  The  courage  of 
Pharisees,  Sadducees,  Herodians  vanished. 

41.  How  say  they?  (Pos  legousin;).  The  Pharisees  had 
rallied  in  glee  and  one  of  their  number,  a  lawyer,  had  made  a 
feeble  contribution  to  the  controversy  which  resulted  in  his 
agreement  with  Jesus  and  in  praise  from  Jesus  (Mark  12:28- 
34  =  Matt.  27:34-40).  Luke  does  not  give  this  incident 
which  makes  it  plain  that  by  "they  say"  {legousin)  Jesus  re- 
fers to  the  Pharisees  (rabbis,  lawyers),  carrying  on  the  discus- 
sion and  turning  the  tables  on  them  while  the  Pharisees  are 
still  gathered  together  (Matt.  22:41).  The  construction 
with  legousin  is  the  usual  infinitive  and  the  accusative  in  in- 
direct discourse.  By  "the  Christ"  {ton  Christon)  "the 
Messiah"  is  meant. 

42.  For  David  himself  {autos  gar  Daueid).  This  language 
of  Jesus  clearly  means  that  he  treats  David  as  the  author  of 
Psalm  no.    The  inspiration  of  this  Psalm  is  expressly  stated 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  255 

in  Mark  12:36  =  Matt.  22:43  (which  see)  and  the  Messianic 
character  of  the  Psalm  in  all  three  Synoptics  who  all  quote 
the  LXX  practically  alike.  Modern  criticism  that  denies 
the  Davidic  authorship  of  this  Psalm  has  to  say  either  that 
Jesus  was  ignorant  of  the  fact  about  it  or  that  he  declined  to 
disturb  the  current  acceptation  of  the  Davidic  authorship. 
Certainly  modern  scholars  are  not  agreed  on  the  authorship 
of  Psalm  no.  Meanwhile  one  can  certainly  be  excused  for 
accepting  the  natural  implication  of  the  words  of  Jesus  here, 
"David  himself."  In  the  book  of  the  Psalms  {en  bibloi  P sal- 
mon). Compare  3 14  "in  the  book  of  the  words  of  Isaiah  the 
prophet." 

44.  David  therefore  {Daueid  oun).  Without  ei  as  in  Mat- 
thew 22:45.  On  the  basis  of  this  definite  piece  of  exegesis 
{oun,  therefore)  Jesus  presses  the  problem  {pos,  how)  for  an 
explanation.  The  deity  and  the  humanity  of  the  Messiah  in 
Psalm  no  are  thus  set  forth,  the  very  problems  that  dis- 
turbed the  rabbis  then  and  that  upset  many  critics  today. 

45.  In  the  hearing  of  all  the  people  {akouontos  pantos  tou 
laou).  Genitive  absolute,  "while  all  the  people  were  listen- 
ing" (present  active  participle).  That  is  the  time  to  speak. 
The  details  in  this  verse  and  verse  47  are  precisely  those 
given  in  Mark  I2:38f.,  which  see  for  discussion  of  details. 
Matt.  23:1-39  has  a  very  full  and  rich  description  of  this 
last  phase  of  the  debate  in  the  temple  where  Jesus  drew  a 
full-length  portrait  of  the  hypocrisy  of  the  Pharisees  and 
scribes  in  their  presence.  It  was  a  solemn  climax  to  this 
last  public  appearance  of  Christ  in  the  temple  when  Jesus 
poured  out  the  vials  of  his  indignation  as  he  had  done  before 
(Matt.  6:12;  Luke  11:12,  15-18). 


CHAPTER  XXI 

1.  And  he  looked  up  (Anablepsas  de).  He  had  taken  his 
seat,  after  the  debate  was  over  and  the  Sanhedrin  had  slunk 
away  in  sheer  defeat,  "over  against  the  treasury"  (Mark 
12:41).  The  word  for  "treasury"  (gazophulakion)  is  a  com- 
pound of  gaza  (Persian  word  for  royal  treasury)  and  phulake 
guard  or  protection.  It  is  common  in  the  LXX,  but  in  the 
N.T.  only  here  and  Mark  12 141,  43  and  John  8 :2c  Jesus  was 
watching  (Mark  12:41)  the  rich  put  in  their  gifts  as  a  slight 
diversion  from  the  intense  strain  of  the  hours  before. 

2.  Poor  (penichran).  A  rare  word  from  penes  (penomai, 
to  work  for  one's  living).  Latin  penuria  and  Greek  peinao, 
to  be  hungry  are  kin  to  it.  Here  only  in  the  N.T.  Mark  1 2  42 
hasptoche,  a  more  common  word  from  ptosso,  to  be  frightened, 
to  strike  and  hide  from  fear,  to  be  in  beggary.  And  Luke 
uses  this  adjective  also  of  her  in  verse  3. 

3.  More  than  they  all  (pleion  panton).  Ablative  case  after 
the  comparative  pleion. 

4.  All  these  did  cast  (pantes  houtoi  ebalon).  Constative 
second  aorist  active  indicative  covering  the  whole  crowd 
except  the  widow.  Living  (bion).  Livelihood  as  in  Mark 
12:44,  not  zoen,  principle  of  life. 

5.  As  some  spake  (tinon  legonton).  Genitive  absolute. 
The  disciples  we  know  from  Mark  13:1  =  Matt.  24:1.  How 
(hoti).  Literally,  "that."  It  was  adorned  (kekosmetai). 
Perfect  passive  indicative,  state  of  completion,  stands 
adorned,  tense  retained  in  indirect  discourse,  though  English 
has  to  change  it.  Kosmeo,  old  and  common  verb  for  orderly 
arrangement  and  adorning.  With  goodly  stones  and  offerings 
(lithois  kalois  kai  anathemasin) .  Instrumental  case.  Some 
of  these  stones  in  the  substructure  were  enormous.     "The 

256 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  257 

columns  of  the  cloister  or  portico  were  monoliths  of  marble 
over  forty  feet  high"  (Plummer).  Cf.  Josephus,  War,  V.  5. 
The  word  anathema  (here  only  in  the  N.T.)  is  not  to  be  con- 
fused with  anathema  from  the  same  verb  anatithemi,  but 
which  came  to  mean  a  curse  (Gal.  1:8;  Acts  23:14).  So  an- 
athema came  to  mean  devoted  in  a  bad  sense,  anathema  in  a 
good  sense.  "Thus  knave,  lad,  becomes  a  rascal;  villain,  a 
farmer,  becomes  a  scoundrel;  cunning,  skilful,  becomes 
crafty"  (Vincent).  These  offerings  in  the  temple  were  very 
numerous  and  costly  (II  Mace.  3:2-7)  like  the  golden  vine 
of  Herod  with  branches  as  tall  as  a  man  (Josephus,  Ant. 
XV.  ii.  3). 

6.  As  for  these  things  {tauta).  Accusative  of  general  refer- 
ence. One  stone  upon  another  {lithos  epi  lithoi).  Stone  upon 
stone  (locative).  Here  both  Mark  13 :2  and  Matt.  24:2  have 
epi  lithon  (accusative).  Instead  of  ouk  aphethesetai  (future 
passive)  they  both  have  ou  me  aphethei  (double  negative  with 
aorist  passive  subjunctive).  It  was  a  shock  to  the  disciples 
to  hear  this  after  the  triumphal  entry. 

8.  That  ye  be  not  led  astray  {me  planethete).  First  aorist 
passive  subjunctive  with  me  (lest).  This  verb  planao  occurs 
here  only  in  Luke  though  often  in  the  rest  of  the  N.T.  (as 
Matt.  24:4,  5,  11,  24,  which  see).  Our  word  planet  is  from 
this  word.  The  time  is  at  hand  {ho  kairos  eggiken).  Just  as 
John  the  Baptist  did  of  the  kingdom  (Matt.  3 :2)  and  Jesus 
also  (Mark  1:15).  Go  ye  not  after  them  {me  poreuthete  opiso 
autbn).  First  aorist  passive  subjunctive  with  me.  A  needed 
warning  today  with  all  the  false  cries  in  the  religious  world. 

9.  Be  not  terrified  {me  ptoethete).  First  aorist  passive  sub- 
junctive with  me  from  ptoeo  an  old  verb  to  terrify,  from  ptoa, 
terror.  In  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Luke  24:37.  First  {Pro- 
ton). It  is  so  eas)'-  to  forget  this  and  to  insist  that  the  end 
is  "immediately"  in  spite  of  Christ's  explicit  denial  here. 
See  Matt.  24:4-42  and  Mark  13  :i— 37  for  discussion  of  details 
for  Luke  21 :8-36,  the  great  eschatological  discourse  of  Jesus 


2SS      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

11.  Famines  and  pestilences  (loimoi  kai  limoi).  Play  on 
the  two  words  pronounced  just  alike  in  the  Koine  (itacism). 
And  terrors  (phobethra  te).  The  use  of  te  .  .  .  te  in  this  verse 
groups  the  two  kinds  of  woes.  This  rare  word  phobethra 
is  only  here  in  the  N.T.  It  is  from  phobeo,  to  frighten,  and 
occurs  only  in  the  plural  as  here. 

12.  But  before  all  these  things  (pro  de  touibn  pantbn).  In 
Mark  13:8  =  Matt.  24:8  these  things  are  termed  "the  be- 
ginning of  travail."  That  may  be  the  idea  here.  Plummer 
insists  that  priority  of  time  is  the  point,  not  magnitude. 
Bringing  you  (apagomenous).  Present  passive  participle 
from  apago,  an  old  verb  to  lead  off  or  away.  But  here  the 
participle  is  in  the  accusative  plural,  not  the  nominative  like 
paradidontes  (present  active  participle,  delivering  you  up), 
agreeing  with  humas  not  expressed  the  object  of  paradi- 
dontes,  "you  being  brought  before  or  led  off."  "A  technical 
term  in  Athenian  legal  language"  (Bruce). 

13.  It  shall  turn  unto  you  (apobesetai  humin).  Future  mid- 
dle of  apobaino.  It  will  come  off,  turn  out  for  you  (dative  of 
advantage).  For  a  testimony  (eis  marturion).  To  their  loy- 
alty to  Christ.  Besides,  "the  blood  of  the  martyrs  is  the 
seed  of  the  church." 

14.  Not  to  meditate  beforehand  (me  promeletdin) .  The  clas- 
sical word  for  conning  a  speech  beforehand.  Mark  13:11  has 
promerimnao,  a  later  word  which  shows  previous  anxiety 
rather  than  previous  preparation.  How  to  answer  (apolo- 
gethenai).  First  aorist  passive  infinitive.  It  is  the  prepara- 
tion for  the  speech  of  defence  (apology)  that  Jesus  here  for- 
bids, not  the  preparation  of  a  sermon. 

15.  Your  adversaries  (hoi  antikeimenoi  humin).  Those  who 
stand  against,  line  up  face  to  face  with  (note  anti-).  To 
withstand  or  to  gainsay  (antistenai  e  anteipein).  Two  second 
aorist  active  infinitives  with  anti-  in  composition  again.  But 
these  "antis"  will  go  down  before  the  power  of  Christ. 

16.  Shall  they   cause  to  be  put  to  death   (thanatosousin). 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  259 

Future  active  of  thanatoo,  to  put  to  death  or  to  make  to  die 
(causative).  Either  makes  sense  here.  Old  and  common 
verb. 

17.  Not  a  hair  of  your  head  shall  perish  (thrix  ek  tes  kephales 
humon  ou  me  apoletai) .  Only  in  Luke.  Second  aorist  middle 
subjunctive  of  apollumi  with  ou  me  (double  negative).  Jesus 
has  just  said  that  some  they  will  put  to  death.  Hence  it  is 
spiritual  safety  here  promised  such  as  Paul  claimed  about 
death  in  Phil.  1:21. 

19.  Ye  shall  win  (ktesesthe).  Future  middle  of  ktaomai, 
to  acquire.  They  will  win  their  souls  even  if  death  does 
come. 

20.  Compassed  with  armies  (kukloumenen  hupo  strato- 
pedon).  Present  passive  participle  of  kukloo,  to  circle,  en- 
circle, from  kuklos,  circle.  Old  verb,  but  only  four  times  in 
N.T.  The  point  of  this  warning  is  the  present  tense,  being 
encircled.  It  will  be  too  late  after  the  city  is  surrounded. 
It  is  objected  by  some  that  Jesus,  not  to  say  Luke,  could 
not  have  spoken  (or  written)  these  words  before  the  Roman 
armies  came.  One  may  ask  why  not,  if  such  a  thing  as 
predictive  prophecy  can  exist  and  especially  in  the  case  of 
the  Lord  Jesus.  The  word  stratopedon  (stratos,  army,  pedon, 
plain)  is  a  military  camp  and  then  an  army  in  camp.  Old 
word,  but  only  here  in  the  N.T.  Then  know  (tote  gnote). 
Second  aorist  active  imperative  of  ginosko.  Christians  did 
flee  from  Jerusalem  to  Pella  before  it  was  too  late  as  directed 
in  Luke  21 :2i  =  Mark  13  :i4f.  =  Matt.  24:i6f. 

22.  That  may  be  fulfilled  (tou  plesthenai).  Articular  in- 
finitive passive  to  express  purpose  with  accusative  of  gen- 
eral reference.  The  O.T.  has  many  such  warnings  (Hosea 
9:7;  Deut.  28:49-57,  etc.). 

24.  Edge  of  the  sword  (stomati  machaires).  Instrumental 
case  of  stomati  which  means  "mouth"  literally  (Gen.  34:26). 
This  verse  like  the  close  of  verse  22  is  only  in  Luke.  Josephus 
(War,  VI.  9.  3)  states  that  1,100,000  Jews  perished  in  the 


260      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  97,000  were  taken  captive. 
Surely  this  is  an  exaggeration  and  yet  the  number  must  have 
been  large.  Shall  be  led  captive  (aichmalbtisthesontai). 
Future  passive  of  aichmalbtizo  from  aichme,  spear  and  halbtos 
(halts komai).  Here  alone  in  the  literal  sense  in  the  N.T. 
Shall  be  trodden  under  foot  (estai  patoumene).  Future  passive 
periphrastic  of  pateo,  to  tread,  old  verb.  Until  the  times  of  the 
Gentiles  be  fulfilled  (achri  hou  plerothosin  kairoi  ethnbn). 
First  aorist  passive  subjunctive  with  achri  hou  like  hebs  hou. 
What  this  means  is  not  clear  except  that  Paul  in  Rom.  1 1 125 
shows  that  the  punishment  of  the  Jews  has  a  limit.  The 
same  idiom  appears  there  also  with  achri  hou  and  the  aorist 
subjunctive. 

25.  Distress  (sunoche).  From  sunechb.  In  the  N.T.  only 
here  and  II  Cor.  2:4.  Anguish.  In  perplexity  (en  aporiai). 
State  of  one  who  is  aporos,  who  has  lost  his  way  (a  privative 
and  poros).  Here  only  in  the  N.T.  though  an  old  and  com- 
mon word.  For  the  roaring  of  the  sea  (echous  thalasses). 
Our  word  echo  (Latin  echo)  is  this  word  echos,  a  reverberating 
sound.  Sense  of  rumour  in  Luke  4:37.  Billows  (salou).  Old 
word  salos  for  the  swell  of  the  sea.    Here  only  in  the  N.T. 

26.  Men  fainting  (apopsuchontbn  anthrbpbn).  Genitive 
absolute  of  apopsuchb,  to  expire,  to  breathe  off  or  out.  Old 
word.  Here  only  in  N.T.  Expectation  (prosdokias) .  Old 
word  from  prosdokab,  to  look  for  or  towards.  In  the  N.T. 
only  here  and  Acts  12:11.  The  world  (tei  oikoumenei).  Da- 
tive case,  "the  inhabited"  (earth,  get). 

27.  And  then  shall  they  see  (kai  tote  opsontai).  As  much  as 
to  say  that  it  will  be  not  till  then.  Clearly  the  promise  of 
the  second  coming  of  the  Son  of  man  in  glory  here  ( =  Mark 
I3:26f.  =  Matt.  24:3of.)  is  pictured  as  not  one  certain  of 
immediate  realization.  The  time  element  is  left  purposely 
vague. 

28.  Look  up  (anakupsate).  First  aorist  active  imperative 
of  anakuptb,  to  raise  up.    Here  of  the  soul  as  in  John  8  7,  10, 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  261 

but  in  Luke  13:11  of  the  body.  These  the  only  N.T.  ex- 
amples of  this  common  verb.  Redemption  {apolutrosis) . 
Act  of  redeeming  from  apolutrob.  The  final  act  at  the  second 
coming  of  Christ,  a  glorious  hope. 

29.  The  fig  tree,  and  all  the  trees  {ten  suken  kai  panta  ta 
dendra).  This  parable  of  the  fig-tree  (=  Mark  13:28-32  = 
Matt.  24:32-35)  Luke  applies  to  "all  the  trees."  It  is  true 
about  all  of  them,  but  the  fig  tree  was  very  common  in  Pales- 
tine. 

30.  Shoot  forth  {probalosin).  Second  aorist  active  sub- 
junctive of  proballo,  common  verb,  but  in  the  N.T.  only  here 
and  Acts  19:33.  Summer  {theros).  Not  harvest,  but  sum- 
mer. Old  word,  but  in  the  N.T.  only  here  ( =  Mark  13:28 
=  Matt.  24:32). 

31.  Coming  to  pass  {ginomena).  Present  middle  participle 
of  ginomai  and  so  descriptive  of  the  process.  Nigh  {eggus). 
The  consummation  of  the  kingdom  is  here  meant,  not  the 
beginning. 

32.  This  generation  {he  genea  haute).  Naturally  people 
then  living.  Shall  not  pass  away  {ou  me  parelthei).  Second 
aorist  active  subjunctive  of  parerchomai.  Strongest  possible 
negative  with  ou  me.  Till  all  things  be  accomplished  {heos  an 
panta  genetai).  Second  aorist  middle  subjunctive  of  ginomai 
with  heos,  common  idiom.  The  words  give  a  great  deal  of 
trouble  to  critics.  Some  apply  them  to  the  whole  discourse 
including  the  destruction  of  the  temple  and  Jerusalem,  the 
second  coming  and  the  end  of  the  world.  Some  of  these 
argue  that  Jesus  was  simply  mistaken  in  his  eschatology, 
some  that  he  has  not  been  properly  reported  in  the  Gospels. 
Others  apply  them  only  to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem 
which  did  take  place  in  a.d.  70  before  that  generation 
passed  away.  It  must  be  said  for  this  view  that  it  is  not 
easy  in  this  great  eschatological  discourse  to  tell  clearly 
when  Jesus  is  discussing  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  and 
when  the  second  coming.     Plummer  offers  this  solution: 


262      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

"The  reference,  therefore,  is  to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem 
regarded  as  the  type  of  the  end  of  the  world." 

33.  My  words  shall  not  pass  away  {hoi  logoi  mou  ou  me 
pareleusontai).  Future  middle  indicative  with  ou  me,  a  bit 
stronger  statement  than  the  subjunctive.  It  is  noteworthy 
that  Jesus  utters  these  words  just  after  the  difficult  predic- 
tion in  verse  32. 

34.  Lest  haply  your  hearts  be  overcharged  {me  pote  barethbsin 
hai  kardiai  humbn).  First  aorist  passive  subjunctive  of 
bareb,  an  old  verb  to  weigh  down,  depress,  with  me  pote. 
With  surfeiting  {en  krepalei).  A  rather  late  word,  common 
in  medical  writers  for  the  nausea  that  follows  a  debauch. 
Latin  crapula,  the  giddiness  caused  by  too  much  wine. 
Here  only  in  the  N.T.  Drunkenness  {methei).  From  methu 
(wine).  Old  word  but  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Rom. 
13:13;  Gal.  5:21.  Cares  of  this  life  {merimnais  bibtikais). 
Anxieties  of  life.  The  adjective  bibtikos  is  late  and  in  the 
N.T.  only  here  and  I  Cor.  6:3f.  Come  on  you  {epistei). 
Second  aorist  active  subjunctive  of  ephistemi,  ingressive 
aorist.  Construed  also  with  me  pote.  Suddenly  {ephnidios). 
Adjective  in  predicate  agreeing  with  hemera  (day).  As  a 
snare  {hbs  pagis).  Old  word  from  pegnumi,  to  make  fast  a  net 
or  trap.  Paul  uses  it  several  times  of  the  devil's  snares  for 
preachers  (I  Tim.  3:7;  II  Tim.  2:26). 

36.  But  watch  ye  {agrupneite  de).  Agrupneb  is  a  late  verb 
to  be  sleepless  {a  privative  and  hupnos,  sleep).  Keep  awake 
and  be  ready  is  the  pith  of  Christ's  warning.  That  ye  may 
prevail  to  escape  {hina  katischusete  ekphugein).  First  aorist 
active  subjunctive  with  hina  of  purpose.  The  verb  katischub 
means  to  have  strength  against  (cf.  Matt.  16:18).  Common 
in  later  writers.  Ekphugein  is  second  aorist  active  infinitive, 
to  escape  out.  To  stand  before  the  Son  of  man  {stathenai 
emprosthen  tou  huiou  tou  anthrbpou).  That  is  the  goal. 
There  will  be  no  dread  of  the  Son  then  if  one  is  ready. 
Stathenai  is  first  aorist  passive  infinitive  of  histemi. 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  263 

37.  Every  day  {tas  hemeras).  During  the  days,  accusative 
of  extent  of  time.  Every  night  {tas  nuktas).  "During  the 
nights,"  accusative  of  extent  of  time.  Lodged  (eulizeto). 
Imperfect  middle,  was  lodging,  aulizomai  from  aule  (court). 

38.  Came  early  (orthrizen).  Imperfect  active  of  orthrizb 
from  orthros,  late  form  for  orthreud,  to  rise  early.  Only  here 
in  the  N.T. 


CHAPTER  XXII 

1.  The  Passover  (pascha)  Both  names  (unleavened 
bread  and  passover)  are  used  here  as  in  Mark  14:1.  Strictly 
speaking  the  passover  was  Nisan  14  and  the  unleavened 
bread  15-21.  This  is  the  only  place  in  the  N.T.  where  the 
expression  "the  feast  of  unleavened  bread"  (common  in 
LXX,  Ex.  23:  15,  etc.)  occurs,  for  Mark  14:1  has  just  "the 
unleavened  bread."  Matt.  26:17  uses  unleavened  bread 
and  passover  interchangeably.  Drew  nigh  (eggizen).  Im- 
perfect active.  Mark  14:1  and  Matt.  26:2  mention  "after 
two  days"  definitely. 

2.  Sought  (ezetoun).  Imperfect  active  of  zeteo,  were  seek- 
ing, conative  imperfect.  How  they  might  put  him  to  death 
{to  pbs  anelbsin  auton).  Second  aorist  active  deliberative 
subjunctive  (retained  in  indirect  question)  of  anaired,  to  take 
up,  to  make  away  with,  to  slay.  Common  in  Old  Greek. 
Luke  uses  it  so  here  and  in  23:32  and  eighteeen  times  in  the 
Acts,  a  favourite  word  with  him.  Note  the  accusative  neuter 
singular  article  to  with  the  whole  clause,  "as  to  the  how,  etc." 
For  they  feared  (ephobounto  gar).  Imperfect  middle  describ- 
ing the  delay  of  the  "how."  The  triumphal  entry  and  the 
temple  speeches  of  Jesus  had  revealed  his  tremendous  power 
with  the  people,  especially  the  crowds  from  Galilee  at  the 
feast.  They  were  afraid  to  go  on  with  their  plan  to  kill  him 
at  the  feast. 

3.  Satan  entered  into  Judas  (eiselthen  eis  Ioudan).  Ingres- 
sive  aorist  active  indicative.  Satan  was  now  renewing  his 
attack  on  Jesus  suspended  temporarily  (Luke  4:13)  "until  a 
good  chance."  He  had  come  back  by  the  use  of  Simon 
Peter  (Mark  8:33  =  Matt.  16:23).  The  conflict  went  on 
and  Jesus  won  ultimate  victory  (Luke  10:18).    Now  Satan 

264 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  265 

uses  Judas  and  has  success  with  him  for  Judas  allowed  him 
to  come  again  and  again  (John  13:27).  Judas  evidently- 
opened  the  door  to  his  heart  and  let  Satan  in.  Then  Satan 
took  charge  and  he  became  a  devil  as  Jesus  said  (John  6:70). 
This  surrender  to  Satan  in  no  way  relieves  Judas  of  his  moral 
responsibility. 

4.  Went  away  {apelthon).  Second  aorist  active  participle 
of  aperchomai.  He  went  off  under  the  impulse  of  Satan  and 
after  the  indignation  over  the  rebuke  of  Jesus  at  the  feast  in 
Simon's  house  (John  12:4-6).  Captains  {str  ate  gois).  Leaders 
of  the  temple  guards  (Acts  4:1),  the  full  title,  "captains  of 
the  temple,"  occurs  in  verse  52.  How  he  might  deliver  him 
unto  them  {to  pbs  autois  paradoi  auton).  The  same  construc- 
tion as  in  verse  2,  the  article  to  with  the  indirect  question  and 
deliberative  subjunctive  second  aorist  active  {paradoi). 

5.  Were  glad  {e  chares  an).  Second  aorist  passive  indicative 
of  chairo  as  in  Mark  14:11.  Ingressive  aorist,  a  natural 
exultation  that  one  of  the  Twelve  had  offered  to  do  this  thing. 
Covenanted  {sunethento) .  Second  aorist  indicative  middle  of 
suntithemi.  An  old  verb  to  put  together  and  in  the  middle 
with  one  another.  In  the  N.T.  outside  of  John  9:22  only  in 
Luke  (here  and  Acts  23:20;  24:9).  Luke  only  mentions 
"money"  {argurion),  but  not  "thirty  pieces"  (Matt.  26:15). 

6.  Consented  {exomologesen).  Old  verb,  but  the  ancients 
usually  used  the  simple  form  for  promise  or  consent  rather 
than  the  compound.  This  is  the  only  instance  of  this  sense 
in  the  N.T.  It  is  from  homologos  {homos,  same,  and  lego,  to 
say),  to  say  the  same  thing  with  another  and  so  agree.  Op- 
portunity {eukarian).  From  eukairos  {eu,  kairos),  a  good 
chance.  Old  word,  but  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  parallel 
passage  Matt.  26:16.  In  the  absence  of  the  multitude  {ater 
ochlou).  Ater  is  an  old  preposition,  common  in  the  poets, 
but  rare  in  prose.  Also  in  verse  35.  It  means  "without," 
"apart  from,"  like  choris.  The  point  of  Judas  was  just 
this.    He  would  get  Jesus  into  the  hands  of  the  Sanhedrin 


266      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

during  the  feast  in  spite  of  the  crowd.  It  was  necessary 
to  avoid  tumult  (Matt.  26:5)  because  of  the  popularity  of 
Jesus. 

7.  The  day  of  unleavened  bread  came  {elthen  he  hemera  ton 
azumbn).  The  day  itself  came,  not  simply  was  drawing  nigh 
(verse  1).  Must  be  sacrificed  (edei  thuesthai).  This  was 
Nisan  14  which  began  at  sunset.  Luke  is  a  Gentile  and  this 
fact  must  be  borne  in  mind.  The  lamb  must  be  slain  by  the 
head  of  the  family  (Ex.  12:6).  The  controversy  about  the 
day  when  Christ  ate  the  last  passover  meal  has  already 
been  discussed  (Matt.  26:17  =Mark  14:12).  The  Synoptics 
clearly  present  this  as  a  fact.  Jesus  was  then  crucified  on 
Friday  at  the  passover  or  Thursday  (our  time)  at  the  regular 
hour  6  p.m.  (beginning  of  Friday).  The  five  passages  in 
John  (13  :if.;  13:27;  18:28;  19:14;  19:31)  rightly  interpreted 
teach  the  same  thing  as  shown  in  my  Harmony  of  the  Gospels 
for  Students  of  the  Life  of  Christ  (pp.  279-284). 

8.  Peter  and  John  (Petron  kai  Ibanen).  Mark  14:13  has 
only  "two"  while  Matt.  26:17  makes  the  disciples  take  the 
initiative.  The  word  passover  in  this  context  is  used  either 
of  the  meal,  the  feast  day,  the  whole  period  (including  the 
unleavened  bread).  "Eat  the  passover"  can  refer  to  the 
meal  as  here  or  to  the  whole  period  of  celebration  (John 
18:28). 

9.  Where  wilt  thou  that  we  make  ready?  (Pou  theleis  hetoi- 
masbmen;).  Deliberative  first  aorist  active  subjunctive 
without  hina  after  theleis,  perhaps  originally  two  separate 
questions. 

10.  When  you  are  entered  (eiselthontbn  humbn).  Genitive 
absolute.  Meet  you  {sunaniesei  humin).  An  old  verb  sun- 
antab  (from  sun,  with,  and  antab,  to  face,  anti)  with  associa- 
tive instrumental  {humin).  See  on  Mark  14:13  about  the 
"man  bearing  a  pitcher  of  water." 

11.  Goodman  of  the  house  (oikodespotei).  Master  of  the 
house  as  in  Mark  14:14  and  Matt.  10:25.    A  late  word  for  the 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  267 

earlier  despoies  oikou.     I  shall  eat  (phagb).     Second  aorist 
futuristic  (or  deliberative)  subjunctive  as  in  Mark  14:14. 

12.  And  he  (k' 'akeinos) .  Kai  and  ekeinos  (crasis)  where 
Mark  14:15  has  kai  autos.  Literally,  And  that  one.  See  on 
Mark  for  rest  of  the  verse. 

13.  He  had  said  (eirekei).  Past  perfect  active  indicative 
of  eipon  where  Mark  14:16  has  eipen  (second  aorist). 

14.  Sat  down  (anepesen).  Reclined,  fell  back  (or  up). 
Second  aorist  active  of  anapipib. 

15.  With  desire  I  have  desired  (epithumiai  epethumesd). 
A  Hebraism  common  in  the  LXX.  Associative  instrumental 
case  of  substantive  and  first  aorist  active  indicative  of  same 
like  a  cognate  accusative.  Peculiar  to  Luke  is  all  this  verse. 
See  this  idiom  in  John  3  :29;  Acts  4:17.  Before  I  suffer  {pro 
tou  me  pathein).  Preposition  pro  with  articular  infinitive  and 
accusative  of  general  reference,  "before  the  suffering  as  to 
me."     Pathein  is  second  aorist  active  infinitive  of  pascho. 

16.  Until  it  be  fulfilled  (heos  hotou  plerothei).  First  aorist 
passive  subjunctive  of  pier 00  with  heos  (hotou),  the  usual 
construction  about  the  future.  It  seems  like  a  Messianic 
banquet  that  Jesus  has  in  mind  (cf.  14:15). 

17.  He  received  a  cup  (dexamenos  poterion).  This  cup  is  a 
diminutive  of  poter.  It  seems  that  this  is  still  one  of  the  four 
cups  passed  during  the  passover  meal,  though  which  one  is 
uncertain.  It  is  apparently  just  before  the  formal  introduc- 
tion of  the  Lord's  Supper,  though  he  gave  thanks  here  also 
(eucharistesas).  It  is  from  this  verb  eucharisted  (see  also 
verse  19)  that  our  word  Eucharist  comes.  It  is  a  common 
verb  for  giving  thanks  and  was  used  also  for  "saying  grace" 
as  we  call  it. 

18.  The  fruit  of  the  vine  (tou  genematos  tes  ampelou).  So 
Mark  14:25  =  Matt.  26:29  and  not  oinos  though  it  was  wine 
undoubtedly.  But  the  language  allows  anything  that  is 
"the  fruit  of  the  vine."  Come  (elthei).  Second  aorist  active 
subjunctive  with  heos  as  in  verse  16.    Here  it  is  the  consum- 


268      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

mation  of  the  kingdom  that  Jesus  has  in  mind,  for  the  king- 
dom had  already  come. 

19.  Which  is  given  for  you  (to  huper  humbn  didomenon). 
Some  MSS.  omit  these  verses  though  probably  genuine. 
The  correct  text  in  I  Cor.  11:24  has  "which  is  for  you," 
not  "which  is  broken  for  you."  It  is  curious  to  find  the  word 
"broken"  here  preserved  and  justified  so  often,  even  by 
Easton  in  his  commentary  on  Luke,  p.  320.  In  remembrance 
of  me  (eis  ten  emen  anamnesin).  Objective  use  of  the  posses- 
sive pronoun  emen,  not  the  subjective.  This  do  (touto 
poieite).  Present  active  indicative,  repetition,  keep  on  doing 
this. 

20.  After  the  supper  (meta  to  deipnesai).  Preposition  meta 
and  the  accusative  articular  infinitive.  The  textual  situation 
here  is  confusing,  chiefly  because  of  the  two  cups  (verses  17 
and  20).  Some  of  the  documents  omit  the  latter  part  of 
verse  19  and  all  of  verse  20.  It  is  possible,  of  course,  that  this 
part  crept  into  the  text  of  Luke  from  I  Cor.  11 :24f.  But,  if 
this  part  is  omitted,  Luke  would  then  have  the  order  re- 
versed, the  cup  before  the  bread.  So  there  are  difficulties 
whichever  turn  one  takes  here  with  Luke's  text  whether  one 
cup  or  two  cups.  The  New  Covenant  (he  kaine  diatheke).  See 
on  Matt.  26:28  =  Mark  14:24  for  "covenant."  Westcott  and 
Hort  reject  "new"  there,  but  accept  it  here  and  in  I  Cor. 
11:25.  See  on  Luke  5:38  for  difference  between  kaine  and 
nea.  "The  ratification  of  a  covenant  was  commonly  as- 
sociated with  the  shedding  of  blood;  and  what  was  written 
in  blood  was  believed  to  be  indelible"  (Plummer).  Poured 
out  (ekchunnomenon) .  Same  word  in  Mark  14:24  =  Matt. 
26:28  translated  "shed."  Late  form  present  passive  parti- 
ciple of  ekchunnb  of  ekcheo,  to  pour  out. 

21.  That  betrayeth  (tou  paradidontos).  Present  active 
participle,  actually  engaged  in  doing  it.  The  hand  of  Judas 
was  resting  on  the  table  at  the  moment.  It  should  be  noted 
that  Luke  narrates  the  institution  of  the  Lord's  Supper  before 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  269 

the  exposure  of  Judas  as  the  traitor  while  Mark  and  Matthew 
reverse  this  order. 

22.  As  it  hath  been  determined  (kata  to  hbrismenon).  Perfect 
passive  participle  of  horizo,  to  limit  or  define,  mark  off"  the 
border,  our  "horizon."  But  this  fact  does  not  absolve  Judas 
of  his  guilt  as  the  "woe"  here  makes  plain. 

23.  Which  of  them  it  was  {to  tis  ara  eie  ex  autbn).  Note 
the  article  to  with  the  indirect  question  as  in  verses  2  and  4. 
The  optative  eie  here  is  changed  from  the  present  active 
indicative  estin,  though  it  was  not  always  done,  for  see  dokei 
in  verse  24  where  the  present  indicative  is  retained.  They 
all  had  their  hands  on  the  table.    Whose  hand  was  it? 

24.  Contention  (philoneikia).  Anoldwordfromphiloneikos, 
fond  of  strife,  eagerness  to  contend.  Only  here  in  the  N.T. 
Greatest  {meizbn).  Common  use  of  the  comparative  as  super- 
lative. 

25.  Have  lordship  over  (kurieuousin) .  From  kurios.  Com- 
mon verb,  to  lord  it  over.  Benefactors  {euergetai).  From 
eu  and  ergon.  Doer  of  good.  Old  word.  Here  only  in  the 
N.T.    Latin  Benefactor  is  exact  equivalent. 

26.  Become  {ginesthb).  Present  middle  imperative  of 
ginomai.    Act  so.    True  greatness  is  in  service,  not  in  rank. 

27.  But  I  {Ego  de).  Jesus  dares  to  cite  his  own  conduct, 
though  their  leader,  to  prove  his  point  and  to  put  a  stop  to 
their  jealous  contention  for  the  chief  place  at  this  very 
feast,  a  wrangling  that  kept  up  till  Jesus  had  to  arise  and 
give  them  the  object  lesson  of  humility  by  washing  their 
feet  (John  13:1-20). 

28.  In  my  temptations  {en  tois  peirasmois  mou).  Prob- 
ably "trials"  is  better  here  as  in  James  1:2  though  tempta- 
tions clearly  in  James  1  :i3fF.  This  is  the  tragedy  of  the  situa- 
tion when  Jesus  is  facing  the  Cross  with  the  traitor  at  the 
table  and  the  rest  chiefly  concerned  about  their  own  pri- 
macy and  dignity. 

29.  And  I  appoint  unto  you   {kagb  diatithemai  humin). 


270      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

They  had  on  the  whole  been  loyal  and  so  Jesus  passes  on  to 
them  (diathemai  verb  from  which  diatheke  comes). 

30.  And  ye  shall  sit  (kathesesthe).  But  Westcott  and 
Hort  read  in  the  text  kathesthe  (present  middle  subjunctive 
with  hind).  The  picture  seems  to  be  that  given  in  Matt. 
19:28  when  Jesus  replied  to  Peter's  inquiry.  It  is  not  clear 
how  literally  this  imagery  is  to  be  taken.  But  there  is  the 
promise  of  honour  for  the  loyal  among  these  in  the  end. 

31.  Asked  to  have  you  (exeitesato).  First  aorist  indirect 
middle  indicative  of  exaiteo,  an  old  verb  to  beg  something 
of  one  and  (middle)  for  oneself.  Only  here  in  the  N.T.  The 
verb  is  used  either  in  the  good  or  the  bad  sense,  but  it  does 
not  mean  here  "obtained  by  asking"  as  margin  in  Re- 
vised Version  has  it.  That  he  might  sift  you  (tou  siniasai). 
Genitive  articular  infinitive  of  purpose.  First  aorist  active 
infinitive  of  siniazo,  to  shake  a  sieve,  to  sift,  from  sinion,  a 
winnowing  fan.    Later  word.    Here  only  in  the  N.T. 

32.  That  thy  faith  fail  not  (hina  me  eklipei  he  pistis  mou). 
Second  aorist  active  subjunctive  of  purpose  with  hina  after 
edeethen  (I  prayed)  of  ekleipo,  old  verb.  Our  word  eclipse 
is  this  word.  Evidently  Jesus  could  not  keep  Satan  from 
attacking  Peter.  He  had  already  captured  Judas.  Did 
he  not  repeatedly  attack  Jesus?  But  he  could  and  did  pray 
for  Peter's  faith  and  his  praying  won  in  the  end,  though 
Peter  stumbled  and  fell.  And  do  thou  (kai  su).  The  words 
single  out  Peter  sharply.  Once  thou  hast  turned  again  (pote 
epistrepsas).  First  aorist  active  participle  of  epistrepho,  com- 
mon verb  to  turn  to,  to  return.  But  the  use  of  this  word 
implied  that  Peter  would  fall  though  he  would  come  back 
and  "strengthen  thy  brethren." 

33.  To  prison  and  to  death  (eis  phulaken  kai  eis  thanaton). 
Evidently  Peter  was  not  flattered  by  the  need  of  Christ's 
earnest  prayers  for  his  welfare  and  loyalty.  Hence  this  loud 
boast. 

34.  Until  thou  shalt  thrice  deny  that  thou  knowest  me  (heos 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  271 

tris  me  aparnesei  eidenai).  "Thrice"  is  in  all  four  Gospels 
here  for  they  all  give  this  warning  to  Peter  (Mark  14:30  = 
Matt.  26:34  =  Luke  22:34=  John  18:38).  Peter  will  even 
deny  knowing  Jesus  {eidenai) . 

35.  Without  purse  {ater  ballantiou).  Money  bag  or  purse. 
Old  word,  but  in  the  N.T.  only  in  Luke  (10:4;  12:33;  22: 
35ff.).  Wallet  {per as).  See  on  Matt.  10:10.  Lacked  ye 
anything  {me  tinos  husteresate;).  Answer  No  expected  {ou- 
thenos  below).    Ablative  case  after  hustereb. 

36.  Buy  a  sword  {agorasatb  machairan).  This  is  for  de- 
fence clearly.  The  reference  is  to  the  special  mission  in 
Galilee  (Luke  9:1-6  =  Mark  6:6-13  =  Matt.  9:35-11:1). 
They  are  to  expect  persecution  and  bitter  hostility  (John 
15:18-21).  Jesus  does  not  mean  that  his  disciples  are  to 
repel  force  by  force,  but  that  they  are  to  be  ready  to  defend 
his  cause  against  attack.  Changed  conditions  bring  changed 
needs.     This    language    can   be   misunderstood   as   it  was 

then. 

38.  Lord,  behold,  here  are  two  swords  {kurie  idou  machairai 
hbde  duo).  They  took  his  words  literally.  And  before  this 
very  night  is  over  Peter  will  use  one  of  these  very  swords  to 
try  to  cut  off  the  head  of  Malchus  only  to  be  sternly  rebuked 
by  Jesus  (Mark  14:47  =  Matt.  26:511.  =  Luke  22:501.  = 
John  i8:iof.).  Then  Jesus  will  say:  "For  all  that  take  the 
sword  shall  perish  with  the  sword"  (Matt.  26:52).  Clearly 
Jesus  did  not  mean  his  language  even  about  the  sword  to 
be  pressed  too  literally.  So  he  said:  "It  is  enough"  {Hi- 
kanon  estin).  It  is  with  sad  irony  and  sorrow  that  Jesus 
thus  dismisses  the  subject.  They  were  in  no  humour  now  to 
understand  the  various  sides  of  this  complicated  problem. 
Every  preacher  and  teacher  understands  this  mood,  not  of 
impatience,  but  of  closing  the  subject  for  the  present. 

39.  As  his  custom  was  {kata  to  ethos).  According  to  the 
custom  (of  him).  It  was  because  Judas  knew  the  habit  of 
Jesus  of  going  to  Gethsemane  at  night  that  he  undertook 


272      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

to  betray  him  without  waiting  for  the  crowd  to  go  home 
after  the  feast. 

40.  At  the  place  (epi  tou  topou).  The  place  of  secret  prayer 
which  was  dear  to  Jesus.  Pray  that  ye  enter  not  into  tempta- 
tion (proseuchesthe  me  eiselthein  eis  peirasmon).  "Keep  on 
praying  not  to  enter  (ingressive  aorist  infinitive,  not  even 
once)  into  temptation."  It  is  real  "temptation"  here,  not 
just  "trial."  Jesus  knew  the  power  of  temptation  and  the 
need  of  prayer.  These  words  throw  a  light  on  the  meaning 
of  his  language  in  Matt.  6:13.  Jesus  repeats  this  warning 
in  verse  46. 

41.  About  a  stone's  throw  (hosei  lithou  bolen).  Accusative 
of  extent  of  space.  Luke  does  not  tell  of  leaving  eight  disci- 
ples by  the  entrance  to  Gethsemane  nor  about  taking  Peter, 
James,  and  John  further  in  with  him.  Kneeled  down  (theis  ta 
gonaia).  Second  aorist  active  participle  from  tithemi.  Mark 
14:35  says  "fell  on  the  ground"  and  Matt.  26:39  "feM  on 
his  face."  All  could  be  true  at  different  moments.  Prayed 
(proseucheto).  Imperfect  middle,  was  praying,  kept  on  pray- 
ing. 

42.  If  thou  be  willing  (ei  boulei).  This  condition  is  in  the 
first  petition  at  the  start.  Be  done  (ginestho).  Present  mid- 
dle imperative,  keep  on  being  done,  the  Father's  will. 

43.  An  angel  (aggelos).  The  angels  visited  Jesus  at  the 
close  of  the  three  temptations  at  the  beginning  of  his 
ministry  (Matt.  4:11).  Here  the  angel  comes  during  the 
conflict. 

44.  In  an  agony  {en  agoniai).  It  was  conflict,  contest 
from  agon.  An  old  word,  but  only  here  in  the  N.T.  Satan 
pressed  Jesus  harder  than  ever  before.  As  it  were  great  drops 
of  blood  (hosei  thromboi  haimatos).  Thick,  clotted  blood. 
An  old  word  {thromboi)  common  in  medical  works,  but  here 
only  in  the  N.T.  This  passage  (verses  43  and  44)  is  absent 
from  some  ancient  documents.  Aristotle  speaks  of  a  bloody 
sweat  as  does  Theophrastus. 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  273 

45.  Sleeping  for  sorrow  {koimomenous  apo  tes  lupes). 
Luke  does  not  tell  of  the  three  turnings  of  Jesus  to  the  trusted 
three  for  human  sympathy. 

46.  Why  sleep  ye?  {Ti  katheudete;).  This  reproach  Luke 
gives,  but  not  the  almost  bitter  details  in  Mark  14:37-42  = 
Matt.  26:40-46). 

47.  Went  before  them  (proercheto) .  Imperfect  middle. 
Judas  was  leading  the  band  for  he  knew  the  place  well 
(John  18:2). 

48.  With  a  kiss  {philemaxi).  Instrumental  case.  Jesus 
challenges  the  act  of  Judas  openly  and  calls  it  betrayal, 
but  it  did  not  stop  him. 

49.  What  would  follow  {to  esomenon).  Article  and  the 
future  middle  participle  of  eimi,  to  be.  Shall  we  smite  with 
a  sword?  {ei  pataxomen  en  machairei;).  Note  ei  in  a  direct 
question  like  the  Hebrew.  Luke  alone  gives  this  question. 
Instrumental  use  of  en.  They  had  the  two  swords  already 
mentioned  (22:38). 

50.  His  right  ear  {to  ous  autou  to  dexion).  Mark  14:47 
and  Matt.  26:51  do  not  mention  "right,"  but  Luke  the 
Physician  does.  John  18:10  follows  Luke  in  this  item  and 
also  adds  the  names  of  Peter  and  of  Malchus  since  probably 
both  were  dead  by  that  time  and  Peter  would  not  be  in- 
volved in  trouble. 

51.  Suffer  us  thus  far  {eate  heos  toutou).  Present  active 
imperative  of  edo,  to  allow.  But  the  meaning  is  not  clear. 
If  addressed  to  Peter  and  the  other  disciples  it  means  that 
they  are  to  suffer  this  much  of  violence  against  Jesus.  This 
is  probably  the  idea.  If  it  is  addressed  to  the  crowd,  it 
means  that  they  are  to  excuse  Peter  for  his  rash  act.  He 
touched  his  ear  and  healed  him  {hapsamenos  tou  otiou  iasato 
auton).  Whether  Jesus  picked  up  the  piece  of  the  ear  and 
put  it  back  is  not  said.  He  could  have  healed  the  wound 
without  that.  This  miracle  of  surgery  is  given  alone  by 
Luke. 


274      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

52.  As  against  a  robber?  (hos  epi  leisten;).  They  were 
treating  Jesus  as  if  he  were  a  bandit  like  Barabbas. 

53.  But  this  is  your  hour  (aW  haute  estin  humon  he  hbra). 
So  Jesus  surrenders.  The  moral  value  of  his  atoning  sacri- 
fice on  the  Cross  consists  in  the  voluntariness  of  his  death. 
He  makes  it  clear  that  they  have  taken  undue  advantage 
of  him  in  this  hour  of  secret  prayer  and  had  failed  to  seize 
him  in  public  in  the  temple.  But  "the  power  of  darkness" 
{he  exousia  tou  skotous),  had  its  turn.  A  better  day  will 
come.    The  might,  authority  of  darkness. 

54.  Into  the  high  priest's  house  (eis  ten  oikian  tou  archie- 
reos).  Luke  alone  mentions  "the  house."  Though  it  is  im- 
plied in  Mark  14:53  =  Matt.  26:57.  Followed  (ekolouthei). 
Imperfect,  was  following,  as  Matt.  26:58  and  John  18:15. 
Curiously  Mark  14:54  has  the  aorist. 

55.  When  they  had  kindled  afire  (periapsantbn  pur).  Geni- 
tive absolute,  first  aorist  active  participle  of  periapto,  an 
old  verb,  but  here  only  in  the  N.T.  Kindle  around,  make  a 
good  fire  that  blazes  all  over.  It  was  April  and  cool  at  night. 
The  servants  made  the  fire.  And  had  sat  down  together  (kai 
sunkathisanton).  Genitive  absolute  again.  Note  sun-  (to- 
gether), all  had  taken  seats  around  the  fire.  Peter  sat  in 
the  midst  of  them  (ekatheto  ho  Petros  mesos  anion).  Imperfect 
tense,  he  was  sitting,  and  note  mesos,  nominative  predicate 
adjective  with  the  genitive,  like  John  1 :26,  good  Greek 
idiom. 

56.  In  the  light  (pros  to  phos).  Facing  (pros)  the  light,  for 
the  fire  gave  light  as  well  as  heat.  Mark  14:65  has  "warming 
himself  in  the  light,"  John  (18:18,  25)  "warming  himself." 
Looking  steadfastly  (atenisasa).  Favourite  word  in  Luke 
(4:20,  etc.)  for  gazing  steadily  at  one.  This  man  also  (kai 
houtos) .  As  if  pointing  to  Peter  and  talking  about  him.  The 
other  Gospels  (Mark  14:67  =Matt.  26:69=  John  18:25) 
make  a  direct  address  to  Peter.  Both  could  be  true,  as  she 
turned  to  Peter. 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  275 

57.  /  know  him  not  {ouk  oida  autori).  Just  as  Jesus  had 
predicted  that  he  would  do  (Luke  22:34). 

58.  After  a  little  while  another  {meta  brachu  heteros). 
Matt.  26:71  makes  it  after  Peter  had  gone  out  into  the  porch 
and  mentions  a  maid  as  speaking  as  does  Mark  14:69,  while 
here  the  "other"  {heteros)  is  a  man  (masculine  gender).  It  is 
almost  impossible  to  co-ordinate  the  three  denials  in  the  four 
accounts  unless  we  conceive  of  several  joining  in  when  one 
led  off.    This  time  Peter's  denial  is  very  blunt,  "  I  am  not." 

59.  After  the  space  of  about  one  hour  {diastases  hosei  horas 
mias).  Genitive  absolute  with  second  aorist  active  participle 
feminine  singular  of  diistemi.  This  classical  verb  in  the  N.T. 
is  used  only  by  Luke  (22:59;  24:51;  Acts  27:28).  It  means 
standing  in  two  or  apart,  about  an  hour  intervening.  Con- 
fidently affirmed  {diischurizeto).  Imperfect  middle,  he  kept 
affirming  strongly.  An  old  verb  {dia,  ischurizomai),  to  make 
oneself  strong,  to  make  emphatic  declaration.  In  the  N.T. 
only  here  and  Acts  12:15.  F°r  he  is  a  Galilean  {kai  gar 
Galilaios  estin).  Matt.  26:73  makes  it  plain  that  it  was  his 
speech  that  gave  him  away,  which  see. 

60.  /  know  not  what  thou  say  est  {ouk  oida  ho  legeis).  Each 
denial  tangles  Peter  more  and  more.  While  he  yet  spake 
{eti  lalountos  autou).  Genitive  absolute.  Peter  could  hear 
the  crowing  all  right. 

61.  The  Lord  turned  {strapheis  ho  kurios).  Second  aorist 
passive  participle  of  strepho,  coming  verb.  Graphic  picture 
drawn  by  Luke  alone.  Looked  upon  Peter  {eneblepsen  toi 
Petroi).  Ingressive  aorist  active  indicative  of  enblepo,  an 
old  and  vivid  verb,  to  glance  at.  Remembered  {hupemnesthe). 
First  aorist  passive  indicative  of  hupomimnesko,  common 
verb  to  remind  one  of  something  {hupo  giving  a  suggestion 
or  hint).  The  cock  crowing  and  the  look  brought  swiftly 
back  to  Peter's  mind  the  prophecy  of  Jesus  and  his  sad 
denials.    The  mystery  is  how  he  had  forgotten  that  warning. 

62.  And  he  went  out  and  wept  bitterly  {kai  exelthon  exo 


276      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

eklausen  pikros).  A  few  old  Latin  documents  omit  this  verse 
which  is  genuine  in  Matt.  26:75.  It  may  be  an  insertion 
here  from  there,  but  the  evidence  for  the  rejection  is  too 
slight.  It  is  the  ingressive  aorist  (eklausen),  he  burst  into 
tears.  "Bitter"  is  a  common  expression  for  tears  in  all 
languages  and  in  all  hearts. 

63.  That  held  (hoi  sunechontes).  See  on  8:45;  19:43  for  this 
verb  sunechb.  Here  alone  in  the  N.T.  for  holding  a  prisoner 
(holding  together).  The  servants  or  soldiers,  not  the  San- 
hedrim Mocked  (enepaizon).  Imperfect  active,  were  mock- 
ing, inchoative,  began  to  mock,  to  play  like  boys.  And  beat 
him  (derontes).  Present  active  participle  of  dero,  to  flay,  tan, 
or  hide.    Literally,  "beating." 

64.  Blindfolded  (perikalups antes).  First  aorist  active  par- 
ticiple of  perikalupto,  old  verb,  to  put  a  veil  around.  In  the 
N.T.  only  here  and  Mark  14:65.  See  Mark  14:65  and  Matt. 
26:67f.  for  further  discussion. 

65.  Many  other  things  (hetera  polla).  These  are  just  sam- 
ples. 

66.  As  soon  as  it  was  day  (hos  egeneto  hemera).  Mark 
15:1  (  =  Matt.  27:1)  has  "morning."  The  assembly  of  the 
people  (to  presbutezion  tou  laou).  The  technical  word  for 
"the  eldership"  (from  presbuteros,  an  old  man  or  elder)  or 
group  of  the  elders  composing  the  Sanhedrin.  The  word 
occurs  in  the  LXX  for  the  Sanhedrin.  In  the  N.T.  occurs 
only  here  and  Acts  22:5  of  the  Sanhedrin.  In  I  Tim.  4:14 
Paul  uses  it  of  the  elders  in  a  church  (or  churches).  The 
Sanhedrin  was  composed  of  the  elders  and  scribes  and  chief 
priests  (Mark  15:1)  and  all  three  groups  are  at  this  meeting. 
Luke's  language  (both  chief  priests  and  scribes,  te  .  .  .  kai) 
seems  to  apply  the  word  presbuterion  to  the  whole  Sanhedrin. 
Sadducees  (chief  priests)  and  Pharisees  (scribes)  were  nearly 
equally  represented.  Into  their  council  (eis  to  sunedrion 
auton) .  The  place  of  the  gathering  is  not  given,  but  Jesus  was 
led  into  the  council  chamber. 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  277 

67.  //  thou  art  the  Christ  {Ei  su  ei  ho  Christos).  The  Mes- 
siah, they  mean.  The  condition  is  the  first  class,  assuming  it 
to  be  true.  If  I  tell  you  (Ean  humin  eipo).  Condition  of  the 
third  class,  undetermined,  but  with  likelihood  of  being 
determined.  This  is  the  second  appearance  of  Jesus  before 
the  Sanhedrin  merely  mentioned  by  Mark  15:1  and  Matt. 
27:1  who  give  in  detail  the  first  appearance  and  trial.  Luke 
merely  gives  this  so-called  ratification  meeting  after  daybreak 
to  give  the  appearance  of  legality  to  their  vote  of  condemna- 
tion already  taken  (Mark  14:64  =  Matt.  26:66).  Ye  will  not 
believe  {pu  me  pisteusete).  Double  negative  with  the  aorist 
subjunctive,  strongest  possible  negative.    So  as  to  verse  68. 

69.  The  Son  of  man  {ho  huios  tou  anthropou).  Jesus  really 
answers  their  demand  about  "the  Messiah"  by  asserting  that 
he  is  "the  Son  of  man"  and  they  so  understand  him.  He 
makes  claims  of  equality  with  God  also  which  they  take  up. 

70.  Art  thou  the  Son  of  God?  (Su  oun  ei  ho  huios  tou  theou;). 
Note  how  these  three  epithets  are  used  as  practical  equiva- 
lents. They  ask  about  "the  Messiah."  Jesus  affirms  that 
he  is  the  Son  of  Man  and  will  sit  at  the  right  hand  of  the 
power  of  God.  They  take  this  to  be  a  claim  to  be  the  Son  of 
God  (both  humanity  and  deity).  Jesus  accepts  the  challenge 
and  admits  that  he  claims  to  be  all  three  (Messiah,  the  Son 
of  man,  the  Son  of  God).  Ye  say  (Humeis  legete).  Just 
a  Greek  idiom  for  "Yes"  (compare  "I  am"  in  Mark  14:62 
with  "Thou  has  said"  in  Matt.  26:64). 

71.  For  we  ourselves  have  heard  (autoi  gar  ekousamen). 
They  were  right  if  Jesus  is  not  what  he  claimed  to  be.  They 
were  eternally  wrong  for  he  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  man, 
the  Son  of  God.  They  made  their  choice  and  must  face 
Christ  as  Judge. 


CHAPTER  XXIII 

1.  The  whole  company  {hapan  to  plethos).  All  but  Nicode- 
mus  and  Joseph  of  Arimathea  who  were  probably  not  invited 
to  this  meeting. 

2.  Began  to  accuse  (erxanto  kategorein).  They  went  at  it 
and  kept  it  up.  Luke  mentions  three,  but  neither  of  them 
includes  their  real  reason  nor  do  they  mention  their  own  con- 
demnation of  Jesus.  They  had  indulged  their  hatred  in  doing 
it,  but  they  no  longer  have  the  power  of  life  and  death. 
Hence  they  say  nothing  to  Pilate  of  that.  We  found  {heura- 
men).  Second  aorist  active  indicative  with  first  aorist  vowel 
a.  Probably  they  mean  that  they  had  caught  Jesus  in  the 
act  of  doing  these  things  {in  flagrante  delicto)  rather  than 
discovery  by  formal  trial.  Perverting  our  nation  {diastre- 
phonta  to  ethnos  hemon).  Present  active  participle  of  dias- 
trepho,  old  verb  to  turn  this  way  and  that,  distort,  disturb. 
In  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Acts  13  :io.  The  Sanhedrin  imply 
that  the  great  popularity  of  Jesus  was  seditious.  Forbid- 
ding to  give  tribute  to  Caesar,  {kbluonta  phorous  kaisari  di- 
donai).  Note  object  infinitive  didonai  after  the  participle 
kbluonta.  Literally,  hindering  giving  tribute  to  Caesar. 
This  was  a  flat  untruth.  Their  bright  young  students  had 
tried  desperately  to  get  Jesus  to  say  this  very  thing,  but 
they  had  failed  utterly  (Luke  20:25).  Saying  that  he  him- 
self is  Christ  a  king  {legonta  hauton  Christon  basilea  einai). 
Note  the  indirect  discourse  here  after  the  participle  legonta 
with  the  accusative  {hauton  where  auton  could  have  been 
used),  and  the  infinitive.  This  charge  is  true,  but  not  in  the 
sense  meant  by  them.  Jesus  did  claim  to  be  the  Christ  and 
the  king  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  But  the  Sanhedrin  wanted 
Pilate  to  think  that  he  set  himself  up  as  a  rival  to  Caesar. 

278 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  279 

Pilate  would  understand  little  from  the  word  "Christ,"  but 
"King"  was  a  different  matter.  He  was  compelled  to  take 
notice  of  this  charge  else  he  himself  would  be  accused  to 
Caesar  of  winking  at  such  a  claim  by  Jesus. 

3.  Thou  say  est  (su  legeis).  A  real  affirmative  as  in  22:70. 
The  Gospels  all  give  Pilate's  question  about  Jesus  asking  of 
the  Jews  in  precisely  the  same  words  (Mark  15:2;  Matt. 
27:11;  Luke  23:3;  John  18:33). 

4.  The  multitude  {tous  ochlous).  The  first  mention  of  them. 
It  is  now  after  daybreak.  The  procession  of  the  Sanhedrin 
would  draw  a  crowd  (Plummer)  and  some  may  have  come 
to  ask  for  the  release  of  a  prisoner  (Mark  15:8).  There  was 
need  of  haste  if  the  condemnation  went  through  before 
friends  of  Jesus  came.  I  find  no  fault  (ouden  heurisko  aition). 
In  the  N.T.  Luke  alone  uses  this  old  adjective  aitios  (Luke 
23 :4,  14,  22;  Acts  19:40)  except  Heb.  5:9.  It  means  one  who 
is  the  author,  the  cause  of  or  responsible  for  anything.  Luke 
does  not  give  the  explanation  of  this  sudden  decision  of 
Pilate  that  Jesus  is  innocent.  Evidently  he  held  a  careful 
examination  before  he  delivered  his  judgment  on  the  case. 
That  conversation  is  given  in  John  18:33-38.  Pilate  took 
Jesus  inside  the  palace  from  the  upper  gallery  (verse  33)  and 
then  came  out  and  rendered  his  decision  to  the  Sanhedrin 
(verse  38)  who  would  not  go  into  the  palace  of  Pilate  (John 
18:28). 

5.  But  they  were  the  more  urgent  (hoi  de  epischuon).  Im- 
perfect active  of  epischuo,  to  give  added  (epi)  strength 
(ischuo).  And  they  kept  insisting.  Evidently  Pilate  had 
taken  the  thing  too  lightly.  He  stirred  up  the  people  (anaseiei 
ton  laon).  This  compound  is  rare,  though  old  (Thucydides), 
to  shake  up  (back  and  forth).  This  is  a  more  vigorous  repe- 
tition of  the  first  charge  (verse  2,  "perverting  our  nation"). 
Beginning  from  Galilee  (arxamenos  apo  ies  Galilaias).  These 
very  words  occur  in  the  address  of  Peter  to  the  group  in  the 
house  of  Cornelius   (Acts   10:37).     The  idiomatic  use  of 


280      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

arxamenos  appears  also  in  Acts  i  :22.     Galilee  (Grote)  was 
the  mother  of  seditious  men  (see  Josephus). 

6.  A  Galilean  (Galilaios).  If  so,  here  was  a  way  out  for 
Herod  without  going  back  on  his  own  decision. 

7.  When  he  knew  {epignous).  Second  aorist  active  parti- 
ciple from  epiginoskb,  having  gained  full  {epi,  added  knowl- 
edge). Of  Herod's  jurisdiction  {ek  tes  exousias  Heroidou). 
Herod  was  naturally  jealous  of  any  encroachment  by  Pilate, 
the  Roman  Procurator  of  Judea.  So  here  was  a  chance  to 
respect  the  prerogative  {exousia)  of  Herod  and  get  rid  of  this 
troublesome  case  also.  Sent  him  up  (anepempsen).  First 
aorist  active  indicative  of  anapempb.  This  common  verb 
is  used  of  sending  back  as  in  verse  11  or  of  sending  up  to  a 
higher  court  as  of  Paul  to  Caesar  (Acts  25:21).  Who  himself 
also  was  (onta  kai  auton).  Being  also  himself  in  Jerusalem. 
Present  active  participle  of  eimi. 

8.  Was  exceeding  glad  {e  chare  lian).  Second  aorist  passive 
indicative  of  chairo,  ingressive  aorist,  became  glad.  Of  a 
long  time  {ex  hikanbn  chronbn).  For  this  idiom  see  8:27; 
20:9;  Acts  8:11).  He  hoped  (elpizen).  Imperfect  active.  He 
was  still  hoping.  He  had  long  ago  gotten  over  his  fright 
that  Jesus  was  John  the  Baptist  come  to  life  again  (9:7-9). 
Done  (ginomenon).  Present  middle  participle.  He  wanted 
to  see  a  miracle  happening  like  a  stunt  of  a  sleight-of-hand 
performer. 

9.  He  questioned  (eperbtd).  Imperfect  active,  kept  on 
questioning.  In  many  words  {en  logois  hikanois).  Same  use 
of  hikanos  as  in  verse  8. 

10.  Stood  {histekeisan).  Second  perfect  active  intransitive 
of  histemi  with  sense  of  imperfect.  They  stood  by  while 
Herod  quizzed  Jesus  and  when  he  refused  to  answer,  they 
broke  loose  with  their  accusations  like  a  pack  of  hounds  with 
full  voice  {eutonos,  adverb  from  adjective  eutonos,  from  eu, 
well,  and  teino,  to  stretch,  well  tuned).  Old  word,  but  in  the 
N.T.  only  here  and  Acts  18 128. 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  28 1 

11.  Set  him  at  nought  (exouthenesas).  First  aorist  active 
participle  from  exoutheneo,  to  count  as  nothing,  to  treat  with 
utter  contempt,  as  zero.  Arraying  him  in  gorgeous  apparel 
{peribalbn  estheta  lampran).  Second  aorist  active  participle 
of  periballo,  to  fling  around  one.  Lampran  is  brilliant,  shin- 
ing as  in  James  2 :2,  so  different  from  the  modest  dress  of  the 
Master.    This  was  part  of  the  shame. 

12.  For  before  they  were  at  enmity  between  themselves 
(proiiperchon  gar  en  echthrai  ontes  pros  heautous).  A  peri- 
phrastic imperfect  of  the  double  compound  proilperchb,  an 
old  verb,  to  exist  (huparcho)  previously  {pro-),  here  alone 
in  the  N.T.,  with  ontes  (participle  of  eimi)  added. 

13.  Called  together  (sunkalesamenos) .  First  aorist  middle 
participle  (to  himself).  Pilate  included  "the  people"  in  the 
hope  that  Jesus  might  have  some  friends  among  them. 

14.  As  one  that  perverteth  the  people  (hos  apostrephonta  ton 
laon).  Pilate  here  condenses  the  three  charges  in  verse  2  into 
one  (Plummer).  He  uses  a  more  common  compound  of 
strephb  here,  apostrepho,  to  turn  away  from,  to  seduce,  to  mis- 
lead, whereas  diastrephb  in  verse  2  has  more  the  notion  of 
disturbing  (turning  this  way  and  that).  Note  the  use  of  hos 
with  the  particle,  the  alleged  reason.  Pilate  understands 
the  charge  against  Jesus  to  be  that  he  is  a  revolutionary 
agitator  and  a  dangerous  rival  to  Caesar,  treason  in  plain 
words.  Having  examined  him  before  you  (enbpion  humbn 
anakrinas).  Right  before  your  eyes  I  have  given  him  a  care- 
ful examination  (ana)  up  and  down,  krino,  to  judge,  sift. 
Old  and  common  verb  in  the  general  sense  and  in  the  forensic 
sense  as  here  and  which  Luke  alone  has  in  the  N.T.  (Luke 
23:14;  4:9;  12:19;  28:18;  Acts  24:8)  except  I  Cor.  9:3. 
Whereof  (hon).  Attraction  of  the  relative  ha  to  the  case 
(genitive)  of  the  unexpressed  antecedent  touton. 

15.  No  nor  yet  (all'  oude).  But  not  even.  Hath  been  done 
by  him  (estin  pepragmenon  autoi).  Periphrastic  perfect 
passive  indicative  of  prasso,  common  verb,  to  do.    The  case 


282      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

of  autoi  can  be  regarded  as  either  the  dative  or  the  instru- 
mental (Robertson,  Grammar,  pp.  534,  542). 

16.  Chastise  (paideusas).  First  aorist  active  participle  of 
paideuo,  to  train  a  child  (pais),  and  then,  as  a  part  of  the  train- 
ing, punishment.  Our  English  word  chasten  is  from  the 
Latin  castus,  pure,  chaste,  and  means  to  purify  (cf.  Heb.  12: 
6f.).  Perhaps  Pilate  may  have  split  a  hair  over  the  word  as 
Wycliff  puts  it:  "I  shall  deliver  him  amended."  But,  if 
Jesus  was  innocent,  Pilate  had  no  doubt  to  "chastise"  him 
to  satisfy  a  mob.  Verse  17  is  omitted  by  Westcott  and  Hort 
as  from  Mark  15:6  =  Matt.  27:15. 

18.  All  together  (panplethei) .  An  adverb  from  the  adjec- 
tive panplethes,  all  together.  Used  by  Dio  Cassius.  Only 
here  in  the  N.T.  Away  (aire).  Present  active  imperative, 
Take  him  on  away  and  keep  him  away  as  in  Acts  21:36; 
22:22,  of  Paul.  But  release  (apoluson)  is  first  aorist  active 
imperative,  do  it  now  and  at  once. 

19.  Insurrection  (stasin).  An  old  word  for  sedition,  stand- 
ing off,  the  very  charge  made  against  Jesus  (and  untrue). 
If  Jesus  had  raised  insurrection  against  Caesar,  these  ac- 
cusers would  have  rallied  to  his  standard.  And  for  murder 
(kai  phonon).  They  cared  nought  for  this.  In  fact,  the 
murderer  was  counted  a  hero  like  bandits  and  gangsters 
today  with  some  sentimentalists.  Was  cast  (en  bletheis). 
Periphrastic  aorist  passive  indicative  of  hallo,  a  quite  unusual 
form. 

2 1 .  But  they  shouted  (hoi  de  epephonoun) .  Imperfect  active 
of  epiphoneo,  to  call  to.  Old  verb  and  a  verb  pertinent  here. 
They  kept  on  yelling.  Crucify,  crucify  (staurou,  staurou). 
Present  active  imperative.  Go  on  with  the  crucifixion. 
Mark  15:13  has  stauroson  (first  aorist  active  imperative), 
do  it  now  and  be  done  with  it.  No  doubt  some  shouted  one 
form,  some  another. 

22.  Why,  what  evil?  (Ti  gar  kakon;).  Note  this  use  of 
gar  (explanatory  and  argumentative  combined). 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  283 

23.  But  they  were  instant  (hoi  de  epekeinto).  Imperfect 
middle  of  epikeimai,  an  old  verb  for  the  rush  and  swirl  of  a 
tempest.  With  loud  voices  (phonais  megalais).  Instrumental 
case.  Poor  Pilate  was  overwhelmed  by  this  tornado.  Pre- 
vailed (katischuon) .  Imperfect  active  of  katischuo  (see  Matt. 
16:18;  Luke  21 136).    The  tempest  Pilate  had  invited  (23  :i3). 

24.  Gave  sentence  (epekrinen).  Pronounced  the  final  sen- 
tence. The  usual  verb  for  the  final  decision.  Only  here  in 
the  N.T. 

25.  Whom  they  asked  for  (hon  eitounto).  Imperfect  middle, 
for  whom  they  had  been  asking  for  themselves.  Luke  repeats 
that  Barabbas  was  in  prison  "for  insurrection  and  murder." 
To  their  will  (toi  thelemati  auibn).  This  is  mob  law  by  the 
judge  who  surrenders  his  own  power  and  justice  to  the 
clamour  of  the  crowd. 

26.  They  laid  hold  (epilabomenoi) .  Second  aorist  middle 
participle  of  the  common  verb  epilambano.  The  soldiers 
had  no  scruples  about  taking  hold  of  any  one  of  themselves 
(middle  voice).  Mark  15:21  and  Luke  27:32  use  the  tech- 
nical word  for  this  process  aggareuo,  which  see  for  discussion 
and  also  about  Cyrene.  Laid  on  him  (epethekan).  K  first 
aorist  of  epitithemi.  To  bear  it  (pherein).  Present  infinitive, 
to  go  on  bearing. 

27.  Followed  (ekolouthei).  Imperfect  active,  was  follow- 
ing. Verses  27  to  32  are  peculiar  to  Luke.  Bewailed  (ekop- 
tonto).  Imperfect  middle  of  kopto,  to  cut,  smite,  old  and 
common  verb.  Direct  middle,  they  were  smiting  themselves 
on  the  breast.  "In  the  Gospels  there  is  no  instance  of  a 
woman  being  hostile  to  Christ"  (Plummer).  Luke's  Gospel 
is  appropriately  called  the  Gospel  of  Womanhood  (1 :39— 56; 
2:36-38;  7:n-i5;  37"S°;  8:1-3;  10:38-42;  11:27;  13:11-16). 
Lamented  (ethrenoun).  Imperfect  active  of  threneo,  old  verb 
from  threomai,  to  cry  aloud,  lament. 

28.  Turning  (strapheis).  Luke  is  fond  of  this  second  aorist 
passive  participle  of  strepho  (7:9,  44,  55;  10:23).    If  he  had 


284      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

been  still  carrying  the  Cross,  he  could  not  have  made  this 
dramatic  gesture.  Weep  not  (me  klaiete).  Present  active 
imperative  with  me,  Stop  weeping. 

29.  Blessed  (makariai).  A  beatitude  to  the  barren,  the 
opposite  of  the  hopes  of  Jewish  mothers.  Childless  women 
are  commiserated  (1:25,  36).  To  the  hills  (tois  bounois). 
A  Cyrenaic  word.  In  the  N.T.  only  here  and  3  :$.  Quota- 
tion from  Hosea  10:8. 

31.  In  the  green  tree  (en  hugrbi  xuloi).  Green  wood  is  hard 
to  burn  and  so  is  used  for  the  innocent.  In  the  dry  (en  tbi 
xerox).  Dry  wood  kindles  easily  and  is  a  symbol  for  the 
guilty.  This  common  proverb  has  various  applications. 
Here  the  point  is  that  if  they  can  put  Jesus  to  death,  being 
who  he  is,  what  will  happen  to  Jerusalem  when  its  day  of 
judgment  comes?  What  shall  be  done  (ti  genetai).  Delibera- 
tive subjunctive. 

32.  Were  led  (egonto) .  Imperfect  passive  of  ago,  were  being 
led.  Malefactors  (kakourgoi).  Evil  (kakon),  doers  (work, 
ergon).  Old  word,  but  in  the  N.T.  only  in  this  passage 
(32,  33,  39)  and  II  Tim.  2:9.  Luke  does  not  call  them  "rob- 
bers "  like  Mark  1 5  \2j  =  Matt.  27  38,  44.  To  be  put  to  death 
(anairethenai).  First  aorist  passive  infinitive  of  anaireb,  old 
verb,  to  take  up,  to  take  away,  to  kill. 

33.  The  skull  (to  kr anion).  Probably  because  it  looked 
like  a  skull.  See  on  Matt.  27:33  =Mark  15:22.  There  they 
crucified  him  (ekei  estaurbsan).  There  between  the  two  rob- 
bers and  on  the  very  cross  on  which  Barabbas,  the  leader 
of  the  robber  band,  was  to  have  been  crucified.  One  (hon 
men),  the  other  (hon  de).  Common  idiom  of  contrast  with 
this  old  demonstrative  hos  and  men  and  de. 

34.  Father  forgive  them  (Pater,  aphes  autois).  Second  aorist 
active  imperative  of  aphiemi,  with  dative  case.  Some  of  the 
oldest  and  best  documents  do  not  contain  this  verse,  and  yet, 
while  it  is  not  certain  that  it  is  a  part  of  Luke's  Gospel,  it  is 
certain  that  Jesus  spoke  these  words,  for  they  are  utterly 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  285 

unlike  any  one  else.  Jesus  evidently  is  praying  for  the  Ro- 
man soldiers,  who  were  only  obeying,  but  not  for  the  Sanhe- 
drin.  Cast  lots  (ebalon  kleron).  Second  aorist  active  indica- 
tive of  hallo.  See  Mark  15:24;  Matt.  27:35.  John  19:23^ 
shows  how  the  lot  was  cast  for  the  seamless  garment,  the 
four  soldiers  dividing  the  other  garments. 

35.  The  people  stood  beholding  (histekei).  Past  perfect 
active  of  hisiemi,  intransitive  and  like  imperfect.  A  graphic 
picture  of  the  dazed  multitude,  some  of  whom  may  have  been 
in  the  Triumphal  Entry  on  Sunday  morning.  Scoffed 
(exemukterizon) .  Imperfect  active,  perhaps  inchoative, 
began  to  turn  up  (out,  ex)  at  the  dying  Christ.  The  language 
comes  from  Psalm  22:7.  The  Christ  of  God  (ho  Christos  ton 
theou).  He  had  claimed  to  be  just  this  (22:67,  7°)-  The 
sarcastic  sneer  (he  saved  others;  let  him  save  others,  for  him- 
self he  cannot  save)  is  in  Mark  15:31;  Matt.  27:42.  Luke 
alone  gives  the  contemptuous  use  of  houtos  (this  fellow)  and 
the  fling  in  "the  elect"  (ho  eklektos).  These  rulers  were 
having  their  day  at  last. 

36.  Mocked  (enepaixan) .  Even  the  soldiers  yielded  to  the 
spell  and  acted  like  boys  in  their  jeers.  Aorist  tense  here  and 
different  verb  also  from  that  used  of  the  rulers.  They  were 
not  so  bitter  and  persistent. 

37.  //  (ei).  Condition  of  the  first  class  as  is  text  in  verse 
35  used  by  the  rulers.  The  soldiers  pick  out  "the  king  of  the 
Jews"  as  the  point  of  their  sneer,  the  point  on  which  Jesus 
was  condemned.  But  both  soldiers  and  rulers  fail  to  under- 
stand that  Jesus  could  not  save  himself  if  he  was  to  save 
others. 

38.  A  superscription  (epigraph?).  Mark  15:26  has  "the 
superscription  of  his  accusation"  Matt.  27:37,  "his  accusa- 
tion, "  John  19:19  "a  title. "  But  they  all  refer  to  the  charge 
written  at  the  top  on  the  cross  giving,  as  was  the  custom, 
the  accusation  on  which  the  criminal  was  condemned,  with 
his  name  and  residence.    Put  all  the  reports  together  and  we 


286      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

have:  This  is  Jesus  of  Nazareth  the  King  of  the  Jews.  This 
full  title  appeared  in  Latin  for  law,  in  Aramaic  for  the  Jews, 
in  Greek  for  everybody  (John   19:20). 

39.  Railed  (eblasphemei) .  Imperfect  active,  implying 
that  he  kept  it  up.  His  question  formally  calls  for  an  affirma- 
tive answer  (ouchi),  but  the  ridicule  is  in  his  own  answer: 
"Save  thyself  and  us."  It  was  on  a  level  with  an  effort  to 
break  prison.  Luke  alone  gives  this  incident  (39-43),  though 
Mark  15:32  and  Matt  27:44  allude  to  it. 

40.  Rebuking  (epitimon).  From  what  Mark  and  Matthew 
say  both  robbers  sneered  at  Jesus  at  first,  but  this  one  came 
to  himself  and  turned  on  his  fellow  robber  in  a  rage.  Dost 
thou  not  even  fear  God?  (Oude  phobei  ton  theon;).  Oude  here 
goes  with  the  verb.  Phobei  (second  person  singular  present 
indicative  middle  of  phobeomai.  Both  of  you  will  soon  appear 
before  God.  Jesus  has  nothing  to  answer  for  and  you  have 
added  this  to  your  other  sins. 

41.  Nothing  amiss  (ouden  atopon).  Nothing  out  of  place 
{a  privative,  topos,  place).  Old  word,  three  times  in  the  N.T. 
(Luke  23:44;  Acts  28:6;  II  Thess.  3:2).  This  can  only  mean 
that  this  robber  accepts  the  claims  of  Jesus  to  be  true.  He  is 
dying  for  claiming  to  be  Messiah,  as  he  is. 

42.  In  thy  kingdom  (eis  ten  basileian  sou,  text  of  Westcott 
and  Hort  or  en  tei  basileidi  sou,  margin).  Probably  no 
difference  in  sense  is  to  be  found,  for  eis  and  en  are  essentially 
the  same  preposition.  He  refers  to  the  Messianic  rule  of 
Jesus  and  begs  that  Jesus  will  remember  him.  It  is  not 
clear  whether  he  hopes  for  immediate  blessing  or  only  at  the 
judgment. 

43.  Today  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  Paradise  (Semeron  met1 
emou  esei  en  tbi  paradeisbi).  However  crude  may  have  been 
the  robber's  Messianic  ideas  Jesus  clears  the  path  for  him. 
He  promises  him  immediate  and  conscious  fellowship  after 
death  with  Christ  in  Paradise  which  is  a  Persian  word  and 
is  used  here  not  for  any  supposed  intermediate  state,  but  the 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  287 

very  bliss  of  heaven  itself.  This  Persian  word  was  used  for 
an  enclosed  park  or  pleasure  ground  (so  Xenophon).  The 
word  occurs  in  two  other  passages  in  the  N.T.  (II  Cor.  12:4; 
Rev.  2:7),  in  both  of  which  the  reference  is  plainly  to  heaven. 
Some  Jews  did  use  the  word  for  the  abode  of  the  pious  dead 
till  the  resurrection,  interpreting  "Abraham's  bosom" 
(Luke  i6:22f.)  in  this  sense  also.  But  the  evidence  for  such 
an  intermediate  state  is  too  weak  to  warrant  belief  in  it. 

45.  The  sun's  light  failing  {tou  heliou  ekleipontos) .  Geni- 
tive absolute  of  the  present  active  participle  of  ekleipo,  an 
old  verb,  to  leave  out,  omit,  pass  by,  to  fail,  to  die.  The 
word  was  used  also  of  the  eclipse  of  the  sun  or  moon.  But 
this  was  impossible  at  this  time  because  the  moon  was  full 
at  the  passover.  Hence  many  documents  change  this  correct 
text  to  "the  sun  was  darkened"  {eskotisthe  ho  helios)  to 
obviate  the  difficulty  about  the  technical  eclipse.  But  the 
sun  can  be  darkened  in  other  ways.  In  a  London  fog  at  noon 
the  street  lights  are  often  turned  on.  The  Revised  Version 
translates  it  correctly,  "the  sun's  light  failing."  Leave  the 
darkness  unexplained.  In  the  midst  {meson).  In  the  middle. 
Mark  15:38  and  Matt.  27:51  have  "in  two"  {eis  duo). 

46.  Father  {Pater).  Jesus  dies  with  the  words  of  Psalm 
31 :5  on  his  lips.  Gave  up  the  ghost  {exepneusen).  First  aorist 
active  indicative  of  ekpneo,  to  breathe  out,  to  expire,  old 
word,  but  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Mark  15:37,  39.  There 
is  no  special  reason  for  retaining  "ghost"  in  the  English  as 
both  Matt.  27:50  (yielded  up  his  spirit,  apheken  to  pneumd) 
and  John  19:30  (gave  up  his  spirit,  paredbken  to  pneuma) 
use  pneuma  which  is  the  root  of  ekpneo,  the  verb  in  Mark  and 
Luke. 

47.  Glorified  {edoxazen).  Imperfect  active.  Began  to 
glorify  (inchoative)  or  kept  on  glorifying. 

48.  Certainly  {ontbs).  Really,  old  adverb  from  the  parti- 
ciple on  from  eimi,  to  be.  Used  also  in  24:34  of  the  resur- 
rection of  Jesus.     A  righteous  man  {dikaios).     Mark  15:39 


288      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

(Matt.  27:54)  which  see,  represents  the  centurion  as  saying 
theou  huios  (God's  Son)  which  may  mean  to  him  little  more 
than  "righteous  man."  That  came  together  (sunparageno- 
menoi).  Double  compound  (sun,  together,  para,  along),  that 
came  along  together.  To  this  sight  (epi  ten  thebrian  tauten). 
This  spectacle  (theorian  from  thebreb,  verse  35).  Returned 
(hupestrephon).  Imperfect  active  of  hupostrepho.  See  them 
slowly  wending  their  way  back  to  the  city  from  this  Tragedy 
of  the  Ages  which  they  had  witnessed  in  awe. 

49.  Stood  afar  off  (histekeisan  apo  makrothen).  Same  verb 
as  in  verse  35.  Melancholy  picture  of  the  inner  circle  of  the 
acquaintances  of  Jesus  and  the  faithful  band  of  women  from 
Galilee.  Seeing  these  things  (horbsai  tauta).  And  helpless 
either  to  prevent  them  or  to  understand  them.  They  could 
only  stand  and  look  with  blinded  eyes. 

51.  He  had  not  consented  to  their  counsel  and  deed  (houtos 
ouk  en  sunkatatetheimenos  tei  boulei  kai  tei  praxei  autbn). 
This  parenthesis  is  given  by  Luke  alone  and  explains  that, 
though  a  councillor  (bouleutes,  Mark  5:43)  he  had  not  agreed 
to  the  vote  of  the  Sanhedrin.  It  is  fairly  certain  that  both 
Joseph  and  Nicodemus  were  suspected  of  sympathy  with 
Jesus  and  so  were  not  invited  to  the  trial  of  Jesus.  Was  look- 
ing for  (prosedecheto).  Imperfect  middle.  Mark  15:43  has 
the  periphrastic  imperfect  (en  prosdechomenos) . 

52.  Asked  for  (eitesato).  First  aorist  middle  (indirect) 
indicative  as  in  Mark  15:43=  Matt.  27:58.  The  middle 
voice  shows  that  Joseph  of  Arimathea  asked  the  body  of 
Jesus  as  a  personal  favour. 

53.  Took  it  down  (kathelbn).  Second  aorist  active  parti- 
ciple of  kathaireb  as  in  Mark  15:46.  Wrapped  (enetulixen) , 
as  in  Matt.  27:59  where  Mark  15:46  has  eneilesen  (wound), 
which  see.  John  19:40  has  "bound"  (edesan).  See  Matt, 
and  Mark  also  for  the  linen  cloth  (sindoni).  Hewn  in  stone 
(laxeutbi).  From  laxeub  (las,  a  stone,  xeb,  to  polish).  In  the 
LXX  and  here  only  in  the  N.T.     Nowhere  else  so  far  as 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  289 

known.  See  the  usual  Greek  verb  latomeb  in  Mark  15:46  = 
Matt.  27:60.  Where  never  man  had  yet  lain  (hou  ouk  en 
oudeis  oupo  keimenos).  Triple  negative  and  periphrastic 
past  perfect  passive  in  sense  (keimai),  though  periphrastic 
imperfect  passive  in  form.  Same  item  in  John  19:40  who 
uses  en  tetheimenos  (periphrastic  past  perfect  passive  in  form). 

54.  The  day  of  the  Preparation  (hemera  paraskeues).  The 
technical  Jewish  phrase  for  the  day  before  the  sabbath  for 
which  see  discussion  on  Matt.  27:62.  Drew  on  (epephosken). 
Imperfect  active,  began  to  dawn  or  give  light.  However,  it 
was  sundown,  not  sunrise  when  the  Jewish  sabbath  (twenty- 
four-hour  day)  began.  The  confusion  is  to  us,  not  to  the 
Jews  or  the  readers  of  the  Greek  New  Testament.  Luke  is 
not  speaking  of  the  twelve-hour  day  which  began  with  sun- 
rise, but  the  twenty-four-hour  day  which  began  with  sunset. 

55.  Had  come  with  him  (esan  suneleluthuiai) .  Periphrastic 
past  perfect  active  of  sunerchomai.  Followed  after  {kata- 
kolouthesasai).  Aorist  active  participle  of  katakoloutheo, 
an  old  verb,  but  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Acts  16:17.  It ls 
possible  that  they  followed  after  Joseph  and  Nicodemus  so 
that  they  "beheld  the  tomb,"  {etheasanto  to  mnemeion),  and 
also  "how  his  body  was  laid"  (hos  etethe  to  soma  autou). 
First  aorist  passive  indicative  of  tithemi.  They  may  in  fact, 
have  witnessed  the  silent  burial  from  a  distance.  The  Syriac 
Sinaitic  and  the  Syriac  Curetonian  give  it  thus:  "and  the 
women,  who  came  with  Him  from  Galilee  went  to  the  sep- 
ulchre in  their  footsteps,  and  saw  the  body  when  they  had 
brought  it  in  there."  At  any  rate  the  women  saw  "that" 
and  "how"  the  body  of  Jesus  was  laid  in  this  new  tomb  of 
Joseph  in  the  rocks. 

56.  On  the  sabbath  they  rested  {to  sabbaton  hesuchasan). 
They  returned  and  prepared  spices  before  the  sabbath  be- 
gan. Then  they  rested  all  during  the  sabbath  (accusative  of 
extent  of  time,  to  sabbaton). 


CHAPTER  XXIV 

1.  At  early  dawn  (orthrou  batheos).  Genitive  of  time.  Lit- 
erally, at  deep  dawn.  The  adjective  bathus  (deep)  was  often 
used  of  time.  This  very  idiom  occurs  in  Aristophanes,  Plato, 
et  cetera.  John  20:1  adds  "  while  it  was  yet  dark."  That  is, 
when  they  started,  for  the  sun  was  risen  when  they  arrived 
(Mark  16:2).  Which  they  had  prepared  {ha  hetoimasan). 
Mark  16:1  notes  that  they  bought  other  spices  after  the 
sabbath  was  over  besides  those  which  they  already  had 
(Luke  23:56). 

2.  Rolled  away  (apokekulismenon) .  Perfect  passive  parti- 
ciple of  apokulio,  late  verb  and  in  the  N.T.  only  in  this  con- 
text (Mark  16:3;  Matt.  28:2)  while  John  20:1  has  ermenon 
(taken  away). 

3.  Of  the  Lord  Jesus  (ton  kuriou  Iesou).  The  Western 
family  of  documents  does  not  have  these  words  and  Westcott 
and  Hort  bracket  them  as  Western  non-interpolations. 
There  are  numerous  instances  of  this  shorter  Western  text 
in  this  chapter.  For  a  discussion  of  the  subject  see  my 
Introduction  to  the  Textual  Criticism  of  the  New  Testament, 
pp.  225-237.  This  precise  combination  (the  Lord  Jesus)  is 
common  in  the  Acts,  but  nowhere  else  in  the  Gospels. 

4.  While  they  were  perplexed  thereabout  (en  ibi  aporeisthai 
autas  peri  toutou).  Luke's  common  Hebraistic  idiom,  en 
with  the  articular  infinitive  (present  passive  aporeisthai  from 
aporeo,  to  lose  one's  way)  and  the  accusative  of  general  refer- 
ence. Two  men  (andres  duo) .  Men,  not  women.  Mark  16:5 
speaks  of  a  young  man  (neaniskon)  while  Matt.  28:5  has 
"an  angel."  We  need  not  try  to  reconcile  these  varying  ac- 
counts which  agree  in  the  main  thing.  The  angel  looked  like 
a  man  and  some  remembered  two.    In  verse  23  Cleopas  and 

290 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  291 

his  companion  call  them  "angels."  Stood  by  {epestesan). 
Second  aorist  active  indicative  of  ephistemi.  This  common 
verb  usually  means  to  step  up  suddenly,  to  burst  upon  one. 
In  dazzling  apparel  {en  estheti  astraptousei).  This  is  the  cor- 
rect text.  This  common  simplex  verb  occurs  only  twice  in 
the  N.T.,  here  and  Luke  17:24  (the  Transfiguration).  It  has 
the  same  root  as  astrape  (lightning).  The  "men"  had  the 
garments  of  "angels." 

5.  As  they  were  affrighted  {emphobbn  genomenon  autbn). 
Genitive  absolute  with  second  aorist  middle  of  ginomai,  to 
become.  Hence,  when  they  became  affrighted.  They  had 
utterly  forgotten  the  prediction  of  Jesus  that  he  would  rise 
on  the  third  day. 

6.  He  is  not  here,  but  is  risen  (ouk  estin  hode,  alia  egerthe). 
Another  Western  non-interpolation  according  to  Westcott 
and  Hort.  The  words  are  genuine  at  any  rate  in  Mark  16:6; 
Matt.  28  7.  The  third  day  rise  again  [tei  triiei  hemerdi  anas- 
ienai).  See  9:22;  18:32,  33  where  Jesus  plainly  foretold  this 
fact.  And  yet  they  had  forgotten  it,  for  it  ran  counter  to  all 
their  ideas  and  hopes. 

9.  From  the  tomb  (apo  tou  mnemeiou).  Some  documents 
omit  these  words.  This  word  for  tomb  is  like  our  "memo- 
rial" from  mimnesko,  to  remind.  Told  (apeggeilan).  It 
was  a  wonderful  proclamation.  Luke  does  not  separate  the 
story  of  Mary  Magdalene  from  that  of  the  other  women  as 
John  does  (20:2-18). 

11.  As  idle  talk  (hos  leros).  Old  word  for  nonsense,  only 
here  in  the  N.T.  Medical  writers  used  it  for  the  wild  talk 
of  those  in  delirium  or  hysteria.  Disbelieved  (epistoun).  Im- 
perfect active  of  apisteo,  old  verb  from  apistos,  without  con- 
fidence or  faith  in.  They  kept  on  distrusting  the  story  of  the 
women. 

12.  This  entire  verse  is  a  Western  non-interpolation. 
This  incident  is  given  in  complete  form  in  John  18:2-10 
and  most  of  the  words  in  this  verse  are  ther^  also.    It  is  of 


292      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

a  piece  with  many  items  in  this  chapter  about  which  it  is 
not  easy  to  reach  a  final  conclusion.  Stooping  and  looking 
in  (parakupsas).  First  aorist  active  participle  of  parakupto, 
to  stoop  besides  and  peer  into.  Old  verb  used  also  in  John 
20:5,  11;  James  1:25;  I  Pet.  1:12.  By  themselves  (mona). 
Without  the  body.  To  his  home  {pros  hauton).  Literally, 
" to  himself." 

13.  Were  going  (esan  poreuomenoi).  Periphrastic  im- 
perfect middle  of  poreuomai.  Sixty  stadia  {stadious  hexe- 
konta).    About  seven  miles. 

14.  They  communed  {hbmiloun).  Imperfect  active  of 
homileo,  old  and  common  verb  (from  homilos,  in  company 
with).  In  the  N.T.  only  here  (and  verse  15)  and  Acts  20:11; 
24:26.  Our  word  homiletics  is  derived  from  this  word  for 
preaching  was  at  first  largely  conversational  in  style  and 
not  declamatory. 

15.  While  they  communed  and  questioned  together  {en  toi 
homilein  autous  kai  sunzetein).  Same  idiom  as  in  verse  14, 
which  see.  Note  sunzetein;  each  questioned  the  other. 
Jesus  himself  {autos  Iesous).  In  actual  person.  Went  with 
them  {suneporeueto  autois).  Imperfect  middle,  was  going 
along  with  them. 

16.  Were  holden  that  they  should  not  know  him  {ekratounto 
tou  me  epignonai  auton).  Imperfect  passive  of  krated,  con- 
tinued being  held,  with  the  ablative  case  of  the  articular 
infinitive,  "from  recognizing  him,"  from  knowing  him  fully 
{epi-gnonai,  ingressive  aorist  of  epiginosko).  The  me  is  a 
redundant  negative  after  the  negative  idea  in  ekratounto. 

17.  That  you  have  with  another  {hous  antiballete  pros  alle- 
lous).  Anti-ballo  is  an  old  verb  and  means  to  throw  in  turn, 
back  and  forth  like  a  ball,  from  one  to  another,  a  beautiful 
picture  of  conversation  as  a  game  of  words.  Only  here  in 
the  N.T.  They  stood  still  {estathesan).  First  aorist  passive  of 
histemi,  intransitive.  They  stopped.  Looking  sad  {skuthro- 
poi).    This  is  the  correct  text.     It  is  an  old  adjective  from 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  293 

skuthros,  gloomy  and  ops,  countenance.    Only  here  in  the 
N.T. 

18.  Dost  thou  alone  sojourn?  (su  monos  paroikeis;). 
Monos  is  predicate  adjective.  "Hast  thou  been  dwelling 
alone  (all  by  thyself)?"  And  not  know?  {kai  ouk  egnos;). 
Second  aorist  active  indicative  and  difficult  to  put  into 
English  as  the  aorist  often  is.  The  verb  paroikeo  means  to 
dwell  beside  one,  then  as  a  stranger  like  paroikoi  (Eph.  2:19). 
In  Jerusalem  everybody  was  talking  about  Jesus. 

21.  But  we  hoped  {Kernels  de  elpizomen).  Imperfect  active, 
we  were  hoping.  Note  emphasis  in  hemeis  (we).  Redeem 
(lutrousthai) .  From  the  bondage  of  Rome,  no  doubt.  Yea 
and  beside  all  this  {alia  ge  kai  sun  pasin  toutois).  Particles 
pile  up  to  express  their  emotions.  Yea  {alia  here  affirmative, 
as  in  verse  22,  not  adversative)  at  least  {ge)  also  {kai)  to- 
gether with  all  these  things  {sun  pasin  toutois).  Like  Pelion 
on  Ossa  with  them  in  their  perplexity.  Now  the  third  day 
{triten  tauten  hemeran  agei).  A  difficult  idiom  for  the  Eng- 
lish. "One  is  keeping  this  a  third  day."  And  he  is  still 
dead  and  we  are  still  without  hope. 

22.  Amazed  us  {exestesan  hemas).  First  aorist  active 
(transitive)  indicative  with  accusative  hemas  of  existemi. 
The  second  aorist  active  is  intransitive.  Early  {orthrinai). 
A  poetic  and  late  form  for  orthrios.  In  the  N.T.  only  here 
and  Rev.  24:22.  Predicate  adjective  agreeing  with  the 
women. 

23.  Had  seen  (heorakenai) .  Perfect  active  infinitive  in 
indirect  assertion  after  legousai.  Same  construction  for 
zein  after  legousin.  But  all  this  was  too  indirect  and  un- 
certain (women  and  angels)  for  Cleopas  and  his  companion. 

25.  Foolish  men  (anoetoi).  Literally  without  sense  {nous), 
not  understanding.  Common  word.  Slow  of  heart  {bradeis 
iei  kardidi).  Slow  in  heart  (locative  case).  Old  word  for 
one  dull,  slow  to  comprehend  or  to  act.  All  that  {pasin 
hois).     Relative  attracted  from  the  accusative  ha  to  the 


294      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

case  of  the  antecedent  pdsin   (dative).     They  could  only 
understand  part  of  the  prophecies,  not  all. 

26.  Behooved  it  not?  (ouchi  edei;).  Was  it  not  necessary? 
The  very  things  about  the  death  of  Jesus  that  disturbed 
them  so  were  the  strongest  proof  that  he  was  the  Messiah 
of  the  Old  Testament. 

27.  Interpreted  (diermeneusen) .  First  aorist  active  (con- 
stative  aorist)  indicative  of  diermeneub  (Margin  has  the  im- 
perfect diermeneuen) ,  intensive  compound  (did)  oihermeneub, 
the  old  verb  to  interpret  from  hermeneus,  interpreter,  and 
that  from  Hermes,  the  messenger  of  the  gods  as  the  people  of 
Lystra  took  Paul  to  be  (Acts  14:12).  But  what  wonderful 
exegesis  the  two  disciples  were  now  hearing!  Concerning 
himself  (peri  heauton).  Jesus  found  himself  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, a  thing  that  some  modern  scholars  do  not  seem  able 
to  do. 

28.  Made  as  though  (prosepoiesato).  First  aorist  active 
middle  (Some  MSS.  have  prosepoieito  imperfect)  indicative 
of  prospoieb,  old  verb  to  conform  oneself  to,  to  pretend. 
Only  here  in  the  N.T.  Of  course  he  would  have  gone  on  if  the 
disciples  had  not  urged  him  to  stay. 

29.  Constrained  (parebiasanto).  Strong  verb  parabiazo- 
mai,  to  compel  by  use  of  force  (Polybius  and  LXX).  In 
the  N.T.  only  here  and  Acts  16:15.  It  was  nere  compulsion 
of  courteous  words.  Is  far  spent  (kekliken).  Perfect  active 
indicative  of  klinb.    The  day  "has  turned"  toward  setting. 

30.  When  he  had  sat  down  (en  tbi  kataklithenai  auton). 
Luke's  common  idiom  as  in  verses  4  and  15.  Note  first  aorist 
passive  infinitive  (on  the  reclining  as  to  him).  Gave  (epedi- 
dou).  Imperfect,  inchoative  idea,  began  to  give  to  them, 
in  contrast  with  the  preceding  aorist  (punctiliar)  participles. 

31.  Were  opened  (dienoichthesan).  Ingressive  first  aorist 
passive  indicative  of  dianoigb.  Knew  (epegnbsan).  Effec- 
tive first  aorist  active  indicative  fully  recognized  him.  Same 
word  in  verse   16.     Vanished  (aphantos  egeneto).     Became 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  295 

invisible  or  unmanifested.     Aphantos  from  a  privative  and 
phainomai,  to  appear.    Old  word,  only  here  in  the  N.T. 

32.  Was  not  our  heart  burning?  {Ouchi  he  kardia  hembn 
kaiomene  en;).  Periphrastic  imperfect  middle.  Spake  (ela- 
lei).  Imperfect  active,  was  speaking.  This  common  verb 
laleo  is  onomatopoetic,  to  utter  a  sound,  la-la  and  was  used 
of  birds,  children  chattering,  and  then  for  conversation,  for 
preaching,  for  any  public  speech.  Opened  (dienoigen).  Im- 
perfect active  indicative  of  the  same  verb  used  of  the  eyes 
in  verse  31. 

33.  That  very  hour  (autei  iei  horai).  Locative  case  and 
common  Lukan  idiom,  at  the  hour  itself.  They  could  not 
wait.  Gathered  (ethroismenous) .  Perfect  passive  participle 
of  athroizo,  old  verb  from  athroos  (copulative  a  and  throos, 
crowd).    Only  here  in  the  N.T. 

34.  Saying  (legontas).  Accusative  present  active  partici- 
ple agreeing  with  "the  eleven  and  those  with  them"  in 
verse  33.  Indeed  (ontos).  Really,  because  "he  has  appeared 
to  Simon"  (opthe  Simoni).  First  aorist  passive  indicative 
of  horao.  This  is  the  crucial  evidence  that  turned  the  scales 
with  the  disciples  and  explains  "indeed."  Paul  also  men- 
tions it  (I  Cor.  15:5). 

35.  Rehearsed  (exegounto).  Imperfect  middle  indicative 
of  exegeomai,  verb  to  lead  out,  to  rehearse.  Our  word  exege- 
sis comes  from  this  verb.  Their  story  was  now  confirmatory, 
not  revolutionary.  The  women  were  right  then  after  all. 
Of  them  (autois).  To  them,  dative  case.  They  did  not  rec- 
ognize Jesus  in  his  exegesis,  but  did  in  the  breaking  of  bread. 
One  is  reminded  of  that  saying  in  the  Logia  of  Jesus:  "Raise 
the  stone  and  there  thou  shalt  find  me,  cleave  the  wood  and 
there  am  I." 

36.  He  himself  stood  {autos  este).  He  himself  stepped  and 
stood.    Some  documents  do  not  have  "Peace  be  unto  you." 

37.  Terrified  (ptoethentes).  First  aorist  passive  participle 
of  ptoeo,  old  verb  and  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Luke  21:9 


296      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

which  see.  Affrighted  {emphoboi  genomenoi).  Late  adjective 
from  en  and  phobos  (fear).  Both  these  terms  of  fear  are 
strong.  Supposed  (edokoun).  Imperfect  active  of  dokeo, 
kept  on  thinking  so. 

38.  Why  are  ye  troubled?  (ti  tetaragmenoi  este;).  Peri- 
phrastic perfect  passive  indicative  of  tarasso,  old  verb,  to 
agitate,  to  stir  up,  to  get  excited. 

39.  Myself  (autos).  Jesus  is  patient  with  his  proof.  They 
were  convinced  before  he  came  into  the  room,  but  that 
psychological  shock  had  unnerved  them  all.  Handle  (psela- 
phesate).  This  very  word  is  used  in  I  John  1  :i  as  proof  of  the 
actual  human  body  of  Jesus.  It  is  an  old  verb  for  touching 
with  the  hand.  Flesh  and  bones  (sarka  kai  ostea).  At  least 
this  proves  that  he  is  not  just  a  ghost  and  that  Jesus  had  a 
real  human  body  against  the  Docetic  Gnostics  who  denied  it. 
But  clearly  we  are  not  to  understand  that  our  resurrection 
bodies  will  have  "  flesh  and  bones. "  Jesus  was  in  a  transition 
state  and  had  not  yet  been  glorified.  The  mystery  remains 
unsolved,  but  it  was  proof  to  the  disciples  of  the  identity  of 
the  Risen  Christ  with  Jesus  of  Nazareth. 

40.  Another  Weston  non-interpolation  according  to  West- 
cott  and  Hort.    It  is  genuine  in  John  20:20. 

41.  Disbelieved  for  joy  (apistountbn  auibn  apo  tes  charas). 
Genitive  absolute  and  a  quite  understandable  attitude. 
They  were  slowly  reconvinced,  but  it  was  after  all  too  good  to 
be  true.  Anything  to  eat  (brbsimon).  Only  here  in  the  N.T., 
though  an  old  word  from  bibrbskb,  to  eat. 

42.  A  piece  of  broiled  fish  (ichthuos  optou  meros).  Optos  is 
a  verbal  from  optab,  to  cook,  to  roast,  to  broil.  Common 
word,  but  only  here  in  the  N.T.  The  best  old  documents 
omit  "and  a  honeycomb"  (kai  apo  melissiou  keriou). 

44.  While  I  was  yet  with  you  (eti  on  sun  humin).  Literally, 
Being  yet  with  you.  The  participle  on  takes  the  time  of  the 
principal  verb. 

45.  Opened  he  their  mind  (dienoixen  auibn  ton  noun).    The 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE  297 

same  verb  as  that  in  verses  31  and  32  about  the  eyes  and  the 
Scriptures.  Jesus  had  all  these  years  been  trying  to  open 
their  minds  that  they  might  understand  the  Scriptures  about 
the  Messiah  and  now  at  last  he  makes  one  more  effort  in 
the  light  of  the  Cross  and  the  Resurrection.  They  can  now 
see  better  the  will  and  way  of  God,  but  they  will  still  need 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  before  they  will  fully  know  the 
mind  of  Christ. 

46.  It  is  written  {gegraptai).  Perfect  passive  indicative  of 
grapho,  to  write,  the  usual  phrase  for  quoting  Scripture. 
Jesus  now  finds  in  the  Old  Testament  his  suffering,  his  res- 
urrection, and  the  preaching  of  repentance  and  forgiveness 
of  sins  to  all  nations.  Note  the  infinitives  pathein,  anastenai, 
keruchthenai. 

47.  Beginning  {arxamenoi).  Aorist  middle  participle  of 
archo,  but  the  nominative  plural  with  no  syntactical  connec- 
tion (an  anacoluthon). 

49.  Until  ye  be  clothed  {heos  hou  endusesthe).  First  aorist 
middle  subjunctive  of  enduo  or  enduno.  It  is  an  old  verb  for 
putting  on  a  garment.  It  is  here  the  indirect  middle,  put  on 
yourselves  power  from  on  high  as  a  garment.  They  are  to 
wait  till  this  experience  comes  to  them.  This  is  "the  promise 
of  the  Father."  It  is  an  old  metaphor  in  Homer,  Aris- 
tophanes, Plutarch,  and  Paul  uses  it  often. 

50.  Over  against  Bethany  {heos  pros  Beihanian).  That  is 
on  Olivet.  On  this  blessed  spot  near  where  he  had  delivered 
the  great  Eschatological  Discourse  he  could  see  Bethany  and 
Jerusalem. 

51.  He  parted  from  them  {dieste  ap*  auton).  Second  aorist 
active  (intransitive)  indicative  of  diistemi.  He  stood  apart 
{did)  and  he  was  gone.  Some  manuscripts  do  not  have  the 
words  "and  was  carried  into  heaven."  But  we  know 
that  Jesus  was  taken  up  into  heaven  on  a  cloud  (Acts  1  :g). 

52.  Worshipped  him  {proskunes antes  auton).  Here  again 
We  have  one  of  Westcott  and  Hort's  Western  non-interpola- 


298      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

tions  that  may  be  genuine  or  not.  With  great  joy  (meta  char  as 
me  gales).  Now  that  the  Ascension  has  come  they  are  no 
longer  in  despair.  Joy  becomes  the  note  of  victory  as  it  is 
today.  No  other  note  can  win  victories  for  Christ.  The  bells 
rang  in  heaven  to  greet  the  return  of  Jesus  there,  bat  he  set 
the  carillon  of  joy  to  ringing  on  earth  in  human  hearts  in  all 
lands  and  for  all  time. 


A.  T.  Robertson 

A.  T.  Robertson,  professor  of  inter- 
pretation of  the  Greek  New  Testament 
at  Southern  Baptist  Theological  Semi- 
nary for  nearly  a  half  century,  was  one 
of  the  most  brilliant  and  popular  Bible 
scholars  of  his  day. 

A  world-famous  authority  on  the 
Greek  New  Testament,  Dr.  Robertson 
was  a  powerful  preacher  and  lecturer, 
and  a  prolific  writer  with  forty-five  vol- 
umes on  both  popular  and  profound 
subjects  to  his  credit.  A  Grammar  of 
the  Greek  New  Testament  in  the  Light 
of  Historical  Research  was  his  greatest 
contribution  to  the  serious  Bible  stu- 
dent, but  his  many  more  concise  New 
Testament  interpretations  have  been 
equally  helpful  to  the  average  Chris- 
tian. 

Among  his  most  popular  works  are : 
A  Harmony  of  the  Gospels  for  Students 
of  the  Life  of  Christ,  Paul  and  the  In- 
tellectuals, Studies  in  Mark's  Gospel, 
Studies  in  the  Epistle  of  James,  Epochs 
in  the  Life  of  Jesus,  and  Epochs  in  the 
Life  of  Paul. 


Other  Aids  in 
New  Testament  Study 


THE  MEANING  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Barclay  M.  Newman 

What  relationship,  if  any,  do  the  New  Testament  books  have 
to  the  social,  economic,  and  intellectual  conditions  of  the  time 
in  which  they  were  written?  How  can  an  understanding  of  this 
relationship  add  to  our  appreciation  of  the  New  Testament?  This 
illuminating  survey  provides  sound  and  satisfying  answers  to 
these  and  other  questions.  It  also  contains  a  brief  history  of  the 
New  Testament  canon  and  a  discussion  of  its  inspiration  and  au- 
thority. Has  numerous  maps,  drawings,  and  photographs. 


NEW  TESTAMENT  THEOLOGY 

Frank  Stagg 

This  study  emphasizes  the  New  Testament's  unity  of  thought 
and  defines  its  basic  concern  as  proclaiming  the  story  of  sal- 
vation. Dealing  with  various  New  Testament  theological  ques- 
tions—Christ, salvation,  the  church,  ordinances,  escatology,  and 
others— Dr.  Stagg  gives  fresh  meaning  and  understanding  of 
the  Bible  for  today. 

THE  NEW  TESTAMENT  WORLD 

H.  E.  Dana 

Pictures  the  life  and  world  in  the  days  of  Jesus  and  Paul. 
Briefly  sets  forth  the  Jewish  thinking  and  writing,  the  political 
parties,  institutions,  home  life,  and  other  pertinent  aspects  of 
that  day.  Also  contains  a  good  summary  of  the  two  great  streams 
of  thought  during  the  time— Judaism  and  Hellenism. 


BROMIMAN  PRESS 


