A.  T.  ROBERTSON 


Volume  III 


ACTS 


WORD  PICTURES 

IN  THE 
NEW  TESTAMENT 

A.  T.  Robertson 


This  six-volume  commentary  on  the 
New  Testament  was  published  in 
1930-33.  Ministers  and  other  Bible  stu- 
dents still  acclaim  it  for  combining 
thorough  scholarship  with  teaching 
skill  and  insight. 

"It  is  a  verse  by  verse  commentary 
on  the  English  text  (with  the  corre- 
sponding Greek  in  English  letters) 
stressing  those  meaningful  and  picto- 
rial suggestions  which  are  often  im- 
plicit in  the  original  significance  of 
the  words  but  are  lost  in  translation. 
.  .  .  The  author  makes  available  for 
those  who  do  not  know  Greek  a  large 
amount  of  critical  and  exegetical  ma- 
terial and  of  interpretative  insight  di- 
rectly connected  with  studies  in  the 
original  text." — The  Christian  Century 

Dr.  Robertson's  scholarship  was  at 
all  times  unimpeachable,  his  spiritual 
insight  was  profound,  and  his  style  was 
of  the  highest  order.  His  genial  wit,  his 
human  touch  and  interest,  and  his 
unique  phrasing  carry  an  appeal  for 
every  reader. 


Digitized  by  tine  Internet  Archive 
in  2010 


Iittp://www.archive.org/details/wordpicturesinne03robe 


WORD  PICTURES 

IN  THE 
NEW  TESTAMENT 


BOOKS  BY  PROFESSOR  A.  T.  ROBERTSON 

The  English  New  Testament  as  a  Whole: 
SYLLABUS  FOR  NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDY 
THE  S-fUDENT'S  CHRONOLOGICAL  NEW  TESTAMENT 
STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT 
NEW  TESTAMENT  HISTORY  (AIRPLANE  VIEW) 

The  Greek  New  Testament: 
WORD  PICTURES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT  (IN  SIX  VOLS.) 
A  SHORT  GRAMMAR  OF  THE  GREEK  NEW  TESTAMENT 
A  GRAMMAR  OF  THE  GREEK  NEW  TESTAMENT  IN  THE  LIGHT 

OF  HISTORICAL  RESEARCH 
THE  MINISTER  AND  HIS  GREEK  NEW  TESTAMENT 
AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  TEXTUAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE  NEW 

TESTAMENT 
STUDIES  IN  THE  TEXT  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT 

The  Gospels  and  Jesus: 

A  HARMONY  OF  THE  GOSPELS  FOR  STUDENTS  OF  THE  UFE  OF 
CHRIST 

A  COMMENTARY  ON  MATTHEW 

STUDIES  IN  MARK'S  GOSPEL 

LUKE  THE  HISTORIAN  IN  THE  LIGHT  OF  RESEARCH 

A  TRANSLATION  OF  LUKE'S  GOSPEL 

THE  DIVINITY  OF  CHRIST  IN  THE  GOSPEL  OF  JOHN 

JOHN  THE  LOYAL  (THE  MINISTRY  OF  THE  BAPTIST) 

THE  PHARISEES  AND  JESUS   (STONE  LECTURES  FOR   1916) 

EPOCHS  IN  THE  LIFE  OF  JESUS 

KEYWORDS  IN  THE  TEACHING  OF  JESUS 

THE  TEACHING  OF  JESUS  CONCERNING  GOD  THE  FATHER 

THE  CHRIST  OF  THE  LOGIA  (PORTRAITS  OF  CHRIST  IN  Q  AND 
THE  GOSPELS) 

THE  MOTHER  OF  JESUS:  HER  PROBLEMS  AND  HER  GLORY 
Paul: 

PAUL  AND  THE  INTELLECTUALS  (EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS) 

EPOCHS   IN  THE  LIFE  OF  PAUL 

PAUL  THE  INTERPRETER  OF  CHRIST 

PAUL'S  JOY  IN  CHRIST  (EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS) 

THE  GLORY  OF  THE  MINISTRY  (II  COR.  2:12-6:10) 

THE  NEW  CITIZENSHIP 

Other  Studies  in  the  New  Testament: 
SOME  MINOR  CHARACTERS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT 
STUDIES   IN  THE  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES 

MAKING  GOOD  IN  THE  MINISTRY  (SKETCH  OF  JOHN  MARK) 
TYPES  OF  PREACHERS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Biography: 
LIFE  AND  LETTERS  OF  JOHN  ALBERT  BROADUS 


WORD  PICTURES 

IN  THE 
NEW  TESTAMENT 


BY 

ARCHIBALD  THOMAS  ROBERTSON 
A.  M.,  D.  D.,  LL.  D.,  Litt.  D. 

PROFESSOR  OF  NEW  TESTAMENT  INTERPRETATION 

IN  THE 

SOUTHERN  BAPTIST  THEOLOGICAL  SEMINARY 

OF 

LOUISVILLE,  KENTUCKY 


Volume  III 
THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


BROADMAN  PRESS 

NASHVILLE,  TENNESSEE 


COPYRIGHT,  1930, 

BY  SUNDAY  SCHOOL  BOARD 

OF  THE 

SOUTHERN    BAPTIST   CONVENTION 

4213-03 

ISBN:  0-8054-1303-0 


PRINTED    IN    THE    UNITED    STATES    OF    AMERICA 


To 
DR.  ADOLF  DEISSMANN 

OF  BERLIN 
WHO  HAS  DONE  SO  MUCH 
TO  MAKE  THE  WORDS  OF  THE 
NEW  TESTAMENT  GLOW  WITH  LIFE 


BY  WAY  OF  INTRODUCTION 

But  for  the  Acts  we  should  know  nothing  of  the  early 
apostolic  period  save  what  is  told  in  the  Epistles.  There  are 
various  apocryphal  "Acts,"  but  they  are  without  historical 
worth.    Hence  the  importance  of  this  book. 

Luke  the  Author 

It  ought  to  be  possible  to  assume  this  as  a  fact  since  the 
work  of  Ramsay  and  Harnack  on  various  phases  of  the 
problems  concerning  the  Acts.  Harnack,  in  particular,  has 
covered  the  ground  with  his  accustomed  thoroughness  and 
care  in  his  two  volumes  {The  Acts  of  the  Apostles^  English 
Translation  by  Rev.  J.  R.  Wilkinson,  1909;  The  Date  of  the 
Acts  and  the  Synoptic  Gospels,  English  Translation  by  Rev. 
J.  R.  Wilkinson,  1911).  Ramsay's  view  may  be  found  in 
Chapter  I  of  St.  Paul  the  Traveller  and  the  Roman  Citizen, 
Chapter  XII  of  Pauline  and  Other  Studies.  A  good  summary 
of  the  matter  appears  in  Part  V  of  The  Synoptic  Gospels 
and  the  Book  of  Acts  by  Dr.  D.  A.  Hayes,  in  Robertson's 
Luke  the  Historian  in  the  Light  of  Research,  and  in  the  intro- 
duction to  the  various  commentaries  by  Knowling,  Rack- 
ham,  Fumeaux,  Rendall,  Hackett,  Meyer-Wendt,  Zahn, 
Blass,  Campbell-Morgan,  Stokes.  In  Part  I  of  The  Acts  of 
the  Apostles,  Vol.  II  of  The  Beginnings  of  Christianity,  edited 
by  Foakes-Jackson  and  Kirsopp  Lake  both  sides  are  ably 
presented:  The  Case  for  the  Tradition  by  C.  W.  Emmet, 
The  Case  against  the  Tradition  by  H.  Windisch.  The  In- 
ternal Evidence  of  Acts  is  discussed  by  the  Editors,  Foakes- 
Jackson  and  Lake,  with  an  adverse  conclusion  against 
Luke.  Henry  J.  Cadbury  surveys  The  Tradition  (the  ex- 
ternal evidence)  and  draws  a  negative  conclusion  likewise 


viii  BY  WAY  OF  INTRODUCTION 

on  the  ground  that  the  early  writers  who  ascribe  Acts  to 
Luke  were  not  critical  scholars.  A  similar  position  is  taken 
by  Cadbury  in  his  more  recent  volume,  The  Making  of 
Luke — Acts  (1927).  But  all  the  same  the  traditional  view 
that  Luke  is  the  author  of  the  Acts  holds  the  field  with 
those  who  are  not  prejudiced  against  it.  The  view  of  Baur 
that  Acts  is  a  Tendenz  writing  for  the  purpose  of  healing 
the  breach  between  Peter  and  Paul  and  showing  that  the 
two  factions  came  together  had  great  influence  for  a  while. 
In  fact  both  Ramsay  and  Harnack  at  first  held  it.  Ramsay 
broke  away  first  and  he  was  followed  by  Harnack.  Both  were 
influenced  to  change  their  views  by  the  accumulation  of 
evidence  to  the  effect  that  the  author  of  both  the  Gospel  and 
Acts  is  Luke  the  Physician  and  Friend  of  Paul.  Part  of  this 
evidence  has  already  been  given  in  the  Introduction  to  the 
Gospel  according  to  Luke. 

The  Author  of  the  Gospel  Also 
The  author  of  the  Acts  expressly  states  that  he  wrote 
"the  first  treatise  {ton  proton  logon)  concerning  all  things, 
O  Theophilus,  that  Jesus  began  both  to  do  and  to  teach 
until  which  day  he  gave  command  through  the  Holy  Spirit 
to  the  apostles  whom  he  had  chosen  and  was  received  up" 
(Acts  I  :if.).  There  is  no  room  for  dispute  that  the  reference 
is  directly  to  the  Gospel  according  to  Luke  as  we  have  it 
now.  Like  the  Gospel  the  book  is  dedicated  to  Theophilus. 
And,  what  is  even  more  important,  the  same  style  appears 
in  both  Gospel  and  Acts.  This  fact  Harnack  has  shown  with 
great  pains  and  conclusiveness.  There  is  the  same  interest 
in  medical  matters  and  even  Cadbury,  who  denies  by  impli- 
cation the  Lukan  authorship,  admits  identity  of  authorship 
for  both  books. 

The  Unity  of  the  Acts 

There  are  some  scholars  who  are  willing  to  admit  the 
Lukan  authorship  of  the  "we"  sections  when  the  author 


BY  WAY  OF  INTRODUCTION  ix 

uses  "we"  and  "us"  as  in  chapter  16:10-40  and  20:6-28:31. 
It  has  been  argued  that  Luke  wrote  a  travel-document  or 
diary  for  these  sections,  but  that  this  material  was  used  by 
the  editor  or  redactor  of  the  whole  book.  But,  unfortunately 
for  that  view,  the  very  same  style  appears  in  the  Acts  as  a 
whole  and  in  the  Gospel  also  as  Harnack  has  proven.  The 
man  who  said  "we"  and  "us"  in  the  "we"  sections  wrote 
"I"  in  1:1  and  refers  to  the  Gospel  as  his  work.  The  effort 
to  disprove  the  unity  of  the  Acts  has  failed.  It  stands  as  the 
work  of  the  same  author  as  a  whole  and  the  same  author 
who  wrote  the  Gospel. 

Sources  of  the  Acts 

Beyond  a  doubt  Luke  employed  a  variety  of  sources  for 
this  great  history  as  he  did  for  the  Gospel  (Luke  i  :i-4). 
In  fact,  Cadbury  argues  that  this  Prologue  was  meant  to 
apply  to  the  Acts  also  as  Volume  II  whether  he  intended  to 
write  a  third  volume  or  not.  Certainly  we  are  entitled  to  say 
that  Luke  used  the  same  historical  method  for  Acts.  Some 
of  these  sources  are  easy  to  see.  Luke  had  his  own  personal 
experience  for  the  "we"  sections.  Then  he  had  the  benefit  of 
Paul's  own  notes  or  suggestions  for  all  that  portion  where 
Paul  figures  from  chapters  8  to  28,  since  Luke  was  appar- 
ently with  Paul  in  Rome  when  he  finished  the  Book.  This 
would  include  Paul's  sermons  and  addresses  which  Luke 
gives  unless  one  wishes  to  say,  as  some  do,  that  Luke  fol- 
lowed the  style  of  Thucydides  and  composed  the  kind  of 
addresses  that  he  thought  Paul  would  make.  I  see  no  evi- 
dence of  that  for  each  address  differs  from  the  others  and 
suits  precisely  the  occasion  when  it  was  delivered.  The 
ancients  frequently  employed  shorthand  and  Paul  may  have 
preserved  notes  of  his  addresses.  Prof.  C.  C.  Torrey,  of 
Yale  University,  argues  in  his  Composition  and  Date  of  Acts 
(1916)  that  Luke  used  an  Aramaic  document  for  the  first 
fifteen  chapters  of  the  Acts.   There  is  an  Aramaic  element  in 


X  BY  WAY  OF  INTRODUCTION 

certain  portions  of  these  chapters,  but  nothing  like  so  pro- 
nounced as  in  Luke  i  and  2  after  i  :i-4.  It  cannot  be  said 
that  Torrey  has  made  out  his  case  for  such  a  single  docu- 
ment. Luke  may  have  had  several  such  documents  besides 
access  to  others  familiar  with  the  early  days  of  the  work  in 
Jerusalem.  There  was  Simon  Peter  whom  Paul  visited  for 
two  weeks  in  Jerusalem  (Gal.  i:i8)  besides  other  points  of 
contact  with  him  in  Jerusalem  and  Antioch  (Acts  15  and 
Gal.  2).  There  was  also  Barnabas  who  was  early  Paul's 
friend  (Acts  9:27)  and  who  knew  the  beginnings  as  few  did 
(Acts  4:36f.).  Besides  many  others  it  is  to  be  observed  that 
Paul  with  Luke  made  a  special  visit  to  Caesarea  where  he 
spent  a  week  with  the  gifted  Philip  and  his  daughters  with 
the  gift  of  prophecy  (Acts  21 :8f.).  But  with  all  the  inevitable 
variety  of  sources  for  the  information  needed  to  cover  the 
wide  field  of  the  Book  of  Acts  the  same  mind  has  mani- 
festly worked  through  it  and  it  is  the  same  style  all  through 
that  appears  in  the  "we"  sections  where  the  writer  is  con- 
fessedly a  companion  of  Paul.  No  other  companion  of  Paul 
carries  this  claim  for  the  authorship  and  no  other  was  a 
physician  and  no  author  has  the  external  evidence  from  early 
writers. 

The  Date 

There  are  three  views  about  the  date  of  the  Acts.  Baur 
and  his  Tubingen  School  held  the  second  century  to  be  the 
date  of  this  late  pamphlet  as  they  termed  it  after  the  fashion 
of  the  Clementine  Homilies.  But  that  view  is  now  prac- 
tically abandoned  save  by  the  few  who  still  strangely  oppose 
the  Lukan  authorship.  Probably  the  majority  of  those  who 
accept  the  Lukan  authorship  place  it  in  the  latter  part  of 
the  first  century  for  two  reasons.  One  is  that  the  Gospel 
according  to  Luke  is  dated  by  them  after  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem  because  of  the  prophecy  by  Jesus  of  the  encom- 
passing of  the  city  by  armies.     Predictive  prophecy  that 


BY  WAY  OF  INTRODUCTION  xi 

would  be  and  so  it  is  considered  a  prophecy  post  eventum. 
The  other  reason  is  the  alleged  use  of  the  Antiquities  of 
Josephus  by  Luke.  Josephus  finished  this  work  a.d.  93  so 
that,  if  Luke  did  use  it,  he  must  have  written  the  Acts 
after  that  date.  Usually  this  argument  is  made  to  show  that 
Luke  could  not  have  written  it  at  all,  but  some  hold  that  he 
may  have  lived  to  an  age  that  would  allow  it.  But  it  cannot 
be  assumed  that  Luke  used  Josephus  because  of  his  mention 
of  Theudas  and  Judas  the  Galilean.  They  differ  so  widely 
(Acts  5:36f.  and  Josephus,  Ant.  XX.  v,  i,  2)  that  Von  Dob- 
schiitz  {Dictionary  of  the  Apostolic  Church,  art.  Josephus) 
argues  that  the  two  accounts  are  entirely  independent  of 
each  other.  So  Luke  (Lu.  13  :if.)  alludes  to  a  Galilean  revolt 
not  mentioned  by  Josephus  and  Josephus  records  three 
revolts  under  Pilate  not  referred  to  by  Luke.  A  comparison 
of  the  accounts  of  the  death  of  Agrippa  I  in  Acts  12:20-23 
and  Ant.  XIX.  viii,  2  redounds  to  the  credit  of  Luke.  The 
Josephus  phase  of  the  argument  may  be  brushed  to  one 
side.  The  third  view,  held  by  Hamack  and  adopted  here, 
is  that  Luke  wrote  the  Acts  while  with  Paul  in  Rome  and 
finished  the  book  before  Paul's  release,  that  is  by  a.d.  63. 
This  is  the  obvious  and  natural  way  to  take  the  language  of 
Luke  at  the  close  of  Acts.  Events  had  gone  no  farther  and 
so  he  ends  the  narrative  right  there.  It  is  argued  against 
this  that  Luke  contemplated  a  third  volume  and  for  this 
reason  closed  with  the  arrival  of  Paul  in  Rome.  But  the 
use  of  proton  (first)  in  Acts  I  :i  is  a  common  Koine  idiom  and 
does  not  imply  three  volumes  any  more  than  first  and  second 
stories  with  us  means  that  the  house  has  three.  Of  course 
this  date  for  the  Acts  puts  the  date  of  the  Gospel  further 
back  either  in  Caesarea  (57  to  59)  or  in  Rome  (60  to  62). 
And  that  means  that  Mark's  Gospel  is  still  earlier  since 
Luke  used  it  for  his  Gospel  and  the  Logia  (Q)  earlier  still. 
But  all  these  dates  are  probable  in  the  light  of  all  the  known 
facts. 


xii  BY  WAY  OF  INTRODUCTION 

The  Historical  Value 

It  was  once  a  fafd  with  a  certain  school  of  critics  to  decry 
Luke  in  the  Acts  as  wholly  untrustworthy,  not  above  the 
legendary  stage.  But  the  spade  has  done  well  by  Luke  for 
inscriptions  and  papyri  have  brought  remarkable  confirma- 
tion for  scores  of  points  where  Luke  once  stood  all  alone  and 
was  discounted  because  he  stood  alone.  These  will  be  duly 
noted  in  the  proper  places  as  they  occur.  Ramsay  has  done 
most  in  this  restoration  of  the  rank  of  Luke  as  a  credible 
historian,  as  shown  in  particular  in  his  St.  Paul  the  Traveller 
and  the  Roman  Citizen  and  in  The  Bearing  of  Recent  Dis- 
covery on  the  Trustworthiness  of  the  New  Testament.  In  every 
instance  where  discoveries  have  been  made  they  have  con- 
firmed the  testimony  of  Luke  as  concerning  politarchs  in 
Thessalonica,  proconsul  in  Cyprus,  etc.  The  result  is  that 
the  balance  of  evidence  is  now  in  favour  of  Luke  even  when  he 
still  stands  alone  or  seems  to  be  opposed  by  Josephus.  Luke, 
as  it  stands  today,  is  a  more  credible  historian  than  Jose- 
phus. Ramsay  dares  to  call  Luke,  all  things  considered, 
the  greatest  of  all  historians,  even  above  Thucydides.  An 
interesting  book  on  this  phase  of  the  subject  is  Chase's 
The  Credibility  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  (1902). 

The  Purpose  of  the  Acts 

It  is  not  easy  to  say  in  a  word  precisely  the  object  of 
Luke  in  writing  this  book.  It  is  not  the  Acts  of  all  the  apos- 
tles. Outside  of  Peter  and  John  little  is  told  of  any  of  them 
after  chapter  3.  And  all  the  acts  of  Peter  and  John  are 
not  given  for  Peter  disappears  from  the  narrative  after  chap- 
ter 15,  though  he  has  been  the  central  figure  through  chapter 
II.  Paul  is  not  one  of  the  twelve  apostles,  but  Luke  follows 
Paul's  career  mainly  after  chapter  8.  Stephen  and  Barnabas 
come  in  also.  Still  {St.  Paul  on  Trial,  1923)  argues  that 
Luke  meant  the  book  as  an  apology  to  be  used  in  Paul's 


BY  WAY  OF  INTRODUCTION  xiii 

trial  at  Rome  or  at  any  rate  to  put  Paul  in  the  right  light 
with  the  Jews  in  Rome.  Hence  the  full  account  of  Paul's 
series  of  defences  in  Jerusalem,  Caesarea,  Rome.  There 
may  be  an  element  of  truth  in  this  idea,  but  it  clearly  does 
not  cover  the  whole  purpose  of  Luke.  Others  hold  that  Luke 
had  a  dramatic  plan  to  get  Paul  to  Rome  as  the  climax  of 
his  campaign  to  win  the  Roman  Empire  to  Christ.  The 
book  is  not  a  history  of  all  early  Christianity.  Peter  and 
Paul  dominate  the  atmosphere  of  the  book  with  Paul  as 
the  great  hero  of  Luke.  But  one  can  easily  see  that  the  work 
is  done  with  consummate  skill.  The  author  is  a  man  of  cul- 
ture, of  Christian  grace,  of  literary  power.  The  book  pulses 
with  life  today. 

The  Text  of  the  Acts 

A  special  problem  arises  concerning  the  text  of  Acts  in- 
asmuch as  the  Codex  Bezae  (D)  with  some  other  Western 
support  presents  a  great  many  additions  to  the  Neutral- 
Alexandrian  text  of  Aleph  ABC.  Blass  has  even  proposed 
the  idea  that  Luke  himself  issued  two  editions  of  the  book, 
an  attractive  hypothesis  that  is  not  generally  accepted. 
J.  M.  Wilson  has  published  The  Acts  of  the  Apostles  from 
Codex  Bezae.  The  whole  subject  is  elaborately  treated  by 
J.  H.  Ropes  in  Vol.  Ill,  The  Text  of  Acts  in  Part  I  of  The 
Beginnings  of  Christianity.  Besides  thorough  discussion  of 
all  the  problems  of  text  involved  Ropes  gives  the  text  of 
the  Vatican  Codex  (B)  on  the  left  page  and  that  of  Codex 
Bezae  (D)  on  the  right,  making  comparison  easy.  Blass's 
ideas  appear  in  his  Acta  Apostolorum. 


CONTENTS 
THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


PAGE 

Chapter  I 3 

Chapter  II 20 

Chapter  III 41 

Chapter  IV 49 

Chapter  V 59 

Chapter  VI .72 

Chapter  VII 79 

Chapter  VIII .  100 

Chapter  IX 113 

Chapter  X 133 

Chapter  XI  .        .        .        .        .        .        .  151 

Chapter  XII 163 

Chapter  XIII 177 

Chapter  XIV 204 

Chapter  XV 221 

Chapter  XVI 243 

Chapter  XVII 266 

Chapter  XVIII 294 

Chapter  XIX 310 

Chapter  XX 335 

Chapter  XXI  ....        .        .        .  358 

Chapter  XXII .385 

Chapter  XXIII 397 

XV 


XVI 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 

Chapter      XXIV 412 

Chapter        XXV 426 

Chapter      XXV'I 442 

Chapter    XXVII 456 

Chapter  XXVIII 477 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


CHAPTER  I 

The  Title  is  simply  Acts  (Praxeis)  in  Aleph,  Origen, 
Tertullian,  Didymus,  Hilary,  Eusebius,  Epiphanius.  The 
Acts  of  the  Apostles  {Praxeis  apostolon)  is  the  reading  of 
B  D  (Aleph  in  subscription)  Athanasius,  Origen,  Tertul- 
lian, Cyprian,  Eusebius,  Cyril  of  Jerusalem,  Theodoret, 
Hilary.  The  Acts  of  the  Holy  Apostles  {Praxeis  ton  hagion 
apostolon)  is  read  by  A^  E  G  H  A  K  Chrysostom.  It  is  pos- 
sible that  the  book  was  given  no  title  at  all  by  Luke,  for 
it  is  plain  that  usage  varied  greatly  even  in  the  same  writers. 
The  long  title  as  found  in  the  Textus  Receptus  (Authorized 
Version)  is  undoubtedly  wrong  with  the  adjective  "Holy." 
The  reading  of  B  D,  "  The  Acts  of  the  Apostles^^  may  be 
accepted  as  probably  correct. 

I.  The  former  treatise  {ton  men  proton).  Literally,  the 
first  treatise.  The  use  of  the  superlative  is  common  enough 
and  by  no  means  implies,  though  it  allows,  a  third  volume. 
This  use  of  protos  where  only  two  are  compared  is  seen  be- 
tween the  Baptist  and  Jesus  (John  1:15),  John  and  Peter 
(John  20:4).  The  idiom  is  common  in  the  papyri  (Robert- 
son, Grammar,  pp.  662,  669).  The  use  of  men  solitarium 
here,  as  Hackett  notes,  is  common  in  Acts.  It  is  by  no  means 
true  that  men  requires  a  following  de  by  contrast.  The  word 
is  merely  a  weakened  form  of  7n^n  =  surely,  indeed.  The 
reference  is  to  the  "first  treatise"  and  merely  emphasizes 
that.  The  use  of  logos  {word)  for  treatise  or  historical  narra- 
tive is  common  in  ancient  Greek  as  in  Herodotus  6  and  9. 
Plato  {Phaedo,  p.  61  B)  makes  a  contrast  between  muthos 
and  logos.  I  made  {epoiesamen).  Aorist  middle  indicative, 
the  middle  being  the  usual  construction  for  mental  acts 
with  poieo.    O  Theophilus  {0  Theophile).    The  interjection 


4  WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

O  here  as  is  common,  though  not  in  Luke  1:3.  But  the 
adjective  kratiste  (most  excellent)  is  wanting  here.  See 
remarks  on  Theophilus  on  Luke  1 13.  Hackett  thinks  that  he 
lived  at  Rome  because  of  the  way  Acts  ends.  He  was  a  man 
of  rank.  He  may  have  defrayed  the  expense  of  publishing 
both  Luke  and  Acts.  Perhaps  by  this  time  Luke  may  have 
reached  a  less  ceremonious  acquaintance  with  Theophilus. 
Which  Jesus  began  {hon  erxato  lesous).  The  relative  is 
attracted  from  the  accusative  ha  to  the  genitive  hbn  because 
of  the  antecedent  panton  (all).  The  language  of  Luke  here 
is  not  merely  pleonastic  as  Winer  held.  Jesus  "began" 
"both  to  do  and  to  teach"  (poiein  te  kai  didaskein).  Note 
present  infinitives,  linear  action,  still  going  on,  and  the  use 
of  te — kai  binds  together  the  life  and  teachings  of  Jesus,  as 
if  to  say  that  Jesus  is  still  carrying  on  from  heaven  the  work 
and  teaching  of  the  disciples  which  he  started  while  on  earth 
before  his  ascension.  The  record  which  Luke  now  records 
is  really  the  Acts  of  Jesus  as  much  as  the  Acts  of  the  Apos- 
tles. Dr.  A.  T.  Pierson  called  it  "The  Acts  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,"  and  that  is  true  also.  The  Acts,  according  to  Luke, 
is  a  continuation  of  the  doings  and  teachings  of  Jesus.  "The 
following  writings  appear  intended  to  give  us,  and  do,  in 
fact,  profess  to  give  us,  that  which  Jesus  continued  to  do  and 
teach  after  the  day  in  which  he  was  taken  up"  (Bernard, 
Progress  of  Doctrine  in  the  N.T.). 

2.  Until  the  day  in  which  (achri  hes  hemeras).  Incorpora- 
tion of  the  antecedent  into  the  relative  clause  and  the  change 
of  case  hei  (locative)  to  hes  (genitive).  Was  received  up 
(anelempthe).  First  aorist  passive  indicative  of  analambanb. 
Common  verb  to  lift  anything  up  (Acts  10:16)  or  person  as 
Paul  (Acts  20:13).  Several  times  of  the  Ascension  of  Jesus 
to  heaven  (Mark  16:19;  Acts  1:2,  11,  22;  I  Tim.  3:16)  with 
or  without  "into  heaven"  {eis  ton  ouranon).  This  same  verb 
is  used  of  Elijah's  translation  to  heaven  in  the  LXX  (II 
Kings  2:11).     The  same  idea,  though  not  this  word,  is  in 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  5 

Luke  24:51.  See  Luke  9:51  for  analempsis  of  the  Ascension. 
Had  given  commandment  {enteilamenos).  First  aorist  middle 
participle  of  entello  (from  en  and  tello^  to  accomplish),  usually 
in  the  middle,  old  verb,  to  enjoin.  This  special  command- 
ment refers  directly  to  what  we  call  the  commission  given 
the  apostles  before  Christ  ascended  on  high  (John  20:21-23; 
Matt.  28:16-20  =  Mark  16:15-18  =  !  Cor.  15:6;  Luke  24:44- 
49).  He  had  given  commands  to  them  when  they  were  first 
chosen  and  when  they  were  sent  out  on  the  tour  of  Galilee, 
but  the  immediate  reference  is  as  above.  Through  the  Holy 
Spirit  {did  pneumatos  hagiou).  In  his  human  life  Jesus  was 
under  the  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  This  applies  to  the 
choice  of  the  apostles  (Luke  6:13)  and  to  these  special  com- 
mands before  the  Ascension.  Whom  he  had  chosen  (hous 
exelexato).  Aorist  middle  indicative,  not  past  perfect.  The 
same  verb  (eklexamenos)  was  used  by  Luke  in  describing 
the  choice  of  the  twelve  by  Jesus  (Luke  6:13).  But  the 
aorist  does  not  stand  "for"  our  English  pluperfect  as  Hackett 
says.  That  is  explaining  Greek  by  English.  The  Western 
text  here  adds:  "And  ordered  to  proclaim  the  gospel." 

3.  To  whom  also  (hois  kai).  He  chose  them  and  then  also 
manifested  himself  to  these  very  same  men  that  they  might 
have  personal  witness  to  give.  Shewed  himself  alive  {pares- 
tesen  heauton  zbnta).  To  the  disciples  the  first  Sunday  eve- 
ning (Mark  i6:i4  =  Luke  24:36-43  =  John  20:19-25),  the 
second  Sunday  evening  (John  20:26-29),  ^^  ^he  Sea  of 
Tiberias  (John  21:1-23),  on  the  mountain  in  Galilee  (Matt. 
28:16-20  =  Mark  16:15-18  =  !  Cor.  15:6),  to  the  disciples  in 
Jerusalem  and  Olivet  (Luke  24:44-53;  Mark  i6-i9f.  =Acts 
I  :i-ii).  Luke  uses  this  verb  paristemi  13  times  in  the  Acts 
both  transitively  and  intransitively.  It  is  rendered  by  various 
English  words  (present,  furnish,  provide,  assist,  commend). 
The  early  disciples  including  Paul  never  doubted  the  fact  of 
the  Resurrection,  once  they  were  convinced  by  personal  ex- 
perience.    At  first  some  doubted  like  Thomas  (Mark  16:14; 


6  WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Luke  24:41 ;  John  20:24f.;  Matt.  28:17).  ^^^  after  that  they 
never  wavered  in  their  testimony  to  their  own  experience 
with  the  Risen  Christ,  "whereof  we  are  witnesses"  Peter 
said  (Acts  3:15).  They  doubted  at  first,  that  we  may  be- 
lieve, but  at  last  they  risked  life  itself  in  defence  of  this  firm 
faith.  After  his  passion  {meta  to  pathein  auton).  Neat  Greek 
idiom,  meta  with  the  articular  infinitive  (second  aorist 
active  of  pascho)  and  the  accusative  of  general  reference, 
"after  the  suffering  as  to  him."  For  pathein  used  absolutely 
of  Christ's  suffering  see  also  Acts  17:3;  26:23.  ^J  fnany 
proofs  {en  pollois  tekmeriois).  Literally,  "in  many  proofs." 
Tekmerion  is  only  here  in  the  N.T.,  though  an  old  and  com- 
mon word  in  ancient  Greek  and  occurring  in  the  Koine 
(papyri,  etc.).  The  verb  tekmairo^  to  prove  by  sure  signs,  is 
from  tekmar,  a  sign.  Luke  does  not  hesitate  to  apply  the 
definite  word  "proofs"  to  the  evidence  for  the  Resurrection 
of  Christ  after  full  investigation  on  the  part  of  this  scientific 
historian.  Aristotle  makes  a  distinction  between  tekmerion 
(proof)  and  semeion  (sign)  as  does  Galen  the  medical  writer. 
Appearing  (optanomenos).  Present  middle  participle  from 
late  verb  optano,  late  Koine  verb  from  root  opto  seen  in 
opsomai,  ophthen.  In  LXX,  papyri  of  second  century  B.C. 
(Deissmann,  Light  from  the  Ancient  East,  p.  83).  Only  here 
in  the  N.T.  For  optasia  for  vision  see  Acts  26:19;  Luke  i  :22; 
24:23.  By  the  space  of  forty  days  {dV  hemeron  tesserakonta). 
At  intervals  {dia,  between)  during  the  forty  days,  ten  ap- 
pearances being  known  to  us.  Jesus  was  not  with  them 
continually  now  in  bodily  presence.  The  period  of  forty 
days  is  given  here  alone.  The  Ascension  was  thus  ten  days 
before  Pentecost  when  the  Holy  Spirit  came.  Moses  was  in 
the  mount  forty  days  (Ex.  24:18)  and  Jesus  fasted  forty 
days  (Matt.  4:2).  In  the  Gospel  of  Luke  24  this  separation 
of  forty  days  between  the  Resurrection  and  the  Ascension 
is  not  drawn.  The  things  concerning  the  Kingdom  of  God 
[ta  peri  t?s  hasileias  tou  theou).   This  phrase  appears  33  times 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  7 

in  Luke's  Gospel,  15  times  in  Mark,  4  times  in  Matthew 
who  elsewhere  has  "the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  once  in  John, 
and  6  times  in  Acts.  No  essential  distinction  is  to  be  drawn 
between  the  two  for  the  Jews  often  used  "heaven"  rather 
than  "God"  to  avoid  using  the  Tetragrammaton.  But  it  is 
noticeable  how  the  word  kingdom  drops  out  of  Acts.  Other 
words  like  gospel  {euaggelion)  take  the  place  of  "kingdom." 
Jesus  was  fond  of  the  word  "kingdom"  and  Luke  is  fond  of 
the  idiom  "the  things  concerning"  {ta  peri).  Certainly  with 
Jesus  the  term  "kingdom"  applies  to  the  present  and  the 
future  and  covers  so  much  that  it  is  not  strange  that  the 
disciples  with  their  notions  of  a  political  Messianic  king- 
dom (Acts  1:6)  were  slow  to  comprehend  the  spiritual  na- 
ture of  the  reign  of  God. 

4.  Being  assembled  together  with  them  {sunalizomenos). 
Present  passive  participle  from  sunalizo,  an  old  verb  in 
Herodotus,  Xenophon,  etc.,  from  sun,  with,  and  halizo,  from 
hales,  crowded.  The  margin  of  both  the  Authorized  and  the 
Revised  Versions  has  "eating  with  them"  as  if  from  sun 
and  hals  (salt).  Salt  was  the  mark  of  hospitality.  There  is 
the  verb  halisthete  en  autoi  used  by  Ignatius  y^d  Magnes. 
X,  "Be  ye  salted  in  him."  But  it  is  more  than  doubtful  if 
that  is  the  idea  here  though  the  Vulgate  does  have  con- 
vescens  illis  "eating  with  them,"  as  if  that  was  the  common 
habit  of  Jesus  during  the  forty  days  (Wendt,  Peine,  etc.). 
Jesus  did  on  occasion  eat  with  the  disciples  (Luke  24:41-43 
=  Mark  16:14).  ^^  wait  for  the  promise  of  the  Father  {per- 
imenein  ten  epaggelian  tou  patros).  Note  present  active 
infinitive,  to  keep  on  waiting  for  (around,  peri).  In  the 
Great  Commission  on  the  mountain  in  Galilee  this  item  was 
not  given  (Matt.  28:16-20).  It  Is  the  subjective  genitive, 
the  promise  given  by  the  Father  (note  this  Johannlne  use 
of  the  word),  that  Is  the  Holy  Spirit  ("the  promise  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,"  objective  genitive).  Which  ye  heard  from  me 
{hen  ekousaie  mou).    Change  from  Indirect  discourse  (com- 


8  WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

mand),  infinitives  chbrizesthai  and  perimenein  after  pareg- 
geilen  to  direct  discourse  without  any  ephe  (said  he)  as  the 
English  (Italics).  Luke  often  does  this  (or<2fzo  &ar{(2/a).  Note 
also  the  ablative  case  of  mou  (from  me).  Luke  continues  in 
verse  5  with  the  direct  discourse  giving  the  words  of  Jesus. 

5.  Baptized  with  water  (ebaptisen  hudati)  and  with  the 
Holy  Ghost  {en  pneumati  baptisthesesthe  hagidi).  The  margin 
has  "in  the  Holy  Ghost"  (Spirit,  it  should  be).  The  Ameri- 
can Standard  Version  renders  "in"  both  with  "water" 
and  "Holy  Spirit"  as  do  Goodspeed  (American  Translation) 
and  Mrs.  Montgomery  (Centenary  Translation).  John's 
own  words  (Matt.  3:11)  to  which  Jesus  apparently  refers 
use  en  (in)  both  with  water  and  Spirit.  There  is  a  so-called 
instrumental  use  of  en  where  we  in  English  have  to  say 
"with"  (Rev.  13:10  en  machairei,  like  machairei,  Acts  12:2). 
That  is  to  say  en  with  the  locative  presents  the  act  as  lo- 
cated in  a  certain  instrument  like  a  sword  (Robertson, 
Grammar,  pp.  sSQf.).  But  the  instrumental  case  is  more 
common  without  en  (the  locative  and  instrumental  cases 
having  the  same  form).  So  it  is  often  a  matter  of  indifference 
which  idiom  is  used  as  in  John  21:8  we  have  toi  ploiarioi 
(locative  without  en).  They  came  in  (locative  case  without 
en)  the  boat.  So  in  John  1:31  en  hudati  baptizon  baptizing 
in  water.  No  distinction  therefore  can  be  insisted  on  here 
between  the  construction  hudati  and  en  pneumati  (both 
being  in  the  locative  case,  one  without,  one  with  en).  Note 
unusual  position  of  the  verb  baptisthesesthe  (future  passive 
indicative)  between  pneumati  and  hagidi.  This  baptism 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  was  predicted  by  John  (Matt.  3:1 1)  as  the 
characteristic  of  the  Messiah's  work.  Now  the  Messiah  him- 
self in  his  last  message  before  his  Ascension  proclaims  that 
in  a  few  days  the  fulfilment  of  that  prophecy  will  come  to 
pass.  The  Codex  Bezae  adds  here  "which  ye  are  about  to 
receive"  and  "until  the  Pentecost"  to  verse  5.  Not  many 
days  hence  (ou  meta  pollas  tautas  hemeras).    A  neat  Greek 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  9 

idiom  difficult  to  render  smoothly  into  English:  "Not  after 
many  days  these."  The  litotes  (not  many  =  few)  is  common 
in  Luke  (7:6;  15:13;  Acts  17:27;  19:11;  20:12;  21:39;  28:14; 
28:2).  The  predicate  use  of  tautas  (without  article)  is  to  be 
noted.  "These"  really  means  as  a  starting  point,  "from 
these"  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  702).  It  was  ten  days 
hence.  This  idiom  occurs  several  times  in  Luke  (24:21; 
Acts  24:21),  as  elsewhere  (John  4:18;  II  Pet.  3:1).  In  Luke 
2:12  the  copula  is  easily  supplied  as  it  exists  in  Luke  1:36;  2:2. 

— j^  6.  They  therefore  {hoi  men  oun).  Demonstrative  use  of  hoi 
with  men  oun  without  any  corresponding  de  just  as  in  i:i 
men  occurs  alone.  The  combination  men  oun  is  common  in 
Acts  (27  times),  Cf.  Luke  3:18.  The  oun  is  resumptive  and 
refers  to  the  introductory  verses  (1:1-5),  which  served  to 
connect  the  Acts  with  the  preceding  Gospel.  The  narrative 
now  begins.  Asked  (eroton).  Imperfect  active,  repeatedly 
asked  before  Jesus  answered.  Lord  {kurie).  Here  not  in 
~tKe~sense'or^1ir "  (Matt.  21:30),  but  to  Jesus  as  Lord  and 

J  Master  as  often  in  Acts  (19:5,  10,  etc.)  and  in  prayer  to 
Jesus  (7:59).  Dost  thou  restore  {ei  apokathistaneis).  The  use 
of  ei  in  an  indirect  question  is  common.  We  have  already 
seen  its  use  in  direct  questions  (Matt.  12:10;  Luke  13:23 
which  see  for  discussion),  possibly  in  imitation  of  the  Hebrew 
(frequent  in  the  LXX)  or  as  a  partial  condition  without 
conclusion.  See  also  Acts  7:1;  19:2;  21:37;  22:25.  The  form 
of  the  verb  apokathistano  is  late  (also  apokathistao)  omega 
form  for  the  old  and  common  apokathisiemi,  double  com- 
pound, to  restore  to  its  former  state.  As  a  matter  of  fact  the 
Messianic  kingdom  for  which  they  are  asking  is  a  ^Utical 
kingdom  that  would  throw  off  the  hated  Roman  yoke.  It  is 
a  futuristic  present  and  they  are  uneasy  that  jTesus  may  yet 
fail  to  fulfil  their  hopes..  Surely  here  is  proof  that  the  eleven 
apostles  needed  the  promise  of  the  Father  before  they  began 
to  spread  the  message  of  the  Risen  Christ.  They  still  yearn 
for  a  political  kingdom  for  Israel  even  after  faith  and  hope 


/ 


lo        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

have  come  back.   They  need  the  enlightenment  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  (John  14-16)  and  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (Acts 

i:4f.). 

7.  Times  or  seasons  {chronous  e  kairous).  "Periods"  and 
"points'*  of  time  sometimes  and  probably  so  here,  but  such 
a  distinction  is  not^lways  maintained.  See  Acts  17:26  for 
kairous  in  the  same  sense  as  chronous  for  long  periods  of 
time.  But  here  some  distinction  seems  to  be  called  for.  It  is 
curious  how  ea^er  people  have  always  been  to  fix  definite^ 
dates  about  the  second  coming  of  Christ  as  the  apostles 
were  about  the  political  Messianic  kingdom  which  they 
were  expecting.  Hath  set  (etheto).  Second  aprist  rniddle 
indicative,  emphasizing  the  sovereigiity  of  the  Father  in 
keeping  all  such  matters  to  himself,  a  gentle  hint  to  people 
today  about  the  limits  of  curiosity.  Note  also  "his  own" 
(ididt)  "authority"  (exousidi). 

8.  Power  (dunamin).  Not  the  "power"  about  which  they 
were  concerned  (political  organization  and  equipments 
for  empire  on  the  order  of  Rome).  Their  very  question  was 
ample  proof  of  their  need  of  this  new  "power"  (dunamin) y 
to  enable  them  (from  dunamai,  to  .he  able),  to  grapple 
with  the  spread  of  the  gospel  in  the  world.  fFhen  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  come  upon  you  {epelthontos  tou  hagiou  pneumatos 
eph*  humas).  Genitive  absolute  and  is  simultaneous  in  time 
with  the  preceding  verb  "shall  receive"  (lempsesthe).  The 
Holy  Spirit  will  give  them  the  "power"  as  he  comes  upon 
them.  This  is  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit  referred  to  in 
verse  5.  My  witnesses  {mou  martures).  Correct  text.  "Royal 
words  of  magnificent  and  Divine  assurance"  (Furneaux). 
Our  word  martyrs  is  this  word  martures.  In  Luke  24:48 
Jesus  calls  the  disciples  "witnesses  to  these  things"  (mar' 
tures  toutony  objective  genitive).  (In  Acts  1:22  an  apostle 
has  to  be  a  "witness  to  the  Resurrection"  of  Christ  and  in 
10:39  ^o  ^he  life  and  work  of  Jesus.  Hence  there  could^e  no 
"apostles"  in  this  sense  after  the  first  generationT}  But  here 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  II 

the  apostles  are  called  "ni^  witnesses."  "His  by  a  direct 
personal  relationship"  (Knowling).  The  expanding  sphere 
of  their  witness  when  the  Holy  Spirit  comes  upon  them  is 
"unto  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth"  {heos  eschatou  tes 
ges).  Once  they  had  been  commanded  to  avoid  Samaria 
(Matt.  10:5),  but  now  it  is  included  in  the  world  program 
as  already  outlined  on  the  mountain  in  Galilee  (Matt. 
28:19  =  Mark  16:15).  Jesus  is  on  Olivet  as  he  points  to 
Jerusalem,  Judea,  Samaria,  the  uttermost  (last,  eschatou) 
part  of  the  earth.  The  program  still  beckons  us  on  to  world 
conquest  for  Christ.  "The  Acts  themselves  form  the  best 
commentary  on  these  words,  and  the  words  themselves 
might  be  given  as  the  best  summary  of  the  Acts"  (Page). 
The  events  follow  this  outline  (Jerusalem  till  the  end  of 
chapter  7,  with  the  martyrdom  of  Stephen,  the  scattering 
of  the  saints  through  Judea  and  Samaria  in  chapter  8,  the 
conversion  of  Saul,  chapter  9,  the  spread  of  the  gospel  to 
Romans  in  Caesarea  by  Peter  (chapter  10),  to  Greeks  in 
Antioch  (chapter  11),  finally  Paul's  world  tours  and  arrest 
and  arrival  in  Rome  (chapters  11  to  28). 

9.  As  they  were  looking  {bleponton  auton).  Genitive  abso- 
lute. The  present  participle  accents  the  fact  that  they  were 
lookin£^  directly  at  Jesus.  He  was  taken  up  (eperthe).  First 
aorist  passive  indicative  of  epairo,  old  and  common  verb 
meaning  toJ[iftjip.  In  Luke  24:51  we  have  "he  was  borne 
up"  (anephereto)  and  in  Acts  1:2,  i:ii;  I  Tim.  3:6  "was 
received  up"  (anelempthe) .  Received  (hupelaben).  Second 
aorist  active  indicative  of  hupolambanOy  literally  here  "took 
under  him."  He  seemed  to  be  supported  by  the  cloud. 
"In  glory"  Paul  adds  in  I  Tim.  3:16.  Out  of  their  sight 
{apo  ton  ophthalmon  auton).  From  their  eyes  (apo  with 
ablative  case). 

10.  fFere  looking  steadfastly  (atenizontes  esan).  Peri- 
phrastic imperfect  active  of  atenizOy  a  late  intensive  verb 
(intensive  a  and  teino,  to  stretch).  Common  in  Acts  and  also 


12        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

in  Luke  4:20  and  22:56  as  well  as  Acts  10:4,  which  see. 
As  he  went  {poreuomenou  autou).  Genitive  absolute  of 
present  middle  participle.  They  saw  him  slipping  away 
from  their  eyes  as  the  cloud  bore  him  away.  Stood  by  them 
(pareistekeisan  autois).  Past  perfect  active  indicative  of 
paristemi  and  intransitive  (note  i  in  B  instead  of  ei  for 
augment,  mere  itacism). 

11.  fFho  also  (hoi  kai).  Common  use  of  kai  pleonastic 
to  show  that  the  two  events  were  parallel.  This  is  the  sim- 
plest way  from  Homer  on  to  narrate  two  parallel  events. 
Why?  (ti).  Jesus  had  tojd  them  of  his  coming  Ascension 
(John  6:62;  20:17)  so  that  theyjilmjildjiaye  been  prepared. 
This  Jesus  (houtos  ho  lesous).  Qui  vobis  fuit  eritque  semper 
Jesus  J  id  est  J  Salvator  (Corn,  a  Lapide).  The  personal  name 
assures  them  that  Jesus  will  always  be  in  heaven  a  personal 
friend  and  divine  Saviour  (Knowling).     So  in  like  manner 

\houtos  hon  tropon).  Same  idea  twice.  "So  in  which  manner" 
(incorporation  of  antecedent  and  accusative  of  general 
reference).  The  fact  of  his  second  coming  and  the  manner 
of  it  also  described  by  this  emphatic  repetition. 

12.  Olivet  (Elaionos).  Genitive  singular.  Vulgate  Olive- 
turn.  Made  like  ampelon.  Here  only  in  the  N.T.,  usually 
to  oros  ton  Elaibn  (the  Mount  of  Olives),  though  some  MSS. 
have  Olivet  in  Luke  19:29;  21:37.  Josephus  {Ant.  VII.  9,  2) 
has  it  also  and  the  papyri  (Deissmann,  Light  from  the  Ancient 
East  J  p.  170).  A  sabbath  day^s  journey  off  {Sabbatou  echon 
hodon).  Luke  only  says  here  that  Olivet  is  a  Sabbath  day's 
journey  from  Jerusalem,  not  that  Jesus  was  precisely  that 
distance  when  he  ascended.  In  the  Gospel  Luke  (24:50) 
states  that  Jesus  led  them  "over  against"  {heos  pros) 
Bethany  (about  two  miles  or  fifteen  furlongs).  The  top  of 
Olivet  is  six  furlongs  or  three-fourths  of  a  mile.  The  Greek 
idiom  here  is  "having  a  journey  of  a  Sabbath"  after  "which 
is  nigh  unto  Jerusalem"  {ho  estin  eggus  lerousalem)^  note 
the  periphrastic  construction.     Why  Luke  mentions  this 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  13 

item  for  Gentile  readers  in  this  form  is  not  known,  unless 
it  was  in  his  Jewish  source.  See  Ex.  16:29;  Numb.  35:5; 
Josh.  3  4.  But  it  does  not  contradict  what  he  says  in  Luke 
24:50,  where  he  does  not  say  that  Jesus  led  them  all  the  way 
to  Bethany. 

13.  Into  the  upper  chamber  (eis  to  huperoion).  The  upstairs 
or  upper  room  (huper  is  upper  or  over,  the  adjective  huper- 
oios),  the  room  upstairs  where  the  women  staid  in  Homer, 
then  a  room  up  under  the  flat  roof  for  retirement  or  prayer 
(Acts  9:37,  39),  sometimes  a  large  third  story  room  suitable 
for  gatherings  (Acts  20:9).  It  is  possible,  even  probable, 
that  this  is  the  "large  upper  room"  {anogeon  mega)  of 
Mark  14:15  =Luke  22:12,  The  Vulgate  has  coenaculum  for 
both  words.  The  word  is  used  in  the  N.T  only  in  Acts. 
It  was  in  a  private  house  as  in  Luke  22:11  and  not  in  the 
temple  as  Luke  24:53  might  imply,  "continually"  {dia 
pantos)  these  words  probably  meaning  on  proper  occasions. 
They  were  abiding  {esan  katamenontes).  Periphrastic  im- 
perfect active.  Perfective  use  of  kata,  to  abide  permanently. 
It  is  possible  that  this  is  the  house  of  Mary  the  mother  of 
John  Mark  where  the  disciples  later  met  for  prayer  (Acts 
12:12).  Here  alone  in  the  N.T.,  though  old  compound. 
Some  MSB.  here  read  paramenontes.  This  could  mean  con- 
stant residence,  but  most  likely  frequent  resort  for  prayer 
during  these  days,  some  being  on  hand  all  the  time  as  they 
came  and  went.  Simon  the  Zealot  {Simon  ho  Zelotes).  Called 
Simon  the  Cananaean  {ho  Cananaios)  in  Matt.  10:4,  Mark 
3:18,  but  Zealot  in  Luke  6:16  as  here  giving  the  Greek 
equivalent  of  the  Aramaic  word  because  Luke  has  Gentiles 
in  mind.  The  epithet  (member  of  the  party  of  Zealots) 
clung  to  him  after  he  became  an  apostle  and  distinguishes 
him  from  Simon  Peter.  See  Vol.  I  on  the  Gospel  of  Matthew 
for  discussion  of  the  four  lists  of  the  apostles.  Judas  the  son 
of  James  {Joudas  lakobou).  Literally,  Judas  of  James, 
whether  son  or  brother  (cf.  Jude  1:1)  we  do  not  really  know. 


14        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

"Of  James"  is  added  to  distinguish  him  from  Judas  Is- 
cariot  (John  14:22).  However  we  take  it,  he  must  be  identi- 
fied with  the  Thaddaeus  (  =  Lebbaeus)  of  Mark  and  Matthew 
to  make  the  Hst  in  the  third  group  identical.  No  name  ap- 
pears in  Acts  for  that  of  Judas  Iscariot. 

14.  fFith  one  accord  {homothumadon) .  Old  adverb  in 
-don  from  adjective  homothumos  and  that  from  homos,  same, 
and  thumos,  mind  or  spirit,  with  the  same  mind  or  spirit. 
Common  in  ancient  Greek  and  papyri.  In  the  N.T.  eleven 
times  in  Acts  and  nowhere  else  save  Rom.  15:6.  See  Matt. 
18:19.  Continued  {esan  proskarterountes).  Periphrastic 
imperfect  active  of  proskartereo,  old  verb  from  pros  (per- 
fective use)  and  kartereo  from  karteros,  strong,  steadfast, 
like  the  English  "carry  on."  Already  in  Mark  3:9  which 
see  and  several  times  in  Acts  and  Paul's  Epistles.  They 
"stuck  to"  the  praying  {tei  proseuchei,  note  article)  for 
the  promise  of  the  Father  till  the  answer  came.  fVith  the 
women  {sun  gunaixin).  Associative  instrumental  case  plural 
of  gune  after  sun.  As  one  would  expect  when  praying  was 
the  chief  work  on  hand.  More  women  certainly  included 
than  in  Luke  8:2;  Mark  1 5 :4of .  =  Matt.  27:55f.  =Luke 
23:49;  Mark  i5:47  =  Matt.  27:61  =Luke  23:55^;  Mark 
l6:i=Matt.  28:1;  Luke  24:if.  =John  20:1,  11-18;  Matt. 
28:9f.  There  were  probably  other  women  also  whose  testi- 
mony was  no  longer  scouted  as  it  had  been  at  first.  Codex 
Bezae  adds  here  "and  children."  And  Mary  the  mother  of 
Jesus  {kaiMariam  tei  metri  tou  lesou).  A  delicate  touch  by 
Luke  that  shows  Mary  with  her  crown  of  glory  at  last. 
She  had  come  out  of  the  shadow  of  death  with  the  song  in 
her  heart  and  with  the  realization  of  the  angel's  promise 
and  the  prophecy  of  Simeon.  It  was  a  blessed  time  for  Mary. 
With  his  brethren  {sun  tois  adelphois  autou).  With  his  broth- 
ers, it  should  be  translated.  They  had  once  disbelieved 
in  him  (John  7:5).  Jesus  had  appeared  to  James  (I  Cor. 
15:7)  and  now  it  is  a  happy  family  of  believers  including  the 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  IS 

mother    and    brothers    (half-brothers,    literally)    of   Jesus, 
They  continue  in  prayer  for  the  power  from  on  high. 

15.  Brethren  (adelphon).  Codex  Bezae  has  "disciples." 
Multitude  of  persons  {ochlos  onomatoii).  Literally,  multi- 
tude of  names.  This  Hebraistic  use  of  onoma  =  person  occurs 
in  the  LXX  (Numb.  1:2;  18:20;  3:40,  43;  26:53)  and  in  Rev. 
3:4;  11:13.  Together  (epi  to  auto).  The  word  "gathered" 
is  not  in  the  Greek  here,  but  it  does  occur  in  Matt.  22:34 
and  that  is  undoubtedly  the  idea  in  Luke  17:35  as  in  Acts 
2:1,  44,  47;  I  Cor.  11:20;  14:23.  So  also  here.  They  were 
in  the  same  place  (to  auto).  About  a  hundred  and  twenty 
(hos  hekaton  eikosi).  A  crowd  for  "the  upper  room."  No 
special  significance  in  the  number  120,  just  the  number 
there. 

16.  Brethren  {andres  adelphoi).  Literally,  men,  brethren 
or  brother  men.  More  dignified  and  respectful  than  just 
"brethren."  Demosthenes  sometimes  said  Andres  Athe- 
naioi.  Cf.  our  "gentlemen  and  fellow-citizens."  Women 
are  included  in  this  address  though  andres  refers  only  to  men. 
It  was  needful  (edei).  Imperfect  tense  of  the  impersonal 
dei  with  the  infinitive  clause  (first  aorist  passive)  and  the 
accusative  of  general  reference  as  a  loose  subject.  Peter 
here  assumes  that  Jesus  is  the  Messiah  and  finds  scripture 
illustrative  of  the  treachery  of  Judas.  He  applies  it  to 
Judas  and  quotes  the  two  passages  in  verse  20  (Psa.  69:25; 
Psa.  109:8).  The  Holy  Spirit  has  not  yet  come  upon  them, 
but  Peter  feels  moved  to  interpret  the  situation.  He  feels 
that  his  mind  is  opened  by  Jesus  (Luke  24:45).  It  is  a  logi- 
cal, not  a  moral,  necessity  that  Peter  points  out.  Peter 
here  claims  the  Holy  Spirit  as  speaking  in  the  scriptures 
as  he  does  in  II  Peter  1:21.  His  description  of  Judas  as 
"guide"  (hodegou)  to  those  who  seized  (sullabousin)  Jesus 
is  that  of  the  base  traitor  that  he  was.  This  very  verb  oc- 
curs in  Luke  22:54  of  the  arrest  of  Jesus. 

17.  Was  numbered  {katerithmenos  en).    Periphrastic  past 


l6        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

perfect  passive  indicative  of  katarithmeo,  old  verb,  but  here 
only  in  the  N.T.  (perfective  use  of  kata).  Received  his  por- 
tion {elacken  ion  kleron).  Second  aorist  active  indicative  of 
lagchano,  old  verb,  to  obtain  by  lot  as  in  Luke  i  :9  and  John 
19:24,  especially  by  divine  appointment  as  here  and  II  Peter 
2:1.  Kleros  also  means  lot,  an  object  used  in  casting  lots 
(Acts  1:26),  or  what  Is  obtained  by  lot  as  here  and  8:21,  of 
eternal  salvation  (Acts  26:18;  Col.  1:12),  of  persons  chosen 
by  divine  appointment  (I  Peter  5:3).  From  this  latter  usage 
the*  Latin  cleros,  clericus,  our  clergy,  one  chosen  by  divine 
lot.  So  Peter  says  that  Judas  "obtained  by  lot  the  lot  of 
this  ministry"  (diakonias)  which  he  had  when  he  betrayed 
Jesus.  The  Master  chose  him  and  gave  him  his  opportunity. 

18.  Now  this  man  (Houtos  men  oun).  Note  men  oun 
again  without  a  corresponding  de  as  in  i  :6.  Verses  18  and  19 
are  a  long  parenthesis  of  Luke  by  way  of  explanation  of  the 
fate  of  Judas.  In  verse  20  Peter  resumes  and  quotes  the 
scripture  to  which  he  referred  In  verse  16.  Obtained  {ekte- 
sato).  First  aorist  middle  Indicative  of  ktaomai,  to  acquire, 
only  in  the  middle,  to  get  for  oneself.  With  the  covenant 
money  for  the  betrayal,  acquired  it  Indirectly  apparently 
according  to  Matt.  26:14-16;  27:3-8  which  see.  Falling 
headlong  {prenes  genomenos).  Attic  form  usually  pranes. 
The  word  means,  not  "headlong,"  but  "flat  on  the  face"  as 
opposed  to  huptios  on  the  back  (Hackett).  Hackett  ob- 
serves that  the  place  suits  admirably  the  Idea  that  Judas 
hung  himself  (Matt.  27:5)  and,  the  rope  breaking,  fell  flat 
on  his  face  and  burst  asunder  in  the  midst  {elakesen  mesos). 
First  aorist  active  indicative  of  laskb  old  verb  (here  only  in 
the  N.T.),  to  clang,  to  crack,  to  crash,  like  a  falling  tree. 
Aristophanes  uses  it  of  crashing  bones.  Mesos  Is  predicate 
nominative  referring  to  Judas.  Gushed  out  (exechuthe). 
First  aorist  passive  indicative  of  ekcheo,  to  pour  out. 

19.  Language  {dialektoi).  Not  a  dialect  of  the  Greek, 
but  a  dlfl^erent  language,  the  Aramaic.    So  also  In  2:6;  21 :40. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  17 

Dialektos  is  from  dialegomai,  to  converse,  to  speak  between 
two  (dia).  Akeldama  {Hakeldamach).  This  Aramaic  word 
Peter  explains  as  "the  field  of  blood."  Two  traditions  are 
preserved:  one  in  Matt.  27:7  which  explains  that  the  priests 
purchased  this  potter's  field  with  the  money  which  Judas 
flung  down  as  the  price  of  the  blood  of  Jesus.  The  other  in 
Acts  describes  it  as  the  field  of  blood  because  Judas  poured 
out  his  blood  there.  Hackett  and  Knowling  argue  that  both 
views  can  be  true.  "The  ill-omened  name  could  be  used 
with  a  double  emphasis"  (Hackett). 

20.  For  it  is  written  {gegraptai  gar).  Luke  here  returns  to 
the  address  of  Peter  interrupted  by  verses  18  and  19.  Perfect 
passive  indicative,  the  usual  idiom  in  quoting  scripture, 
stands  written.  Psalm  69  is  often  quoted  as  Messianic  in 
Matthew  and  John.  His  habitation  {he  epaulis  auiou).  Only 
here  in  the  N.T.,  a  country  house,  cottage,  cabin.  His  office 
{ten  episkopen  autou).  Our  word  bishopric  (Authorized 
Version)  is  from  this  word,  office  of  bishop  {episcopos). 
Only  that  is  not  the  idea  here,  but  over-seership  {epi,  skopeo) 
or  office  as  in  I  Peter  2:12.  It  means  to  visit  and  to  inspect, 
to  look  over.    The  ecclesiastical  sense  comes  later  (I  Tim. 

3:1). 

21.  Must  {dei).  Present  necessity  corresponding  to  the 
old  necessity  {edei)  about  Judas  (verse  16).  This  sentence 
in  verses  21  and  22  begins  with  dei.  That  {hoi).  Locative 
case  of  the  relative  attracted  to  the  case  of  the  antecedent. 
Went  in  and  went  out  {eiselthen  kai  exelthen).  Constative 
aorist  active.  With  us  {epW  hemas).  Over  us,  the  margin 
has  it.  But  the  full  phrase  would  be  epW  hemas  kai  aph* 
hemon.    He  came  to  us  and  went  from  us  (Knowling). 

22.  Beginning  {arxamenos).  Aorist  middle  participle  of 
archoy  agreeing  {nominative)  with  ho  kurios  I e sous  (the  Lord 
Jesus).  The  ministry  of  Jesus  began  with  the  ministry  of 
John.  Strictly  speaking  arxamenos  should  be  the  accusative 
and  agree  with  martura  (witness)  in  verse  22,  but  the  con- 


1 8        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

struction  is  a  bit  free.  The  ministry  of  Jesus  began  with  the 
baptism  of  John  and  lasted  until  the  Ascension.  A  witness 
with  us  of  his  resurrection  {martura  tes  anastaseos  autou  sun 
hemin).  This  Peter  considers  the  essential  thing  in  a  suc- 
cessor to  Judas.  The  one  chosen  should  be  a  personal  witness 
who  can  speak  from  his  own  experience  of  the  ministry, 
resurrection,  and  ascension  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  One  can 
easily  see  that  this  qualification  will  soon  put  an  end  to 
those  who  bear  such  personal  testimony. 

23.  They  put  forward  two  {estesan  duo).  First  aorist  active 
indicative  (transitive)  of  histemi  (not  intransitive  second 
aorist,  though  same  form  in  the  third  person  plural).  Some- 
body nominated  two  names,  Justus  and  Matthias. 

24.  Show  us  the  one  whom  thou  hast  chosen  (anadeixon  hon 
exelexo).  First  aorist  active  imperative  of  anadeiknumi, 
to  show  up,  make  plain.  First  aorist  middle  indicative 
second  person  singular  of  eklegb,  to  pick  out,  choose,  select. 
In  this  prayer  they  assume  that  God  has  made  a  choice. 
They  only  wish  to  know  his  will.  They  call  God  the  heart- 
searcher  or  heart-knower  {kardiognosta,  vocative  singular), 
a  late  word,  here  and  Acts  15:8  only  in  the  N.T.  Modem 
physicians  have  delicate  apparatus  for  studying  the  human 
heart. 

25.  Apostleship  (apostoles).  Jesus  had  called  the  twelve 
apostles.  An  old  word  for  sending  away,  then  for  a  release, 
then  the  office  and  dignity  of  an  apostle  (Acts  1:25;  Rom. 
1:5;  I  Cor.  9:2;  Gal.  2:8).  To  his  own  place  (eis  ton  topon 
ton  idion).  A  bold  and  picturesque  description  of  the  destiny 
of  Judas  worthy  of  Dante's  Inferno.  There  is  no  doubt  in 
Peter's  mind  of  the  destiny  of  Judas  nor  of  his  own  guilt. 
He  made  ready  his  own  berth  and  went  to  it. 

26.  He  was  numbered  (sunkatepsephisthe) .  To  the  Jews 
the  lot  did  not  suggest  gambling,  but  "the  O.T.  method  of 
learning  the  will  of  Jehovah"  (Fumeaux).  The  two  nomina- 
tions made  a  decision  necessary  and  they  appealed  to  God 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  19 

in  this  way.  This  double  compound  sunkatapsephizo  occurs 
here  alone  In  the  N.T.  and  elsewhere  only  in  Plutarch 
{Them.  21)  in  the  middle  voice  for  condemning  with  others. 
Sunpsephizo  occurs  in  the  middle  voice  in  Acts  19:19  for 
counting  up  money  and  also  in  Aristophanes.  Psephizo 
with  dapanen  occurs  in  Luke  14:28  for  counting  the  cost  and 
in  Rev.  13:18  for  "counting"  the  number  of  the  beast.  The 
ancients  used  pebbles  (psephoi)  in  voting,  black  for  con- 
demning, white  (Rev.  2:17)  in  acquitting.  Here  it  is  used  in 
much  the  same  sense  as  katarithmeo  in  verse  17. 


CHAPTER   II 

1.  fVas  now  come  {en  toi  sunplerousthai).  Luke's  favourite 
idiom  of  en  with  the  articular  present  infinitive  passive  and 
the  accusative  of  general  reference,  "in  the  being  fulfilled 
completely  (perfective  use  of  sun-)  as  to  the  day  of  Pente- 
cost." Common  verb,  but  only  in  Luke  in  N.T.  In  literal 
sense  of  filling  a  boat  in  Luke  8:23,  about  days  in  Luke  9:51 
as  here.  Whether  the  disciples  expected  the  coming  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  on  this  day  we  do  not  know.  Blass  holds  that 
the  present  tense  shows  that  the  day  had  not  yet  come.  It 
is  a  Hebrew  idiom  (Ex.  7:25)  and  Luke  may  mean  that  the 
day  of  Pentecost  was  not  yet  over,  was  still  going  on,  though 
Hackett  takes  it  for  the  interval  (fifty  days)  between  Pass- 
over and  Pentecost.  Apparently  this  day  of  Pentecost  fell 
on  the  Jewish  Sabbath  (our  Saturday).  It  was  the  feast  of 
first  fruits.  All  together  in  one  place  {pantes  homou  epi  to 
auto).  All  together  in  the  same  place.  Note  homou  here 
(correct  text),  not  homothumadon  as  in  1:14,  and  so  a  bit  of 
tautology. 

2.  Suddenly  (aphno).  Old  adverb,  but  in  the  N.T.  only 
in  Acts  (2:2;  16:26;  28:6).  Kin  to  exaiphnes  (Acts  22:61). 
A  sound  (echos).  Our  echo.  Old  word,  already  in  Luke  4:37 
for  rumour  and  Luke  21 :25  for  the  roar  of  the  sea.  It  was  not 
wind,  but  a  roar  or  reverberation  "as  of  the  rushing  of  a 
mighty  wind"  {hosper  pheromenes  pnoes  biaias).  This  is 
not  a  strict  translation  nor  is  it  the  genitive  absolute.  It 
was  "an  echoing  sound  as  of  a  mighty  wind  borne  violently" 
(or  rushing  along  like  the  whirr  of  a  tornado).  Pnoe  (wind) 
is  used  here  (in  the  X.T.  only  here  and  17:25  though  old 
word)  probably  because  of  the  use  of  pneuma  in  verse  4  of 
the  Holy  Spirit.    In  John  3  :5-8  pneuma  occurs  for  both  wind 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  21 

and  Spirit.  Filled  (eplerosen).  "As  a  bath  is  filled  with 
water,  that  they  might  be  baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost, 
in  fulfilment  of  Acts  1:5"  (Canon  Cook).  They  were  sitting 
(esan  kathemenoi).  Periphrastic  imperfect  middle  of  kath- 
emai. 

3.  Parting  asunder  {diamerizomenai) .  Present  middle  (or 
passive)  participle  of  diamerizd,  old  verb,  to  cleave  asunder, 
to  cut  in  pieces  as  a  butcher  does  meat  (aorist  passive  in 
Luke  ii'.iyf.).  So  middle  here  would  mean,  parting  them- 
selves asunder  or  distributing  themselves.  The  passive 
voice  would  be  "being  distributed."  The  middle  is  probably 
correct  and  means  that  "the  fire-like  appearance  presented 
itself  at  first,  as  it  were,  in  a  single  body,  and  then  suddenly 
parted  in  this  direction  and  that;  so  that  a  portion  of  it 
rested  on  each  of  those  present"  (Hackett).  The  idea  is  not 
that  each  tongue  was  cloven,  but  each  separate  tongue 
looked  like  fire,  not  real  fire,  but  looking  like  {hosei,  as  if) 
fire.  The  audible  sign  is  followed  by  a  visible  one  (Know- 
ling).  "Fire  had  always  been,  with  the  Jews,  the  symbol 
of  the  Divine  presence  (cf.  Ex.  3:2;  Deut.  5:4).  No  symbol 
could  be  more  fitting  to  express  the  Spirit's  purifying  energy 
and  refining  energy"  (Furneaux).  The  Baptist  had  pre- 
dicted a  baptizing  by  the  Messiah  in  the  Holy  Spirit  and  in 
fire  (Matt.  3:11).  It  sat  (ekathisen).  Singular  verb  here, 
though  plural  opthesan  with  tongues  (glossat).  A  tongue 
that  looked  like  fire  sat  upon  each  one. 

4.  With  other  tongues  {heterais  glossais).  Other  than  their 
native  tongues.  Each  one  began  to  speak  in  a  language  that 
he  had  not  acquired  and  yet  it  was  a  real  language  and 
understood  by  those  from  various  lands  familiar  with  them. 
It  was  not  jargon,  but  intelligible  language.  Jesus  had  said 
that  the  gospel  was  to  go  to  all  the  nations  and  here  the 
various  tongues  of  earth  were  spoken.  One  might  conclude 
that  this  was  the  way  in  which  the  message  was  to  be  car- 
ried to  the  nations,  but  future  developments  disprove  it. 


22         WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

This  is  a  third  miracle  (the  sound,  the  tongues  like  fire,  the 
untaught  languages).  There  is  no  blinking  the  fact  that 
Luke  so  pictures  them.  One  need  not  be  surprised  if  this 
occasion  marks  the  fulfilment  of  the  Promise  of  the  Father. 
But  one  is  not  to  confound  these  miraculous  signs  with  the 
Holy  Spirit.  They  are  merely  proof  that  he  has  come  to 
carry  on  the  work  of  his  dispensation.  The  gift  of  tongues 
came  also  on  the  house  of  Cornelius  at  Caesarea  (Acts  10:44- 
47;  11:15-17),  the  disciples  of  John  at  Ephesus  (Acts  19:6), 
the  disciples  at  Corinth  (I  Cor.  14:1-33).  It  is  possible  that 
the  gift  appeared  also  at  Samaria  (Acts  8:18).  But  it  was  not 
a  general  or  a  permanent  gift.  Paul  explains  in  I  Cor.  14:22 
that  "tongues"  were  a  sign  to  unbelievers  and  were  not  to 
be  exercised  unless  one  was  present  who  understood  them 
and  could  translate  them.  This  restriction  disposes  at  once 
of  the  modern  so-called  tongues  which  are  nothing  but 
jargon  and  hysteria.  It  so  happened  that  here  on  this 
occasion  at  Pentecost  there  were  Jews  from  all  parts  of  the 
world,  so  that  some  one  would  understand  one  tongue  and 
some  another  without  an  interpreter  such  as  was  needed  at 
Corinth.  The  experience  is  identical  in  all  four  instances 
and  they  are  not  for  edification  or  instruction,  but  for  adora- 
tion and  wonder  and  worship.  As  the  Spirit  gave  them  utter- 
ance {kathos  to  pneuma  edidou  apophtheggesthai  autois). 
This  is  precisely  what  Paul  claims  in  I  Cor.  12:10,  28,  but  all 
the  same  without  an  interpreter  the  gift  was  not  to  be 
exercised  (I  Cor.  14:6-19).  Paul  had  the  gift  of  tongues, 
but  refused  to  exercise  it  except  as  it  would  be  understood. 
Note  the  imperfect  tense  here  (edidou).  Perhaps  they  did 
not  all  speak  at  once,  but  one  after  another.  Apophtheg- 
gesthai is  a  late  verb  (LXX  of  prophesying,  papyri).  Lucian 
uses  it  of  the  ring  of  a  vessel  when  it  strikes  a  reef.  It  is 
used  of  eager,  elevated,  impassioned  utterance.  In  the  N.T. 
only  here,  verse  14  and  26:25.  Apophthegm  is  from  this 
verb. 


THE  ACTS   OF  THE  APOSTLES  23 

5.  Were  dwelling  {esan  katoikountes).  Periphrastic  im- 
perfect active  indicative.  Usually  katoiked  means  residence 
in  a  place  (4:16;  7:24;  9:22,  32)  as  inverse  14  (Luke  13:4). 
Perhaps  some  had  come  to  Jerusalem  to  live  while  others 
were  here  only  temporarily,  for  the  same  word  occurs  in  verse 
9  of  those  who  dwell  in  Mesopotamia,  etc.  Devout  (eulabeis). 
Reverent  (eu,  well,  lamhano,  to  take).  See  on  Luke  2:25  like 
Simeon  waiting  for  the  consolation  of  Israel  or  hoping  to  die 
and  be  buried  in  the  Holy  City  and  also  Acts  8:2. 

6.  When  this  sound  was  heard  {genomenes  tes  phones 
tautes).  Genitive  absolute  with  aorist  middle  participle. 
Note  phone  this  time,  not  echo  as  in  verse  i.  Phone  origi- 
nally meant  sound  as  of  the  wind  (John  3 :8)  or  an  instru- 
ment (I  Cor.  14:7,  8,  10),  then  voice  of  men.  The  meaning 
seems  to  be  that  the  excited  "other  tongues"  of  verse  4  were 
so  loud  that  the  noise  drew  the  crowd  together.  The  house 
where  the  120  were  may  have  been  (Hackett)  on  one  of  the 
avenues  leading  to  the  temple.  Were  confounded  (sune- 
chuthe).  First  aorist  passive  indicative  of  suncheo  or  sun- 
chuno,  to  pour  together  precisely  like  the  Latin  confundo, 
to  confound.  The  Vulgate  has  it  mente  confusa  est.  It  is  an 
old  verb,  but  in  the  N.T.  only  in  Acts  five  times  (2:6;  9:22; 
19:32;  21:27,  31).  In  his  own  language  (tei  ididi  dialektbi). 
Locative  case.  Each  one  could  understand  his  own  language 
when  he  heard  that.  Every  one  that  came  heard  somebody 
speaking  in  his  native  tongue. 

7.  Were  amazed  (existanto).  Imperfect  middle  of  existemi, 
to  stand  out  of  themselves,  wide-open  astonishment.  Mar- 
velled (ethaumazon) .  Imperfect  active.  The  wonder  grew 
and  grew.  Galileans  (Galilaioi).  There  were  few  followers  of 
Jesus  as  yet  from  Jerusalem.  The  Galileans  spoke  a  rude 
Aramaic  (Mark  14:70)  and  probably  crude  Greek  vernacular 
also.  They  were  not  strong  on  language  and  yet  these  are 
the  very  people  who  now  show  such  remarkable  linguistic 
powers.    These  people  who  have  come  together  are  all  Jews 


24        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

and  therefore  know  Aramaic  and  the  vernacular  Koines 
but  there  were  various  local  tongues  "wherein  we  were 
bom"  {en  hei  egennethemen).  An  example  is  the  Lycaonian 
(Acts  14:11).  These  Galilean  Christians  are  now  heard 
speaking  these  various  local  tongues.  The  lists  in  verses 
9-1 1  are  not  linguistic,  but  geographical  and  merely  illus- 
trate how  widespread  the  Dispersion  {Diaspora)  of  the 
Jews  was  as  represented  on  this  occasion.  Jews  were  every- 
where, these  "Jews  among  the  nations"  (Acts  21:21).  Page 
notes  four  main  divisions  here:  (i)  The  Eastern  or  Babylo- 
nian, like  the  Parthians,  Medes,  Elamites,  Mesopotamians. 
(2)  The  Syriaji  like  Judea,  Cappadocia,  Pontus,  Asia, 
Phrygia,  Pamphylia.  (3)  The  Egyptian  like  Egypt,  Libya, 
Cyrene.  (4)  The  Roman.  Jews  and  proselytes  {proselutoi). 
These  last  from  proserchomai,  to  come  to,  to  join,  Gentile 
converts  to  Judaism  (circumcision,  baptism,  sacrifice). 
This  proselyte  baptism  was  immersion  as  is  shown  by  I. 
Abrahams  (Studies  in  Pharisaism  and  the  Gospels,  p.  38). 
Many  remained  uncircumcised  and  were  called  proselytes 
of  the  gate. 

11.  Cretes  and  Arabians.  These  two  groups  "seem  to  have 
been  added  to  the  list  as  an  afterthought"  (Knowling). 
Crete  is  an  island  to  itself  and  Arabia  was  separate  also 
though  near  Judea  and  full  of  Jews.  The  point  is  not  that 
each  one  of  these  groups  of  Jews  spoke  a  different  language, 
but  that  wherever  there  was  a  local  tongue  they  heard  men 
speaking  in  it.  We  do  hear  them  speaking  {akouomen  la- 
lountbn  auton).  Genitive  case  auton  with  akouo  the  participle 
lalounton  agreeing  with  auton,  a  sort  of  participial  idiom  of 
indirect  discourse  (Robertson,  Grammar,  pp.  i04off.).  The 
mighty  works  {ta  megaleia).  Old  adjective  for  magnificent.  In 
LXX,  but  only  here  (not  genuine  in  Luke  i  :49)  in  the  N.T. 
Cf.  II  Peter  1:16  for  megaleiotes  (majesty). 

12.  Were  perplexed  {dieporounto).  Imperfect  middle  of 
diaporeb  {dia,  a  privative,  poros)  to  be  wholly  at  a  loss.   Old 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  25 

verb,  but  in  N.T.  only  in  Luke  and  Acts.  They  continued 
amazed  {existanto)  and  puzzled.  What  meaneth  this?  {Ti 
thelei  touto  einai).    Literally,  what  does  this  wish  to  be.^ 

13.  Mocking  {diachleuazontes).  Old  verb,  but  only  here 
in  the  N.T.,  though  the  simple  verb  (without  dia)  in  17:32. 
Chleue  means  a  joke.  With  new  wine  (gleukous) .  Sweet  wine, 
but  intoxicating.  Sweet  wine  kept  a  year  was  very  intoxi- 
cating. Genitive  case  here  after  memestomenoi  eisin  (peri- 
phrastic perfect  passive  indicative),  old  verb  mestoo,  only 
here  in  the  N.T.   Tanked  up  with  new  wine,  state  of  fulness. 

14.  Standing  up  with  the  eleven  {statheis  sun  tois  hendeka). 
Took  his  stand  with  the  eleven  including  Matthias,  who 
also  rose  up  with  them,  and  spoke  as  their  spokesman,  a 
formal  and  impressive  beginning.  The  Codex  Bezae  has 
"ten  apostles."  Luke  is  fond  of  this  pictorial  use  of  statheis 
(first  aorist  passive  participle  of  histemi)  as  seen  nowhere 
else  in  the  N.T.  (Luke  18:11,  40;  19:8;  Acts  5:20;  17:22; 
27:21).  Lifted  up  his  voice  {eperen  ten  phonen  autou).  This 
phrase  only  in  Luke  in  the  N.T.  (Luke  11:29;  Acts  2:14; 
14:11;  22:22),  but  is  common  in  the  old  writers.  First  aorist 
active  indicative  of  epairo.  The  large  crowd  and  the  con- 
fusion of  tongues  demanded  loud  speaking.  "This  most 
solemn,  earnest,  yet  sober  speech"  (Bengel).  Codex  Bezae 
adds  "first"  after  "voice."  Peter  did  it  to  win  and  hold 
attention.  Give  ear  unto  my  words  {enotisasthe  ta  rhemata 
mou).  Late  verb  in  LXX  and  only  here  in  the  N.T.  First 
aorist  middle  from  enotizomai  (en,  ous,  ear)  to  give  ear  to, 
receive  into  the  ear.  People's  ears  differ  greatly,  but  in 
public  speech  they  have  to  be  reached  through  the  ear. 
That  puts  an  obligation  on  the  speaker  and  also  on  the 
auditors  who  should  sit  where  they  can  hear  with  the  ears 
which  they  have,  an  obligation  often  overlooked. 

15.  As  ye  suppose  {hos  humeis  hupolamhanete) .  Note  use 
of  humeis  (ye)  for  decided  emphasis.  The  third  hour  {hora 
trite).    Three  o'clock  in  the  day  Jewish  time,  nine  Roman. 


26        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Drunkenness  belongs  to  the  night  (I  Thess.  57).  It  was  a 
quick,  common  sense  reply,  and  complete  answer  to  their 
suspicion. 

16.  This  is  that  which  hath  been  spoken  by  the  prophet  Joel 
{touto  estin  to  eiremenon  dia  tou  prophetou  I  del).  Positive 
interpretation  of  the  supernatural  phenomena  in  the  light 
of  the  Messianic  prophecy  of  Joel  2:28-32.  Peter's  mind 
is  now  opened  by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  understand  the  Mes- 
sianic prophecy  and  the  fulfilment  right  before  their  eyes. 
Peter  now  has  spiritual  insight  and  moral  courage.  The 
power  (dunamis)  of  the  Holy  Spirit  has  come  upon  him  as  he 
proceeds  to  give  the  first  interpretation  of  the  life  and  work 
of  Jesus  Christ  since  his  Ascension.  It  is  also  the  first  formal 
apology  for  Christianity  to  a  public  audience.  Peter  rises 
to  the  height  of  his  powers  in  this  remarkable  sermon. 
Jesus  had  foretold  that  he  would  be  a  Rock  and  now  he  is 
no  longer  shale,  but  a  solid  force  for  aggressive  Christianity. 
He  follows  here  In  verses  17  to  21  closely  the  LXX  text  of 
Joel  and  then  applies  the  passage  to  the  present  emergency 
(22-24). 

17.  In  the  last  days  {en  tais  eschatais  hemerais).  Joel 
does  not  have  precisely  these  words,  but  he  defines  "those 
days"  as  being  "the  day  of  the  Lord"  (cf.  Isa.  2:2;  Micah 
4:1).  /  will  pour  forth  {ekched).  Future  active  indicative  of 
ekcheo.  This  future  like  edomai  and  piomai  is  without  tense 
sign,  probably  like  the  present  In  the  futuristic  sense  (Robert- 
son, Grammar,  p.  354).  Westcott  and  Hort  put  a  different 
accent  on  the  future,  but  the  old  Greek  had  no  accent.  The 
old  Greek  had  ekcheuso.  This  verb  means  to  pour  out. 
Of  my  Spirit  (apo  tou  pneumatos) .  This  use  of  apo  (of)  is 
either  because  of  the  variety  in  the  manifestations  of  the 
Spirit  (I  Cor.  12)  or  because  the  Spirit  in  his  entirety  re- 
mains with  God  (Holtzmann,  Wendt).  But  the  Hebrew  has 
it:  "I  will  pour  out  my  Spirit"  without  the  partitive  idea 
in  the  LXX.  And  your  daughters  {kai  hai  thugateres  humon). 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  27 

Anna  is  called  a  prophetess  in  Luke  2:36  and  the  daughters 
of  Philip  prophesy  (Acts  21:9)  and  verse  18  (handmaidens). 
See  also  I  Cor,  11:5  {prophetousa).  Visions  {horaseis). 
Late  word  for  the  more  common  horama,  both  from  horaOy 
to  see.  In  Rev.  4:3  it  means  appearance,  but  in  Rev.  9:17 
as  here  an  ecstatic  revelation  or  vision.  Dream  dreams  {enu- 
pniois  enupniasthesontai) .  Shall  dream  with  (instrumental 
case)  dreams.  First  future  passive  of  enupniazo  from  en- 
upnios  (en  and  hupnos,  in  sleep),  a  common  late  word. 
Only  here  in  the  N.T.  (this  from  Joel  as  all  these  verses  17  to 
21  are)  and  Jude  8.  Yea  and  {kai  ge).  Intensive  particle  ge 
added  to  kai  (and),  an  emphatic  addition  (  =  Hebrew  vegam). 
Servants  (doulous),  handmaidens  (doulas).  Slaves,  actual 
slaves  of  men.  The  humblest  classes  will  receive  the  Spirit 
of  God  (cf.  I  Cor.  1:26-31).  But  the  word  "prophesy" 
here  is  not  in  the  LXX  (or  the  Hebrew). 

19.  Wonders  [terata).  Apparently  akin  to  the  verb  tereo, 
to  watch  like  a  wonder  in  the  sky,  miracle  {miraculum)^ 
marvel,  portent.  In  the  New  Testament  the  word  occurs 
only  in  the  plural  and  only  in  connection  with  semeia  (signs) 
as  here  and  in  verse  43.  But  signs  {semeia)  here  is  not  in  the 
LXX.  See  on  Matt.  1 1 :20.  In  verse  22  all  three  words 
occur  together:  powers,  wonders,  signs  (dunamesi,  terasi, 
semeiois).  Above  {and).  This  word  is  not  in  the  LXX  nor  is 
"beneath"  {kato),  both  probably  being  added  to  make 
clearer  the  contrast  between  heaven  and  earth.  Blood  and 
fire  and  vapour  of  smoke  {haima  kai  pur  kai  atmida  kapnou). 
A  chiasm  as  these  words  illustrate  bloodshed  and  destruction 
by  fire  as  signs  here  on  earth. 

20.  Shall  he  turned  {metastraphesetai).  Second  future 
passive  of  metastrepho,  common  verb,  but  only  three  times 
in  the  N.T.  (Acts  2:20  from  Joel;  James  4:9;  Gal.  1:7). 
These  are  the  "wonders"  or  portents  of  verse  19.  It  is 
worth  noting  that  Peter  interprets  these  "portents"  as 
fulfilled  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  though  no  such  change  of 


28        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

the  sun  into  darkness  or  of  the  moon  into  blood  is  recorded. 
Clearly  Peter  does  not  interpret  the  symbolism  of  Joel  in 
literal  terms.  This  method  of  Peter  may  be  of  some  service 
in  the  Book  of  Revelation  where  so  many  apocalyptic  sym- 
bols occur  as  well  as  in  the  great  Eschatological  Discourse 
of  Jesus  in  Matt.  24  and  25.  In  Matt.  24:6,  29  Jesus  had 
spoken  of  wars  on  earth  and  wonders  in  heaven.  Before 
the  day  of  the  Lord  come,  that  great  and  notable  day  (prin 
elthein  hemeran  kuriou  ten  megalen  kai  epiphane).  The  use 
of  prin  with  the  infinitive  and  the  accusative  of  general 
reference  is  a  regular  Greek  idiom.  The  use  of  the  adjec- 
tives with  the  article  is  also  good  Greek,  though  the  article 
is  not  here  repeated  as  in  1:25.  The  Day  of  the  Lord  is  a 
definite  conception  without  the  article.  Notable  {epiphane) 
is  the  same  root  as  epiphany  (epiphaneia)  used  of  the  Second 
Coming  of  Christ  (II  Thess.  2:8;  I  Tim.  6:14;  II  Tim.  4:1; 
Tit.  2:13).  It  translates  here  the  Hebrew  word  for  "terri- 
ble." In  the  Epistles  the  Day  of  the  Lord  is  applied  (Know- 
ling)  to  the  Coming  of  Christ  for  judgment  (I  Thess.  5:2; 
I  Cor.  1:8;  II  Cor.  1:14;  Phil.  1:10). 

21.  Shall  call  on  {epikalesetai).  First  aorist  middle  sub- 
junctive of  epikaleo,  common  verb,  to  call  to,  middle  voice 
for  oneself  in  need.  Indefinite  relative  clause  with  ean  and  so 
subjunctive,  punctiliar  idea,  in  any  single  case,  and  so  aorist. 

22.  Hear  these  words  (akousate  tous  logons  toutous).  Do  it 
now  (aorist  tense).  With  unerring  aim  Peter  has  found  the 
solution  for  the  phenomena.  He  has  found  the  key  to  God's 
work  on  this  day  in  his  words  through  Joel.  As  ye  your- 
selves know  (kathos  autoi  oidate).  Note  autoi  for  emphasis. 
Peter  calls  the  audience  to  witness  that  his  statements  are 
true  concerning  "Jesus  the  Nazarene."  He  wrought  his 
miracles  by  the  power  of  God  in  the  midst  of  these  very 
people  here  present. 

23.  Him  {touton).  "This  one,"  resumptive  and  emphatic 
object  of  "did  crucify  and  slay."    Being  delivered  up  {ekdo- 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  29 

ton).  Verbal  adjective  from  ekdidomi,  to  give  out  or  over. 
Old  word,  but  here  only  in  the  N.T.  Delivered  up  by  Judas, 
Peter  means.  By  the  determinate  counsel  and  foreknowledge 
of  God  (tei  horismenei  boulei  kai  prognosei  tou  theou).  .  In- 
strumental case.  Note  both  purpose  (boule)  and  foreknowl- 
edge (prognosis)  of  God  and  "determined"  {hdris7nene,  per- 
fect passive  participle,  state  of  completion).  God  had  willed 
the  death  of  Jesus  (John  3:16)  and  the  death  of  Judas 
(Acts  i:i6),  but  that  fact  did  not  absolve  Judas  from  his 
responsibility  and  guilt  (Luke  22:22).  He  acted  as  a  free 
moral  agent.  By  the  hand  {dia  cheiros).  Luke  is  fond  of  these 
figures  (hand,  face,  etc.)  very  much  like  the  Hebrew  though 
the  vernacular  of  all  languages  uses  them.  Lawless  men 
(anomon).  Men  without  law,  who  recognize  no  law  for 
their  conduct,  like  men  in  high  and  low  stations  today  who 
defy  the  laws  of  God  and  man.  Old  word,  very  common  in 
the  LXX.  Ye  did  crucify  [prospexantes).  First  aorist  active 
participle  of  prospegnumi,  rare  compound  word  in  Dio 
Cassius  and  here  only  in  the  N.T.  One  must  supply  toi 
stauroi  and  so  it  means  "fastened  to  the  cross,"  a  graphic 
picture  like  Paul's  "nailed  to  the  cross"  (proselosas  toi 
stauroi)  in  Col.  2:14.  Did  slay  (aneilaie).  Second  aorist 
active  indicative  with  first  aorist  vowel  a  instead  of  0  as  is 
common  in  the  Koine.  This  verb  anaireo,  to  take  up,  is  often 
used  for  kill  as  in  Acts  12:2.  Note  Peter's  boldness  now 
under  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  charges  the  people 
to  their  faces  with  the  death  of  Christ. 

24.  God  raised  up  (ho  theos  anestesen).  Est  hoc  summum 
orationis  (Blass).  Apparently  this  is  the  first  public  procla- 
mation to  others  than  believers  of  the  fact  of  the  Resurrec- 
tion of  Jesus.  "At  a  time  it  was  still  possible  to  test  the 
statement,  to  examine  witnesses,  to  expose  fraud,  the  Apos- 
tle openly  proclaimed  the  Resurrection  as  a  fact,  needing 
no  evidence,  but  known  to  his  hearers"  (Furneaux).  The 
pangs  of  death  (tas  odinas  tou  thanatou).    Codex  Bezae  has 


30        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

"Hades"  instead  of  death.  The  LXX  has  odinas  tkanatou 
in  Psa.  18:4,  but  the  Hebrew  original  means  "snares"  or 
"traps"  or  "cords"  of  death  where  sheol  and  death  are 
personified  as  hunters  laying  snares  for  prey.  How  Peter 
or  Luke  came  to  use  the  old  Greek  word  odinas  (birth  pangs) 
we  do  not  know.  Early  Christian  writers  interpreted  the 
Resurrection  of  Christ  as  a  birth  out  of  death.  "Loosing" 
Qusas)  suits  better  the  notion  of  "snares"  held  a  prisoner 
by  death,  but  birth  pangs  do  bring  deliverance  to  the  mother 
also.  Because  {kaihoti).  This  old  conjunction  {kata,  hoti) 
occurs  in  the  N.T.  only  In  Luke's  writings.  That  he  should 
be  holden  {krateisthai  auton).  Infinitive  present  passive  with 
accusative  of  general  reference  and  subject  of  en  adunaton. 
The  figure  goes  with  "loosed"  {lusas)  above. 

25.  Concerning  him  {eis  auton).  Peter  interprets  Psa. 
16:8-11  as  written  by  David  and  with  reference  to  the  Mes- 
siah. There  is  but  one  speaker  in  this  Psalm  and  both  Peter 
here  and  Paul  In  Acts  13:36  make  it  the  Messiah.  David  is 
giving  his  own  experience  which  is  typical  of  the  Messiah 
(Knowling).  /  beheld  (prooromen).  Imperfect  middle  with- 
out augment  of  proorao,  common  verb,  but  only  twice  in  the 
N.T.,  to  see  beforehand  (Acts  21:29)  or  to  see  right  before 
one  as  here.  This  idea  of  pro-  is  made  plainer  by  "  before  my 
face"  {enopion  mou).  On  my  right  hand  {ek  dexibn  mou). 
The  Lord  Jehovah  like  a  defender  or  advocate  stands  at 
David's  right  hand  as  in  trials  In  court  (Psa.  109:31).  That 
{hina)  here  Is  almost  result.  Moved  (saleutho).  First  aorlst 
passive  subjunctive  of  jfl/^wo,  to  shake  like  an  earthquake. 

26.  Was  glad  (euphranthe).  First  aorlst  (timeless  here 
like  the  Hebrew  perfect)  passive  indicative  of  euphraino 
(cf.  Luke  15:32).  Timeless  also  Is  "rejoiced"  (egalliasato). 
Shall  dwell  {kataskenosei).  Shall  tabernacle,  pitch  a  tent, 
make  one's  abode  (cf.  Matt.  13:32).  See  on  Matt.  8:20 
about  kataskenoseis  (nests).  In  hope  {ep*  elpidi).  On  hope, 
the  hope  of  the  resurrection. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  31 

27.  In  Hades  {eis  Hdiden).  Hades  is  the  unseen  world, 
Hebrew  Sheol,  but  here  it  is  viewed  as  death  itself  "con- 
sidered as  a  rapacious  destroyer"  (Hackett).  It  does  not 
mean  the  place  of  punishment,  though  both  heaven  and  the 
place  of  torment  are  in  Hades  (Luke  16:23).  "Death  and 
Hades  are  strictly  parallel  terms:  he  who  is  dead  is  in  Hades" 
(Page).  The  use  of  eis  here  =  (fn  is  common  enough.  The 
Textus  Receptus  here  reads  eis  Hdidou  (genitive  case)  like 
the  Attic  idiom  with  domon  (abode)  understood.  "Hades" 
in  English  is  not  translation,  but  transliteration.  The  phrase 
in  the  Apostles'  Creed,  "descended  into  hell"  is  from  this 
passage  in  Acts  (Hades,  not  Gehenna).  The  English  word 
"hell"  is  Anglo-Saxon  from  helan,  to  hide,  and  was  used  in 
the  Authorized  Version  to  translate  both  Hades  as  here 
and  Gehenna  as  in  Matt.  5:22.  Thy  Holy  One  {ton  hosion 
sou).  Peter  applies  these  words  to  the  Messiah.  Corruption 
{diaphihoran).  The  word  can  mean  destruction  or  putre- 
faction from  diaphtheiro,  old  word,  but  in  N.T.  only  here 
and  Acts  13:34-37.  The  Hebrew  word  in  Psa.  16  can  mean 
also  the  pit  or  the  deep. 

28.  The  ways  of  life  {hodous  zoes).  Though  dead  God  will 
show  him  the  ways  back  to  life. 

29.  /  may  say  {exon  eipein).  Supply  estin  before  exon, 
periphrastic  present  indicative  of  exeimi,  to  allow,  permit. 
The  Authorized  Version  has  "Let  me  speak,"  supplying 
esto  present  imperative.  Freely  {meta  parresias).  Telling 
it  all  {pan,  rhesia  from  eipon,  to  speak),  with  fulness,  with 
boldness.  Luke  is  fond  of  the  phrase  (as  in  4:13).  It  is  a  new 
start  for  Simon  Peter,  full  of  boldness  and  courage.  The 
patriarch  {tou  patriarchou).  Transliteration  of  the  word, 
from  patria,  family,  and  archo,  to  rule,  the  founder  of  a  family. 
Late  word  in  LXX.  Used  of  Abraham  (Heb.  7:4),  of  the 
twelve  sons  of  Jacob  as  founders  of  the  several  tribes  (Acts 
7:8),  and  here  of  David  as  head  of  the  family  from  whom 
the    Messiah  comes.      fFas  buried  {etaphe).    Second    aorist 


32        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

passive  indicative  of  thapto.  His  tomb  was  on  Mt.  Zion 
where  most  of  the  kings  were  buried.  The  tomb  was  said 
to  have  fallen  into  ruins  in  the  time  of  the  Emperor 
Hadrian.  Josephus  (Ant.  XVI.  7,1)  attributes  most  of  the 
misfortunes  of  Herod's  family  to  the  fact  that  he  tried  to 
rifle  the  tomb  of  David. 

31.  Foreseeing  {proidbn).  Second  aorist  active  participle. 
Did  it  as  a  prophet.  Of  the  Christ  [tou  Christou).  Of  the 
Messiah.  See  under  verse  32.  This  is  a  definite  statement  by 
Peter  that  David  knew  that  in  Psalm  16  he  was  describing 
the  resurrection  of  the  Messiah. 

32.  This  Jesus  {touton  ton  lesoun).  Many  of  the  name 
"Jesus,"  but  he  means  the  one  already  called  "the  Naza- 
rene"  (verse  22)  and  foretold  as  the  Messiah  in  Psa.  16  and 
raised  from  the  dead  by  God  in  proof  that  he  is  the  Messiah 
(2:24,  32),  "this  Jesus  whom  ye  crucified"  (verse  36).  Other 
terms  used  of  him  in  the  Acts  are  the  Messiah,  verse  31, 
the  one  whom  God  "anointed"  (Acts  10:38),  as  in  John 
1:41,  Jesus  Christ  (9:34).  In  2:36  God  made  this  Jesus 
Messiah,  in  3:20  the  Messiah  Jesus,  in  17:3  Jesus  is  the 
Messiah,  in  18:5  the  Messiah  is  Jesus,  in  24:24  Christ  Jesus. 
Whereof  (hou).  Or  "of  whom."  Either  makes  sense  and 
both  are  true.  Peter  claims  the  whole  120  as  personal  wit- 
nesses to  the  fact  of  the  Resurrection  of  Jesus  from  the  dead 
and  they  are  all  present  as  Peter  calls  them  to  witness  on  the 
point.  In  Galilee  over  500  had  seen  the  Risen  Christ  at  one 
time  (I  Cor.  15:6)  most  of  whom  were  still  living  when  Paul 
wrote.  Thus  the  direct  evidence  for  the  resurrection  of 
Jesus  piles  up  in  cumulative  force. 

33.  By  the  right  hand  of  God  {tei  dexidi  tou  theou).  This 
translation  makes  it  the  instrumental  case.  The  margin  has 
it  "at"  instead  of  "by,"  that  is  the  locative  case.  And  it 
will  make  sense  in  the  true  dative  case,  "to  the  right  hand 
of  God."  These  three  cases  came  to  have  the  same  form  in 
Greek.      Rom.   8:24  furnishes  another  illustration  of  like 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  33 

ambiguity  {tei  elpidi),  saved  by  hope,  in  hope,  or  for  hope. 
Usually  it  is  quite  easy  to  tell  the  case  when  the  form  is 
identical.  Exalted  (hupsotheis).  First  aorist  passive  partici- 
ple of  hupsooj  to  lift  up.  Here  both  the  literal  and  tropical 
sense  occurs.  Cf.  John  12:32.  The  promise  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
{ten  epaggelian  tou  pneumatos  tou  hagiou).  The  promise 
mentioned  in  i  -.4.  and  now  come  true,  consisting  in  the  Holy 
Spirit  "from  the  Father"  {para  tou  patros),  sent  by  the 
Father  and  by  the  Son  (John  15:26;  16:7).  See  also  Gal. 
3:14.  He  hath  poured  forth  {execheen).  Aorist  active  in- 
dicative of  ekcheo  the  verb  used  by  Joel  and  quoted  by  Peter 
already  in  verses  17  and  18.  Jesus  has  fulfilled  his  promise. 
This  which  ye  see  and  hear  {touto  ho  humeis  kai  hlepete  kai 
akouete).  This  includes  the  sound  like  the  rushing  wind,  the 
tongues  like  fire  on  each  of  them,  the  different  languages 
spoken  by  the  120.  "The  proof  was  before  their  eyes  in 
this  new  energy  from  heaven"  (Furneaux),  a  culminating 
demonstration  that  Jesus  was  the  Messiah. 

34.  Ascended  not  {ou — anehe).  It  is  more  emphatic  than 
that:  For  not  David  ascended  into  the  heavens.  Peter  quotes 
Psa.  1 10:1  as  proof.  No  passage  in  the  O.T.  is  so  constantly 
quoted  as  Messianic  as  this.  "St.  Peter  does  not  demand 
belief  upon  his  own  assertion,  but  he  again  appeals  to  the 
Scriptures,  and  to  words  which  could  not  have  received  a 
fulfilment  in  the  case  of  David"  (Knowling).  Sit  thou 
{kathou).  Late  Koine  form  for  earlier  katheso,  present  middle 
imperative  second  singular  of  kathemai. 

35.  Till  I  make  {heos  an  tho).  Second  aorist  active  sub- 
junctive of  tithemi  with  an  after  hebs  for  the  future,  a  com- 
mon Greek  idiom.  This  dominion  of  Christ  as  Mediator 
will  last  till  the  plan  of  the  kingdom  is  carried  out  (I  Cor. 
15:23-28).  Complete  subjugation  will  come,  perhaps  re- 
ferring to  the  custom  of  victorious  kings  placing  their  feet 
upon  the  necks  of  their  enemies  (Josh.  10:24).  Therefore 
assuredly  {Asphalbs  oun).    Assuredly  therefore,  without  any 


34        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

slip  or  trip  (asphales  from  a  privative  and  sphalloj  to  trip, 
to  slip.  Peter  draws  a  powerfully  pungent  conclusion  by 
the  use  of  the  adverb  asphalos  and  the  inferential  conjunc- 
tion oun.  Peter's  closing  sentence  drives  home  the  point  of 
his  sermon:  "This  very  Jesus  whom  ye  crucified  (note 
humets,  strongly  emphatic  ye),  him  God  made  both  Lord 
and  Messiah"  {kai  kurion  kai  Christon),  as  David  foretold 
in  Psa.  no  and  as  the  events  of  this  day  have  confirmed. 
The  critics  are  disturbed  over  how  Luke  could  have  gotten 
the  substance  of  this  masterful  address  spoken  on  the  spur 
of  the  moment  with  passion  and  power.  They  even  say  that 
Luke  composed  it  for  Peter  and  put  the  words  in  his  mouth. 
If  so,  he  made  a  good  job  of  it.  But  Peter  could  have  written 
out  the  notes  of  the  address  afterwards.  Luke  had  plenty  of 
chances  to  get  hold  of  it  from  Peter  or  from  others. 

37.  They  were  pricked  in  their  heart  {katenugesan  ten 
kardian).  Second  aorist  indicative  of  katanusso,  a  rare  verb 
(LXX)  to  pierce,  to  sting  sharply,  to  stun,  to  smite.  Homer 
used  it  of  horses  dinting  the  earth  with  their  hoofs.  The 
substantive  katanuxis  occurs  in  Rom.  1 1 :8.  Here  only  in  the 
N.T.  It  is  followed  here  by  the  accusative  of  the  part  af- 
fected, the  heart.  What  shall  we  do?  {Ti  poiesomen).  Delib- 
erative subjunctive  first  aorist  active.  The  sermon  went 
home,  they  felt  the  sting  of  Peter's  words,  compunction 
{compungo).    Codex  Bezae  adds:  "Show  us." 

38.  Repent  ye  (metanoesate).  First  aorist  (ingressive) 
active  imperative.  Change  your  mind  and  your  life.  Turn 
right  about  and  do  It  now.  You  crucified  this  Jesus.  Now 
crown  him  in  your  hearts  as  Lord  and  Christ.  This  first. 
And  be  baptized  every  one  of  you  {kai  baptistheto  hekastos 
humon).  Rather,  "And  let  each  one  of  you  be  baptized." 
Change  of  number  from  plural  to  singular  and  of  person  from 
second  to  third.   This  change  marks  a_break_Injt;he_thought 

lere  that  the  English  translation  does  not  preserve.  The 
first  thing  to  do  is  make  a  radical  and  complete  change  of 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  35 

heart  and_Jife.  Then  let^ach_on£  be  baptized  after  this 
change  has  taken  place,  and  the  act  of  baptism  be  performed 
"in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ"  {en  toi  onomati  lesou  Christou). 
In  accordance  with  the  command  of  Jesus  in  Matt.  28:19 
{eis  to  onoma).  No  distinction  is  to  be  insisted  on  between 
(&U  to  onoma  and  fnAoi  onomati  with  baptizo  since  eis  and  en 
are  really  the  same  word  in  origin.  In  Acts  10:48  en  tot 
onomati  lesou  Christou  occurs,  but  eis  to  onoma  in  8:16  and 
19:5.  The  use  of  onoma  means  in  the  name  or  with  the 
authority  of  one  as  eis  onoma  prophetou  (Matt.  10:41)  as  a 
prophet,  in  the  name  of  a  prophet.  In  the  Acts  the  full  name 
of  the  Trinity  does  not  occur  in  baptism  as  in  Matt.  28:19, 
but  this  does  not-shoMf^  that  it  was  not  used.  The  name  of 
Jesus  Christ  is  the  distinctive  one  in  Christian  baptism  and 
really  involves  the  Father  and  the  Spirit.  See  on  Matt.  28:19 
for  discussion  of  this  point.  "  Luke  does  not  give  the  form  of 
words  used  in  baptism  by  the  Apostles,  but  merely  states 
the  fact  that  they  baptized  those  who  acknowledged  Jesus 
as  Messiah  or  as  Lord"  (Page).  Unto  the  remission  of  your 
sins  {eis  aphesin  ton  hamartibn  humon).  This  phrase  is  the 
subject  of  endless  controversy  as  men  look  at  it  from  the 
standpoint  of  sj^ramental  or^^f_eyangelical  theology.  In 
themselves  the  words  can  express  aim  or  purpose  for  that  use 
of  eis  does  exist  as  in  I  Cor.  2:7  eis  doxan  hemon  (for  our 
glory).  But  then  another  usage  exists  which  is  just  as  good 
Greek  as  the  use  of  eis  for  aim  or  purpose.  It  is  seen  in  Matt. 
10:41  in  three  examples  eis  onoma  prophetou,  dikaiou, 
mathetou  where  it  cannot  be  purpose  or  aim,  but  rather  the 
basis  or  ground,  on  the  basis  of  the  name  of  prophet,  right- 
eous man,  disciple,  because  one  is,  etc.  It  is  seen  again  in 
Matt.  12:41  about  the  preaching  of  Jonah  {eis  to  kerugma 
lond).  They  repented  because  of  (or  at)  the  preaching  of 
Jonah.  The  illustrations  of  both  usages  are  numerous  in  the 
N.T.  and  the  Koine  generally  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  592). 
One  will  decide  the  use  here  according  as  he  believes  that 


36        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

baptism  is  essential  to  the  remission  of  sins  or  not.  My  view 

is  decidedly  against  the  idea  that  Peter,  Paul,  or  any  one  in 

the  New  Testament  taught  baptism  as  essential   to  the 

remission  of  sins  or  the  means  of  securing  such  remission. 

So  I  understand  Peter  to  be  urging  baptism  on  each  of  them 

,     who  had  already  turned  (repented)  and  for  it  to  be  done  in 

Ol    the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  on  the  basis  of  the  forgivenessjzL 

^       sins  which  they  had  already  received.    77k?  gift  of  the  Holy 

Ghost  {ten  dorean  tou  hagiou  pneumatos).    The  gift  consists 

(Acts  8:17)  in  the  Holy  Spirit  (genitive  of  identification). 

39.  The  promise  {he  epaggelia).  The  promise  made  by 
Jesus  (14)  and  foretold  by  Joel  (verse  18).  To  you  {humin). 
You  Jews.  To  your  descendants,  sons  and  daughters  of 
verse  17.  To  all  that  are  afar  off  {pasin  tots  eis  makran  .  The 
horizon  widens  and  includes  the  Gentiles.  Those  "afar  oflF'* 
from  the  Jews  were  the  heathen  (Isa.  49:1 ;  57:19;  Eph.  2:13, 
17).  The  rabbis  so  used  it.  Shall  call  {an  proskalesetai). 
First  aorist  middle  subjunctive  with  an  in  an  indefinite 
relative  clause,  a  perfectly  regular  construction.  The  Lord 
God  calls  men  of  every  nation  anywhere  whether  Jews  or 
Gentiles.  It  may  be  doubted  how  clearly  Peter  grasped  the 
significance  of  these  words  for  he  will  have  trouble  over  this 
very  matter  on  the  housetop  in  Joppa  and  in  Caesarea,  but 
he  will  see  ere  long  the  full  sweep  of  the  great  truth  that 
he  here  proclaims  under  the  impulse  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
It  was  a  great  moment  that  Peter  here  reaches. 

40.  fFith  many  other  words  {heterois  logois  pleiosin).  In- 
strumental case.  Not  necessarily  "different"  {heterois) y 
but  "further,"  showing  that  Luke  does  not  pretend  to  give 
all  that  Peter  said.  This  idea  is  also  brought  out  clearly  by 
pleiosin  ("more,"  not  "many"),  more  than  these  given  by 
Luke.  He  testified  {diemarturato) .  First  aorist  middle  of 
diamarturomaiy  old  verb,  to  make  solemn  attestation  or  call 
to  witness  (perfective  use  of  dia)y  while  martureo  is  to  bear 
witness.   Page  insists  that  here  it  should  be  translated  "pro- 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  37 

tested  solemnly"  to  the  Jews  as  it  seems  to  mean  in  Luke 
16:28;  Acts  20:23;  I  Tim.  5:21;  II  Tim.  2:14;  4:1.  And  ex- 
horted {kai  parekalei).  Imperfect  active,  kept  on  exhorting. 
Save  yourselves  (sothete).  First  aorist  passive  of  sozo.  Lit- 
erally, Be  ye  saved.  Crooked  (skolias).  Old  word,  opposite 
of  orthos,  straight.  Pravus  the  opposite  of  rectus^  a  perversity 
for  turning  off  from  the  truth.   Cf.  Luke  9:41;  Phil.  2:15. 

41.  They  then  {Hoi  men  oun).  A  common  phrase  in  Acts 
either  without  antithesis  as  in  1:6;  5:41;  8:4,  25;  9:31;  11:19; 
16:5;  or  with  it  as  here,  8:25;  13:4;  14:3;  17:17;  23:31;  25:4. 
Oun  connects  with  what  precedes  as  the  result  of  Peter's 
sermon  while  men  points  forward  to  what  is  to  follow.  Were 
baptized  {ehaptisthesan).  First  aorist  passive  indicative,  con- 
stative  aorist.  Note  that  only  those  who  had  already  received 
the  word  and  were  converted  were  baptized.  There  were 
added  (prosetethesan).  First  aorist  passive  indicative  of 
prostithemi,  old  verb  to  add,  to  join  to.  Luke  means  that 
the  3,000  were  added  to  the  120  already  enlisted.  It  is 
not  stated  they  were  all  baptized  by  Peter  or  the  twelve 
or  all  on  the  same  day,  though  that  is  the  natural  im- 
plication of  the  language.  The  numerous  pools  in  Jerusalem 
afforded  ample  opportunity  for  such  wholesale  baptizing  and 
Hackett  notes  that  the  habit  of  orientals  would  place  no  ob- 
stacle in  the  way  of  the  use  of  the  public  reservoirs.  Fur- 
neaux  warns  us  that  all  the  3,000  may  not  have  been  gen- 
uine converts  and  that  many  of  them  were  pilgrims  at  the 
passover  who  returned  home.  Souls  {psuchai).  Persons  as 
in  verse  43. 

42.  They  continued  steadfastly  {esan  proskarturountes). 
Periphrastic  active  imperfect  of  proskartureo  as  in  Acts  i  :i4 
(same  participle  in  verse  46).  fellowship  {koinbnidi).  Old 
word  from  koinonos  (partner,  sharer  in  common  interest) 
and  this  from  koinos  what  Is  common  to  all.  This  partnership 
involves  participation  in,  as  the  blood  of  Christ  (Phil.  2:1)  or 
co-operation  in  the  work  of  the  gospel  (Phil,  i  :5)  or  contri- 


38        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

bution  for  those  in  need  (II  Cor.  8:4;  9:13).  Hence  there  is 
wide  diversity  of  opinion  concerning  the  precise  meaning  of 
koinonia  in  this  verse.  It  may  refer  to  the  distribution  of 
funds  in  verse  44  or  to  the  oneness  of  spirit  in  the  community 
of  believers  or  to  the  Lord's  Supper  (as  in  I  Cor.  10:16)  in 
the  sense  of  communion  or  to  the  fellowship  in  the  common 
meals  or  agapae  (love-feasts).  The  breaking  of  bread  {tei 
klasei  tou  artou).  The  word  klasis  is  an  old  word,  but  used 
only  by  Luke  in  the  N.T.  (Luke  24:35;  Acts  2:42),  though 
the  verb  klao  occurs  in  other  parts  of  the  N.T.  as  in  verse  46. 
The  problem  here  is  whether  Luke  refers  to  the  ordinary 
meal  as  in  Luke  24:35  or  to  the  Lord's  Supper.  The  same 
verb  klao  is  used  of  breaking  bread  at  the  ordinary  meal 
(Luke  24:30)  or  the  Lord's  Supper  (Luke  22:19).  It  is  gener- 
ally supposed  that  the  early  disciples  attached  so  much 
significance  to  the  breaking  of  bread  at  the  ordinary  meals, 
more  than  our  saying  grace,  that  they  followed  the  meal 
with  the  Lord's  Supper  at  first,  a  combination  called  agapai 
or  love- feasts.  "There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  Eucharist 
at  this  period  was  preceded  uniformly  by  a  common  repast, 
as  was  the  case  when  the  ordinance  was  instituted"  (Hack- 
ett).  This  led  to  some  abuses  as  in  I  Cor.  11:20.  Hence  it  is 
possible  that  what  is  referred  to  here  is  the  Lord's  Supper 
following  the  ordinary  meal.  "To  simply  explain  tei  klasei 
tou  artou  as  =  'The  Holy  Communion'  is  to  pervert  the  plain 
meaning  of  words,  and  to  mar  the  picture  of  family  life, 
which  the  text  places  before  us  as  the  ideal  of  the  early 
believers"  (Page).  But  in  Acts  20:7  they  seem  to  have 
come  together  especially  for  the  observance  of  the  Lord's 
Supper.  Perhaps  there  is  no  way  to  settle  the  point  conclu- 
sively here.  The  prayers  {tats  proseuchais).  Services  where 
they  prayed  as  in  1:14,  in  the  temple  (Acts  3:1),  in  their 
homes  (4:23). 

43.  Came  (egineto).     Imperfect  middle,  kept  on  coming. 
fFere  done  (egineto).   Same  tense.  Awe  kept  on  coming  on  all 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  39 

and  signs  and  wonders  kept  on  coming  through  the  apostles. 
The  two  things  went  on  pari  passu,  the  more  wonders  the 
more  fear. 

44.  Were  together  {esan  epi  to  auto).  Some  MSS.  esan  kai 
(were  and).  But  they  were  together  jn  the_same  place  as  in 
2:1.  Jnd  had  {kai  eichon).  Imperfect  active,  kept  on  having, 
a  habit  in  the  present  emergency.  Common  (koina).  It  was 
not  actual  communism,  but  they  held  all  their  property 
read}[Jor_use  for  the  common  good  asjija^as. needed  (4:32). 

Y,  This  situation  appears  nowhere  else  except  in  Jerusalem  and 
was  evidently  due  to  special  conditions  there  which  did  not 
survive  permanently.    Later  Paul  will  take  a  special  coUec-^ 
tion  for  the  poor  saints  in  Jerusalem. 

45.  Sold  {epipraskon).  Imperfect  active,  a  habit  or  custom 
from  time  to  time.  Old  and  common  verb,  pipraskb.  Parted 
{diemerizon) .  Imperfect  again  of  diamerizo,  old  verb  for 
dividing  or  distributing  between  {dia)  people.  According  as 
any  man  had  need  {kaihoti  an  tis  chreian  eichen).  Regular 
Greek  idiom  for  comparative  clause  with  an  and  imperfect 
indicative  corresponding  precisely  with  the  three  preceding 
imperfects  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  967). 

46.  With  one  accord  in  the  temple  {homothumadon  en  toi 
hieroi).  See  on  1:14  for  homothumadon.  They  were  still  wor- 
shipping in  the  temple  for  no  breach  had  vet  come  between 
Christians  and  Jews.  Daily  they  were  here  and  dally  break- 
ing bread  at  home  {kat'  oikon)  which  looks  like  the  regular 
meal.  They  did  take  their  food  {metelamhanon  trophes).  Im- 
perfect tense  again  and  clearly  referring  to  the  regular  meals 
at  home.  Does  it  refer  also  to  the  possible  agapai  or  to  the 
Lord's  Supper  afterwards  as  they  had  common  meals  "from 
house  to  house"  {kat'  oikon)  ^  We  know  there  were  local 
churches  in  the  homes  where  they  had  "worship  rooms," 
the  church  in  the  house.  At  any  rate  it  was  "with  singleness" 

I  (apheloteti)  of  heart.  The  word  occurs  only  here  in  the  N.T., 
though  a  late  Koine  word  (papyri).    It  comes  from  aphfles. 


40        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

free  from  rock  {phelleus  is  stony  ground),  smooth.    The  old 
form  was  apheleia. 

47.  Having  favor  {echontes  charin).  Cf.  Luke  2:^2  of  the 
Boy  Jesus.  Added  [prosetithei).  Imperfect  active,  kept  on 
adding.  If  the  Lord  only  always  "added"  those  who  join 
our  churches.  Note  verse  41  where  same  verb  is  used  of  the 
3,cxx).  To  them  (epi  to  auto).  Literally,  "together."  Why 
not  leave  it  so.^  "To  the  church"  {tei  ekklesidi)  is  not  gen- 
uine. Codex  Bezae  has  "in  the  church."  Those  that  were 
being  saved  {tous  sozomenous).  Present  passive  participle. 
Probably  for  repetition  like  the  imperfect  prosetithei.  Better 
translate  it  "those  saved  from  time  to  time."  It  was  a  con- 
tinuous revival,  day  by  day.  Sbzo  like  sbteria  is  used  for 
"save"  in  three  senses  (beginning,  process,  conclusion),  but 
here  repetition  is  clearly  the  point  of  the  present  tense. 


CHAPTER  III 

1.  Were  going  up  {anebainon) .  Descriptive  imperfect 
active.  They  were  ascending  the  terraces  to  the  temple 
courts.  The  ninth  (ten  enaten).  Our  three  o'clock  in  the 
afternoon,  the  time  of  the  evening  sacrifice.  Peter  and  John 
like  Paul  later  kept  up  the  Jewish  worship,  but  not  as  a 
means  of  sacramental  redemption.  There  were  three  hours  of 
prayer  (third,  sixth,  ninth). 

2.  Was  carried  {ebastazeto) .  Imperfect  passive,  picturing 
the  process  as  in  verse  i .  Laid  daily  (etithoun  katk'  hemeran). 
Imperfect  again  describing  their  custom  with  this  man. 
Beautiful  (Horaian).  This  gate  is  not  so  called  elsewhere. 
It  may  have  been  the  Gate  of  Nicanor  on  the  east  side  look- 
ing towards  Kidron  described  by  Josephus  {Jnt.  XV.  ii,  3; 
WarV.  5,  3)  as  composed  chiefly  of  Corinthian  brass  and 
very  magnificent. 

3.  Asked  (erotd).  Began  to  ask,  inchoative  imperfect.  It 
was  his  chance. 

4.  Fasiening  his  eyes  (atenisas).  First  aorist  (ingressive) 
active  participle  of  atenizo.  For  this  verb  see  on  Luke  4:20 
and  Acts  i  :io.  Peter  fixed  his  eyes  on  the  beggar  and  invited 
him  to  look  (blepson)  on  them. 

5.  Gave  heed  unto  them  {epeichen  autois).  Imperfect  active 
of  epecho,  to  hold  to.  For  the  idiom  with  ton  noun  understood 
see  7:14;  I  Tim.  4:16.  He  held  his  eyes  right  on  Peter  and 
John  with  great  eagerness  "expecting  to  receive  something" 
(prosdokon  ti  labein).  He  took  Peter's  invitation  as  a  promise 
of  a  large  gift. 

6.  In  the  name  {en  toi  onomati).  The  healing  power  is  in 
that  name  (Page)  and  Peter  says  so.  Cf.  Luke  9:49;  10:17; 
Acts  4:7,  10;  19:27;  16:18.    W-alk  {peripatei).    Present  im- 

41 


42        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

perative,  inchoative  idea,  begin  to  walk  and  then  go  on 
walking.  But  the  beggar  does  not  budge.  He  knows  that  he 
cannot  walk. 

7.  Took  him  by  the  right  hand  (piasas  auton  tes  dexias 
cheiros).  Doric  form  piazo  for  piezo.  Genitive  of  the  part 
affected.  Peter  had  to  pull  him  up  on  his  feet  before  he  would 
try  to  walk. 

8.  Leaping  up  {exallomenos).  Present  middle  participle, 
leaping  out  repeatedly  after  Peter  pulled  him  up.  Only  here 
in  the  N.T.  He  stood  (este).  Second  aorist  active.  Walked 
(periepatei).  Went  on  walking,  imperfect  active.  He  came 
into  the  temple  repeating  these  new  exercises  (walking, 
leaping,    praising    God). 

10.  They  took  knowledge  of  him  (epeginoskon).  Imperfect 
active,  inchoative,  began  to  perceive.  fVere  filled  (eples- 
thesan).  Effective  first  aorist  passive.  At  that  which  had 
happened  (toi  sumhebekoti) .  Perfect  active  participle  of 
sumbaino. 

11.  The  Codex  Bezae  adds  "as  Peter  and  John  went  out." 
As  he  held  {kratountos  autou).  Genitive  absolute  of  krateOy 
to  hold  fast,  with  accusative  rather  than  genitive  to  get 
hold  of  (Acts  27:13).  Old  and  common  verb  from  kratos 
(strength,  force).  Perhaps  out  of  gratitude  and  partly  from 
fear  (Luke  8:38).  In  the  porch  that  is  called  Solomon's  (epi 
iei  stodi  tei  kaloumenei  Solomontos).  The  adjective  Stoic 
(stoikos)  is  from  this  word  stoa  (porch).  It  was  on  the  east 
side  of  the  court  of  the  Gentiles  (Josephus,  Ant.  XX.  9,  7) 
and  was  so  called  because  it  was  built  on  a  remnant  of  the 
foundations  of  the  ancient  temple.  Jesus  had  once  taught 
here  (John  10:23).  Greatly  wondering  {ekthamboi) .  Wonder- 
ing out  of  [ek)  measure,  already  filled  with  wonder  {tham- 
bous,  verse  10).  Late  adjective.  Construction  according  to 
sense  (plural,  though  laos  singular)  as  in  5:16;  6:7;  11  :i,  etc. 

12.  Answered  (apekrinato).  First  aorist  middle  indica- 
tive. The  people  looked  their  amazement  and  Peter  answered 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  43 

that.  Ye  men  of  Israel  {Andres  I sraeleitai).  Covenant  name 
and  so  conciliatory,  the  stock  of  Israel  (Phil.  3 :5).  At  this 
man  (epi  toutoi).  Probably  so,  though  it  could  be  "at  this 
thing."  Fasten  yon  your  eyes  {atenizeie).  The  very  verb 
used  about  Peter  in  verse  4.  On  us  (hemin).  Dative  case, 
emphatic  proleptical  position  before  ti  atenizete.  On  us  why 
do  ye  fasten  your  eyes?  As  though  {ho  s).  i^oj  with  the  partici- 
ple gives  the  alleged  reason,  not  always  the  true  one.  Power 
{dunamei).  Instrumental  case,  causa  effectiva.  Godliness 
{eusebeidi).  Causa  meritoria.  Had  made  {pepoiekosin). 
Perfect  active  participle  of  poieo.  To  walk  {tou  peripatein). 
Articular  infinitive  in  the  genitive  case  of  result,  purpose 
easily  shading  off  into  result  (ecbatic  infinitive)  as  here  as 
is  true  also  of  hina. 

13.  His  servant  Jesus  {ton  paida  lesoun).  This  phrase 
occurs  in  Isa.  42:1 ;  52:13  about  the  Messiah  except  the  name 
"Jesus"  which  Peter  adds,  the  first  part  of  the  quotation 
is  from  Ex.  3:6;  5:30.  The  LXX  translated  the  Hebrew 
ebhedh  by  pais,  the  servant  of  Jehovah  being  a  Messianic 
designation.  But  the  phrase  "servant  of  God"  {pais  theou) 
is  applied  also  to  Israel  (Luke  1:54)  and  to  David  (Luke 
1:69;  Acts  4:25).  Paul  terms  himself  doulos  theou  (Tit.  i:i). 
Pais  Is  just  child  (boy  or  girl),  and  it  was  also  used  of  a 
slave  (Matt,  8:6,  8,  13).  But  it  is  not  here  huios  (son)  that 
Peter  uses,  but  pais.  Luke  quotes  Peter  as  using  it  again 
in  this  Messianic  sense  in  Acts  3:26;  4:27,  30.  Whom  ye 
delivered  up  {hon  humeis  men  paredokate).  Note  emphatic 
use  of  humeis  {ye).  No  de  to  correspond  to  men.  First  aorist 
active  {k  aorist)  plural  indicative  of  paradidomi  (usual  form 
paredote,  second  aorist).  When  he  {ekeinou).  Emphatic 
pronoun,  that  one,  in  contrast  with  "ye"  {humeis)^  genitive 
absolute  with  krinantos,  here  the  nearest  word  (Pilate),  the 
latter. 

14.  But  ye  {humeis  de).  In  contrast  with  Pilate  {ekeinou). 
Murderer  {andra  phonea).    A  man  a  murderer.    In  contrast 


44        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

with  "the  Holy  and  Righteous  One."  To  he  granted  {char- 
isthenai).  As  a  favour  (charis).  First  aorist  passive  infinitive 
of  charizomaif.    So  also  25:11,  27:24. 

15.  But  the  Prince  of  life  ye  killed  {ton  de  archegon  tes 
zoes  apekteinate).  "The  magnificent  antithesis"  (Bengel) 
Peter  here  draws  between  their  asking  for  a  murderer  and 
kilHng  the  Prince  (or  Author)  of  life.  Peter  pictures  Jesus  as 
the  source  of  all  life  as  is  done  in  John  1:1-18  and  Col. 
1:14-20  and  Heb.  i  :2f.  Archegos  (arcA^,  beginning,  a^o,  to 
lead)  is  an  adjective  "furnishing  the  first  cause  or  occasion" 
in  Euripides,  Plato.  Thence  substantive,  the  originator, 
the  leader,  the  pioneer  as  of  Jesus  both  Beginner  and  Fin- 
isher (Heb.  12:2).  See  also  Heb.  2:10  and  Acts  5:31  where 
it  is  applied  to  Jesus  as  "Prince  and  Saviour."  But  God 
raised  him  from  the  dead  in  contrast  to  what  they  had  done. 
Whereof  we  are  witnesses  {hou  hemeis  martures  esmen).  Of 
which  fact  (the  resurrection)  or  of  whom  as  risen,  hou  having 
the  same  form  in  the  genitive  singular  for  masculine  or 
neuter.  Peter  had  boldly  claimed  that  all  the  120  have  seen 
the  Risen  Christ.   There  is  no  denial  of  that  claim. 

16.  By  faith  in  his  name  (tei  pistei  tou  onomatos  autou). 
Instrumental  case  of  pistei  (Aleph  and  B  do  not  have  epi) 
and  objective  genitive  of  onomatos.  His  name  [to  onoma 
autou).  Repeats  the  word  name  to  make  the  point  clear. 
Cf.  verse  6  where  Peter  uses  "the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  of 
Nazareth"  when  he  healed  the  man.  Made  strong  {estereb- 
sen).  Same  verb  used  in  verse  7  (and  16:5).  Nowhere  else 
in  the  N.T.  Old  verb  from  stereos^  firm,  solid.  Through 
him  {di'  autou).  Through  Jesus,  the  object  of  faith  an;!  the 
source  of  it.  Perfect  soundness  (holoklerian).  Perfect  in  all 
its  parts,  complete,  whole  (from  holos,  whole,  kleros,  allot- 
ment). Late  word  (Plutarch)  once  in  LXX  (Isa.  1:6)  and 
here  alone  in  the  N.T.,  but  adjective  holokleros,  old  and 
common  (James  1:4;  I  Thess.  5:23). 

17.  And  now  (kai  nun).    Luke  is  fond  of  these  particles 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  45 

of  transition  (7:34;  10:5;  20:25;  22:16)  and  also  kai  ta  nun 
(4:29;  5:38;  22:32;  27:22),  and  even  kai  nun  idou  (13:11; 
20:22).  /  wot  {oida).  Old  English  for  "I  know."  In  igno- 
rance (kata  agnoian).  This  use  of  kata  occurs  in  the  KoinS. 
See  also  Philemon  14.  One  may  see  Luke  23 :34  for  the  words 
of  the  Saviour  on  the  Cross.  "They  had  sinned,  but  their 
sin  was  not  of  so  deep  a  dye  that  it  could  not  have  been  still 
more  heinous"  (Hackett).  If  they  had  known  what  they 
were  doing,  they  would  not  knowingly  have  crucified  the 
Messiah'  (I  Cor.  2:8). 

18.  Foreshewed  {prokaUggeilen).  First  aorist  active  in- 
dicative of  pTokataggellOj  late  compound  to  announce  fully 
beforehand.  Only  twice  in  the  N.T.  in  the  critical  text 
(Acts  3:18;  7:52).  That  his  Christ  should  suffer  {pathein  ton 
Christon  autou).  Accusative  of  general  reference  with  the 
aorist  active  infinitive  (pathein  of  pascho)  in  indirect  dis- 
course (predictive  purpose  of  God).  Their  crime,  though 
real,  was  carrying  out  God's  purpose  (2:23;  John  3:16). 
See  the  same  idea  in  Acts  17:3;  26:23.  This  "immense  para- 
dox" (Page)  was  a  stumbling  block  to  these  Jews  as  it  is  yet 
(I  Cor.  1:23).  Peter  discusses  the  sufferings  of  Christ  in 
I  Peter  4:13;  5:1. 

19.  Repent  therefore  {metanoesate  oun).  Peter  repeats  to 
this  new  crowd  the  command  made  in  Acts  2:38  which  see. 
God's  purpose  and  patience  call  for  instant  change  of  atti- 
tude on  their  part.  Their  guilt  does  not  shut  them  out  if 
they  will  turn.  And  turn  again  {kai  epistrepsate) .  Definitely 
turn  to  God  in  conduct  as  well  as  in  mind.  That  your  sins 
may  be  blotted  out  {pros  to  exaliphthenai  humon  tas  hamartias). 
Articular  infinitive  (first  aorist  passive  of  exaleipho,  to  wipe 
out,  rub  off,  erase,  smear  out,  old  verb,  but  in  the  N.T.  only 
here  and  Col.  2:14)  with  the  accusative  of  general  reference 
and  with  pros  and  the  accusative  to  express  purpose.  That  so 
{hopos  an).  Final  particle  with  an  and  the  aorist  active 
subjunctive  elthosin  (come)  and  not  "when"  as  the  Author- 


46        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

ized  Version  has  it.  Some  editors  put  this  clause  in  verse 
20  (Wescott  and  Hort,  for- instance).  Seasons  of  refreshing 
{kairoi  anapsuxebs).  The  word  anapsuxis  (from  anapsucho, 
to  cool  again  or  refresh,  II  Tim.  i:i6)  is  a  late  word  (LXX) 
and  occurs  here  alone  in  the  N.T.  Surely  repentance  will 
bring  "seasons  of  refreshing  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord." 

20.  And  that  he  may  send  the  Christ  zvho  hath  been  ap- 
pointed for  you,  even  Jesus  {kai  aposteilei  ton  prokecheiris- 
menon  humin  Christon  lesoun).  First  aorist  active  sub- 
junctive with  hopos  an  as  in  15:17  and  Luke  2:35.  There  is 
little  real  difference  in  idea  between  hopds  an  and  hina  an. 
There  is  a  conditional  element  in  all  purpose  clauses.  The 
reference  is  naturally  to  the  second  coming  of  Christ  as 
verse  21  shows.  Knowling  admits  "that  there  is  a  spiritual 
presence  of  the  enthroned  Jesus  which  believers  enjoy  as  a 
foretaste  of  the  visible  and  glorious  Presence  of  the  Par- 
ousia.^^  Jesus  did  promise  to  be  with  the  disciples  all  the 
days  (Matt.  28:20),  and  certainly  repentance  with  accom- 
panying seasons  of  refreshing  help  get  the  world  ready  for  the 
coming  of  the  King.  The  word  prokecheirismenon  (perfect 
passive  participle  of  procheirizo,  from  procheiros^  at  hand, 
to  take  into  one's  hands,  to  choose)  is  the  correct  text  here, 
not  prokekerugmenon.  In  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Acts  22: 
14;  26:16.  It  is  not  "Jesus  Christ"  here  nor  "Christ  Jesus," 
but  "the  Messiah,  Jesus,"  identifying  Jesus  with  the  Mes- 
siah. See  the  Second  Epiphany  of  Jesus  foretold  also  in 
I  Tim.  6:15  and  the  First  Epiphany  described  in  I  Pet.  i  :20. 

21.  Restoration  (apokatastaseos).  Double  compound  (apo, 
kata,  histemi),  here  only  in  the  N.T.,  though  common  in 
late  writers.  In  papyri  and  inscriptions  for  repairs  to  temples 
and  this  phrase  occurs  in  Jewish  apocalyptic  writings,  some- 
thing like  the  new  heaven  and  the  new  earth  of  Rev.  21:1. 
Paul  has  a  mystical  allusion  also  to  the  agony  of  nature  in 
Rom.  8:20-22.  The  verb  apokathistemi  is  used  by  Jesus  of 
the  spiritual  and  moral  restoration  wrought  by  the  Baptist 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  47 

as  Elijah  (Matt.  17:11  =Mark  9:12)  and  by  the  disciples 
to  Jesus  in  Acts  1:6.  Josephus  uses  the  word  of  the  return 
from  captivity  and  Philo  of  the  restitution  of  inheritances 
in  the  year  of  jubilee.  As  a  technical  medical  term  it  means 
complete  restoration  to  health.  See  a  like  idea  in  palin- 
genesi'a  (renewal,  new  birth)  in  Matt.  19:28  and  Tit.  3:5. 
This  universalism  of  Peter  will  be  clearer  to  him  after  Joppa 
and  Caesarea. 

22.  Like  unto  me  (hos  erne).  As  me,  literally;  Moses  (Deut. 
18:14-18)  claims  that  God  raised  him  up  as  a  prophet  and 
that  another  and  greater  one  will  come,  the  Messiah.  The 
Jews  understood  Moses  to  be  a  type  of  Christ  (John  1:21). 
God  spoke  to  Moses  face  to  face  (Ex.  33:11)  and  he  was  the 
greatest  of  the  prophets  (Deut.  34:10). 

23.  That  prophet  {tou  prophetou  ekeinou).  Emphasizes 
the  future  prophet  as  on  "him"  (autou)  before  "hearken." 
They  had  refused  to  "hearken"  to  Moses  and  now,  alas, 
many  had  refused  to  "hearken"  to  Christ.  Shall  be  utterly 
destroyed  (exolethreuthesetai).  First  future  passive  of  exole- 
(0)  threuo,  a  late  verb,  to  destroy  utterly  {ex)^  only  here  in 
the  N.T.,  common  in  the  LXX. 

24.  From  Samuel  {apo  Samouel).  Schools  of  prophets 
arose  in  his  time,  few  before  him  (I  Sam.  3:1). 

25.  Ye  (Humeis).  Emphatic  position.  The  covenant  which 
God  made  (tes  diathekes  hes  ho  theos  dietheto).  Literally, 
"the  covenant  which  God  covenanted."  Diatheke  and  di- 
etheto (second  aorlst  middle  indicative  of  diathemi)  are  the 
same  root.  See  on  Matt.  26:28.  The  covenant  (agreement 
between  two,  dia,  tithemi)  was  with  Abraham  (Gen.  12:1-3) 
and  repeated  at  various  times  (Gen.  18:18;  22:18;  26:4, 
etc.).  In  Heb.  9:15-18  the  word  is  used  both  for  covenant 
and  will.  The  genitive  relative  hes  attracted  to  case  of  the 
antecedent. 

26.  Unto  you  first  (Humin  proton).  The  Jews  were  first 
in  privilege  and  it  was  through  the  Jews  that  the  Messiah 


48        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

was  to  come  for  "all  the  families  of  the  earth."  His  servant 
{ton  paida  autou).  As  in  verse  13,  the  Messiah  as  God's 
Servant.  To  bless  you  {eulogounta  humas).  Present  active 
participle  to  express  purpose,  blessing  you  (Robertson, 
Grammar,  p.  991).  In  turning  away  {en  toi  apostrephein). 
Articular  infinitive  in  the  locative  case,  almost  preserved  in 
the  English. 


CHAPTER  IV 

1.  The  captain  of  the  temple  {ho  strategos  tou  hierou). 
Twenty-four  bands  of  Levites  guarded  the  temple,  one  guard 
at  a  time.  They  watched  the  gates.  The  commander  of 
each  band  was  called  captain  (strategos).  Josephus  names 
this  captain  of  the  temple  police  next  to  the  high  priest  {War. 
VI.  5,  3).  The  Sadducees  {hoi  Saddoukaioi) .  Most  of  the 
priests  were  Sadducees  now  and  alLjthe_chief_priests  since 
John  Hyrcanus  I  deserted  the  Pharisees  (Josephus,  ^nt. 
XVII.  10,  6;  XVIII.  I,  4;  XX.  9,  i).  The  Sadducees  were 
slow  to  line  up  with  the  Pharisees  against  Jesus,  but  they  now 
take  the  lead  against  Peter  and  John.  Came  upon  them  {ep- 
estesan  autois).  Second  aorist  active  indicative  (intransi- 
tive). Burst  upon  them  suddenly  or  stood  by  them  in  a 
hostile  attitude  here  (Luke  20:1;  2414.;  Acts  6:12;  17:5;  22:20; 
23:11). 

2.  Being  sore  troubled  {diaponoumenoi) .  Present  passive 
participle  of  old  verb  diaponeo  (perfective  use  of  did)  to  be 
worked  up,  indignant.  In  the  N.T.  only  here  and  16:8. 
Because  {dia  to).  The  articular  infinitive  with  two  accusa- 
tives, one  the  object  (the  people),  the  other  ("they")  of 
general  reference.  In  Jesus  {en  lesou).  In  the  case  of  Jesus, 
an  actual  instance  of  resurrection  which  the  Sadducees 
denied  (Matt.  22:23).  This  same  use  of  en  appears  in  I 
Cor.  4:6  (in  us).  The  Sadducees  were  also  aristocrats  and 
political  ecclesiastics  who  disliked  popular  disturbances.  In 
particular,  they  resented  the  claim  about  Jesus  whom  they 
had  helped  crucify. 

3.  In  ward  {eis  teresin).  Probably  in  one  of  the  chambers 
of  the  temple.  In  safe  keeping  (from  tereo,  to  guard).  Old 
word,  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Acts  5:18;  I  Cor.  7:19.    So 

49 


so        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

in  papyri.  Now  eventide  {hespera  ede).  Hence  no  trial  could 
take  place  before  the  next  day,  a  regulation  violated  in  the 
case  of  Jesus. 

4.  Men  (andron).  Strictly,  men  and  not  women,  for 
anthropos  is  the  term  for  both  men  and  women.  But  in 
Luke  11:31  andres  seems  to  include  both  men  and  women 
and  that  is  possible  here,  though  by  no  means  certain,  for 
see  Matt.  14:21  where  the  women  and  children  are  expressly 
excepted. 

5.  Rulers  and  elders  and  scribes  (tons  archontas  kai  tous 
presbuterous  kai  tous  grammateis) .  The  three  classes  com- 
posing the  Sanhedrin  (rulers  =  chief  priests  who  were  Sad- 
ducees,  the  scribes  usually  Pharisees,  the  elders  not  in  either 
class:  24  priests,  24  elders,  22  scribes).  fFere  gathered  to- 
gether  {sunachthenai).  First  aorist  passive  infinitive  of 
sunago  with  accusative  of  general  reference  and  the  subject 
of  egeneto. 

6.  Annas  {H annas).  One  of  the  rulers  or  chief  priests,  ex- 
high  priest  (a.d.  7-14)  and  father-in-law  of  Caiaphas  {Kaia- 
phas)  who  was  actual  high  priest  at  that  time,  though  the 
title  clung  to  Annas  as  here  (both  so  called  in  Luke  3:2), 
Caiaphas_so_by  Rojnan  law,  Annas  so  in  the  opinion  of  the 

Jews.  They  with  John  and  Alexander  are  the  leaders  among 
the~Sadducees  in  pressing  the  case  against  Peter  and  John. 

7.  In  the  midst  {en  toi  mesoi).  The  Sanhedrin  sat  in  a 
semicircle.  They  inquired  (epunthanonto) .  Imperfect  mid- 
dle, began  to  inquire.  Or  in  what  name  (e  en  poioi  onomati). 
As  if  by  some  magical  formula  such  as  exorcists  practised 
(Acts  19:13)  as  if  to  catch  them  by  (Deut.  13:1).  Have  ye 
done  this  {epoiesate  touto  humeis).  Note  emphatic  use  of 
humeis  (ye). 

8.  Filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit  {plestheis  pneumatos  hagiou). 
.For  this  occasion  and  so  above  all  fear  as  in  verse  3 1  and  as 

in  2:4. 

9.  Concerning  a  good  deed  done  to  an  impotent  man  {epi 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  5 1 

euergesidi  anthropou  asthenous).  Objective  genitive.  Note 
euergesia  (old  word,  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  I  Tim.  6:2), 
as  a  benefactor,  not  a  malefactor.  Skilful  turn  made  by- 
Peter.  Is  made  whole  (sesostai).  Perfect  passive  indicative 
of  sozo,  siajjds  whole. 

10.  Be  it  known  {gnoston  esto).  Imperative  present  active 
third  singular  of  eimi,  to  be,  and  the  verbal  adjective  gnoston. 
Whom  ye  crucified  (hon  humeis  estaurbsate).  Too  good  a 
chance  to  miss,  and  so  Peter  boldly  charges  the  Sajihedrin 
with  responsibility  for  the  death  of  Jesus.  Note  humeis  (ye) 
again.  Whom  God  raised  from  the  dead  {hon  ho  theos  egeiren  ek 
nekron).  Note  repetition  of  hon  {whom).  This  is  God's 
answer  to  their  act  of  crucifixion.  In  him  doth  this  man  stand 
{en  toutoi  houtos  paresteken).  Rather  (note  play  on  houtos), 
"In  this  one  {hon,  hon)  this  one  stands  (present  perfect  ac- 
tive indicative,  intransitive)."  In  Jesus  this  man  stands 
before  you  whole  {hugies).  It  was  a  centre  shot. 

11.  Of  you  the  builders  {huph*  humon  ton  oikodomon).  The 
experts,  the  architects,  had  rejected  Jesus  for  their  building 
(Psa.  118:22)  as  Jesus  himself  had  pointed  out  (Matt. 
21 142  =  Luke  21:17).  This  very  Rejected  Stone  God  had 
made  the  .head  of  the  corner  (either  the  highest  corner  stone 
right  under  the  roof  or  the  comer  stone  under  the  building, 
Isa.  28:16)  as  Jesus  showed,  as  Peter  here  declares  and  re- 
peats later  (I  Peter  2:6f.). 

12.  Salvation  {he  soteria).  The  Messianic  salvation  as  in 
5:31;  17:11  and  as  Jesus  meant  in  John  4:22.  It  is  amazing  to 
see  Peter  speaking  thus  to  the  Sanhedrin  and  proclaiming  the 
necessity  of  salvation  {dei  sbthenai)  in  the  name  of  Jesus 
Christ  and  in  no  other.  If  this  was  true  then,  it  is  true  today. 
There  is  no  second  (heteron)  name  to  go  beside  that  of  Jesus 
in  India,  China,  Japan,  or  America. 

13.  The  boldness  {ten  parresian).  Telling  it  all  {pan,  resia). 
See  also  verses  29,  31.  Actually  Peter  had  turned  the  table 
on  the  Sanhedrin  and  had  arraigned  them  before  the  bar 


52        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

of  God.  Had  perceived  {katalabomenoi).  Second  aorist  middle 
participle  of  katalambano,  common  verb  to  grasp  strongly 
{kata)j  literally  or  with  the  mind  (especially  middle  voice), 
to  comprehend.  The  rulers  recalled  Peter  and  John  from 
having  seen  them  often  with  Jesus,  probably  during  the 
temple  teaching,  etc.  They  were  unlearned  [agrammaioi 
eisin).  Present  indicative  retained  in  indirect  discourse. 
Unlettered  men  without  technical  training  in  the  professional 
rabbinical  schools  of  Hillel  or  Shammai.  Jesus  himself  was 
so  regarded  (John  7:15,  "not  having  learned  letters").  Jnd 
ignorant  {kai  idibtai).  Old  word,  only  here  in  the  N.T.  and 
I  Cor.  14:24;  II  Cor.  11:6.  It  does  not  mean  "ignorant," 
but  a  layman,  a  man  not  in  office  (a  private  person),  a 
common  soldier  and  not  an  officer,  a  man  not  skilled  in  the 
schools,  very  much  like  agrammatos.  It  is  from  idios  (one*s 
own)  and  our  "idiosyncracy"  is  one  with  an  excess  of  such 
a  trait,  while  "idiot"  (this  very  word)  is  one  who  has  nothing 
but  his  idiosyncracy.  Peter  and  John  were  men  of  ability 
and  of  courage,  but  they  did  not  belong  to  the  set  of  the 
rabbis.  They  marvelled  (ethaumazon) .  Imperfect  (inchoative) 
active,  began  to  wonder  and  kept  it  up.  Took  knowledge  of 
them  {epeginoskon  autous).  Imperfect  (inchoative)  active 
again,  they  began  to  recognize  them  as  men  that  they  had 
seen  with  Jesus. 

14.  They  could  say  nothing  against  it  {ouden  eichon  antei- 
pein).  Imperfect  again,  they  keg^t  on  having  nothing  to  say 
against  it.  The  lame  man  was  standing  there  before  their 
eyes  in  proof  of  what  Peter  had  said. 

15.  They  conferred  among  themselves  (suneballon  pros 
allelous).  Imperfect  active  again.  With  Peter  and  John  and 
the  lame  man  outside,  they  began  to  compare  (jwn,  hallo) 
notes  and  take  stock  of  their  predicament. 

16.  What  shall  we  do?  {Ti  poiesomen).  Deliberative  aorist 
active  subjunctive  (ingressive  and  urgent  aorist).  Notable 
miracle  {gnoston  semeion).   Or  sign.    It  was  useless  to  deny  it 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  53 

with  the  man  there.      We  cannot  deny  it   {ou  dunametha 
arneisthai).   That  is,  it  will  do  no  good.  J 

17.  That  it  spread  no  further  (hina  me  epi  pleion  dianeme- 
thei).  First  aorist  passive  subjunctive  of  dianemo,  to  dis- 
tribute with  hina  me,  negative  purpose.  Let  us  threaten  them 
{apeilesometha  autois).  Hortatory  aorist  middle  subjunctive 
of  apeileo,  old  verb  (note  middle  voice).  In  the  N.T.  only 
here  and  I  Peter  2:23.  That  they  speak  henceforth  to  no  man 
in  this  name  (meketi  lalein  epi  toi  onomati  toutoi  medeni  anthro- 
pon).  Indirect  command  with  the  infinitive  and  double  nega- 
tive {meketi,  medeni).  They  will  not  say  "Jesus,"  but  make 
a  slur  at  "ihis  name."  contemptuous  use  of  houtos,  though 
they  apparently  do  mention  the  name  "Jesus"  in  verse  18. 

18.  Not  to  speak  at  all  {katholou  me  phtheggesthai).  Same 
construction  as  above,  infinitive  in  indirect  command  with 
negative  me  (and  mede). 

20.  For  we  cannot  but  speak  (ou  dunametha  gar  hemeis — me 
lalein).  Both  negatives  hold  here,  "For  we  (note  emphatic 
hemeis)  are  not  able  not  to  speak"  (what  we  saw  and  heard). 

I  This  is  defiance  of  the  civil  and  ecclesiastical  authorities  that 
was  justified,  for  the  temple  authorities  stepped  in  between 
the  conscience  and  God.  Peter  and  John  were  willing  to  pay 
the  price  of  this  defiance  with  their  lives.  This  is  the  courage 
of  martyrs  through  all  the  ages. 

21.  When  they  had  further  threatened  them  (prosapeilesa- 
menoi).  The  "further"  is  in  ''pros"  (in  addition).  Finding 
nothing  how  they  might  punish  them  (meden  heuriskontes  to 
pds  kolas ontai  autous).  Note  the  article  "io"  before  pos 
{how),  "the  how."  Aorist  middle  deliberative  subjunctive 
kolasontai  in  indirect  question  after  pos  from  kolazo,  to  lop 
(kolos,  lopped),  to  curb,  to  prune,  to  correct,  to_punish.  Old 
verb,  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  II  Pet.  2:9.  Glorified  God 
{edoxazon  ton  theon).  Imperfect  active,  ^ke£t_on  glorifying 
God  while  the  Sanhedrin  were  threatening  Peter  and  John. 

[It  was  to  laugh  at  the  helplessness  of  the  Sanhedrin. 


^ 


\ 


54         WORD  PICTURES   IN   NEW  TESTAMENT 

22.  Was  wrought  (gegonei).  Second  past  perfect  active 
without  augment  from  ginomai. 

23.  To  their  own  company  {pros  tous  idious).  Their  own 
people  as  in  John  i:ii;  13:1;  Acts  24:23;  I  Tim.  5:8;  Tit. 
3:14,  not  merely  the  apostles  (all  the  disciples).  In  spite  of 
Peter's  courageous  defiance  he  and  John  told  the  brother- 
hood all  that  had  been  said  by  the  Sanhedrin.  They  had  real 
apprehension  of  the  outcome. 

24.  With  one  accord  (homothumadon) .  A  concert  of  voices 
as  already  seen  by  the  word  in  1:14;  2:46  and  later  in  5:12; 
7:57;  15:25.  0  Lord  (Despota).  Our  word  despot.  Old  word 
for  relation  of  master  to  slaves  or  household  servants  (I  Tim. 
6:1;  II  Tim.  2:21;  Tit.  2:9;  I  Peter  2:18).  Simeon  thus 
addressed  God  (Luke  2:29).  So  in  II  Peter  2:1;  Jude  4; 
6:10.  See  " slaves "  in  verse  29. 

25.  By  the  mouth  of  our  father  David  (tou  patros  hemon 
dia  pneumatos  hagiou  stomatos  Daueid).  From  Psa,  2: if. 
here  ascribed  to  David.  Baumgarten  suggests  that  the 
whQle__cornpany__saiig-  the  second  Psalm  and  then  Peter 
applied  it  to  this  emergency.  The  Greek  MSS.  do  not  have 
dia  (by)  here  before  stomatos,  but  only  dia  before  pneumatos 
hagiou  (the  Holy  Spirit).  Hort  calls  this  a  "primitive  error" 
perhaps  due  to  an  early  scribe  who  omitted  this  second  dia 
so  close  to  the  first  dia  (Robertson,  Introduction  to  the  Tex- 
tual Criticism  of  the  N.T.,  p.  238).  A  small  list  of  such 
primitive  errors  is  there  given  as  suggested  by  Dr.  Hort. 
Why  {hina  ti).  This  Greek  idiom  calls  for  genetai  (sec- 
ond aorist  middle  subjunctive),  That  what  may  happen. 
The  Gentiles  (ethne).  So  always  in  LXX,  while  laoi  (peo- 
ples) can  include  Jews.  Did  rage  (ephruaxan).  First  aorist 
active  indicative  of  phruasso,  late  word,  to  neigh  like  a 
horse,  to  prance  or  stamp  the  ground,  to  put  on  lofty  airs. 
Only  here  in  the  N.T.  in  this  quotation  from  Psa.  2:1. 
Imagine  (emeletesan).  First  aorist  active  indicative  of 
meletao.    Old  verb  from  melete  (care),  to  practise,  to  cau- 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  55 

tion,  as  orators  and  rhetoricians.    Only  here  in  the  N.T.  in 
this  quotation. 

26.  Set  themselves  in  array  (parestesan).  Literally,  stood 
by.  Against  his  Anointed  {kata  tou  Christou  autou).  Against 
his  Messiah,  his  Christ. 

27.  Both  Herod  and  Pontics  Pilate  {Her aides  te  kai  Pontius 
Peilatos).  Luke  alone  (Luke  23:12)  tells  of  the  reconcilia- 
tion between  Herod  and  Pilate  at  the  trial  of  Jesus.  So  Peter 
and  the  rest  interpret  this  prophecy  as  directly  fulfilled  in 
their  conduct  towards  Jesus  Christ.  Whom  thou  didst  anoint 
(hon  echrisas).  As  in  verse  26  (cf.  Luke  4:18  and  Isa.  61  :i). 
Inaugurated  as  King  Messiah. 

28.  Foreordained  (proorisen).  First  aorist  active  indica- 
tive of  proorizOj  "They  rise  above  sight  and  seem  to  see  the 
Hand  which  *  shapes  men's  ends,  rough  hew  them  how  they 
will'  "  (Fumeaux). 

29.  And  now  (kai  ta  nun).  "And  as  to  (accusative  of 
general  reference)  the  now  things  (the  present  situation)." 
Only  in  the  Acts  in  the  N.T.  (5:38;  17:30;  20:32;  27:22). 
Grant  (d&j^  Second  aorisX,active  imperative  of  didomi, 
urgency  of  the  aorist.  Do  it  now.  To  speak  thy  word  with  all 
boldness  (meta  parresias  pases  lalein  ton  logon  sou).  Lit- 
erally, "with  all  boldness  to  go  on  speaking  (present  active 
infinitive)  thy  word."  Peter  and  John  had  defied  the  San- 
hedrin  in  verse  20,  but  all  the  same  and  all  the  more  they 
pray  for  courage  in  deed  to  live  up  to  their  brave  words. 
A  wholesome  lesson. 

30.  While  thou  stretchest  forth  thy  hand  [en  toi  ten  cheira 
ekteinein  se).  Luke's  favourite  idiom,  "In  the  stretching  out 
(articular  present  active  infinitive)  the  hand  as  to  thee" 
(accusative  of  general  reference),  the  second  allusion  to 
God's  "hand"  in  this  prayer  (verse  28).  To  heal  (eis  iasin). 
For  healing.  See  verse  22.  And  that  signs  and  wonders  may 
be  done  {kai  semeia  kai  terata  ginesthai).  Either  to  be  taken 
as  in  the  same  construction  as  ekteinein  with  en  toi  as  Re- 


56        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

vised  Version  has  it  here  or  to  be  treated  as  subordinate 
purpose  to  en  toi  ekteinein  (as  Knowling,  Page,  Wendt, 
Hackett).  The  latter  most  likely  true.  They  ask  for  a  visi- 
ble sign  or  proof  that  God  has  heard  this  prayer  for  courage 
to  be  faithful  even  unto  death. 

31.  The  place  was  shaken  {esaleuthe  ho  topos).  By  an  earth- 
quake most  likely  as  in  16:26,  but  none  the  less  a  token  of 
God's  presence  and  power  (Psa.  114:7;  Isa.  2:19,  21;  Heb. 
I2:26f.).  Were  gathered  together  {esan  sunegmenoi).  Peri- 
phrastic past  perfect  passive  of  sunago.  They  spake  (elaloun). 
Imperfect  active  indicative,  began  to  speak,  after  being 
filled  {eplesthesan,  aorist  passive  indicative)  with  the  Holy 
Spirit.  Luke  uses  the  very  words  of  the  prayer  in  verse  29 
to  describe  their  conduct. 

32.  Of  one  heart  and  soul  {kardia  kai  psuche  mia).  It  is 
not  possible  to  make  sharp  distinction  between  heart  and 
soul  here  (see  Mark  12:30),  only  that  there  was  harmony 
in  thought  and  affection.  But  the  English  translation  is 
curiously  unlike  the  Greek  original.  "There  was  one  heart 
and  soul  (nominative  case,  not  genitive  as  the  English  has 
it)  in  the  multitude  {tou  plethous,  subjective  genitive)  of 
those  who  believed."  Not  one  of  them  (oude  heis).  More 
emphatic  than  oudeis,  "not  even  one."  Common  {koina). 
In  the  use  of  their  property,  not  in  the  possession  as  Luke 
proceeds  to  explain.  The  word  koinos  is  kin  to  sun  (together 
with)=A;wn  (Epic)  and  so  xunos  =  koinos.  See  this  word  al- 
ready in  2:44.  The  idea  of  unclean  (Acts  10:15)  ^^  a  later 
development  from  the  original  notion  of  common  to  all. 

33.  Gave  their  witness  {apedidoun  to  marturion).  Imper- 
fect active  of  apodidomi,  old  verb  to  give  back,  to  pay  back  a 
debt  (Luke  7:42),  but  a  late  omega  form  instead  of  the  usual 
apedidosan.  They  kept  on  giving  their  witness  with  power 
after  the  answer  to  their  prayer  (verse  31).  Of  the  resurrec- 
tion {tes  anastaseos).  It  was  on  this  issue  that  the  Sadducees 
had  arrested  them   (4:1-3). 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  $7 

34.  That  lacked  {endees).  Literally,  in  need,  old  adjective, 
here  only  in  the  N.T.  Were  (huperchon).  Imperfect  active 
of  huparcho,  to  exist.  Sold  them  and  brought  {polountes 
epheron).  Present  active  participle  and  imperfect  active 
indicative.  Selling  they  brought  from  time  to  time,  as  there 
was  occasion  by  reason  of  need.  Hence  the  wants  were  kept 
supplied.  Laid  them  (etithoun).  Imperfect  active  again, 
repetition,  of  tithemi,  late  omega  form  for  the  usual  etithesan. 

35.  Distribution  was  made  (diedideto).  Imperfect  passive 
of  diadidomi,  late  omega  form  for  diedidoto  (the  stem  vowel 
0  displaced  by  e).  Impersonal  use  of  the  verb  here.  Accord- 
ing as  any  one  had  need  {kathoti  an  tis  chreian  eichen).  Im- 
perfect active  of  echo  with  kathoti  and  an  with  the  notion  of 
customary  repetition  in  a  comparative  clause  (Robertson, 
Grammar,  p.  967). 

36.  Barnabas  {Barnabas).  His  name  was  Joseph  (correct 
text,  and  not  Jesus)  and  he  is  mentioned  as  one  illustration 
of  those  in  verse  34  who  selling  brought  the  money.  The 
apostles  gave  him  the  nickname  Barnabas  by  which  later  he 
was  known  because  of  this  noble  deed.  This  fact  argues  that 
all  did  not  actually  sell,  but  were  ready  to  do  so  if  needed. 
Possibly  Joseph  had  a  larger  estate  than  some  others  also. 
The  meaning  of  the  nickname  is  given  by  Luke  as  "son  of 
consolation  or  exhortation"  (huios  parakleseos).  Doubtless 
his  gifts  as  a  preacher  lay  along  this  same  line.  Rackham 
thinks  that  the  apostles  gave  him  this  name  when  he  was 
recognized  as  a  prophet.  In  Acts  1 1 123  the  very  word  pare- 
kalei  (exhorted)  is  used  of  Barnabas  up  at  Antioch.  He  is  the 
type  of  preacher  described  by  Paul  in  I  Cor.  14:3.  Encour- 
agement is  the  chief  idea  in  paraklesis  though  exhortation, 
comfort,  consolation  are  used  to  render  it  (Acts  9:31;  13:15; 
15:31).  See  also  16:9;  20:12.  It  is  not  necessary  to  think 
that  the  apostles  coined  the  name  Barnabas  for  Joseph 
which  originally  may  have  come  from  Barnebous  (Deiss- 
mann,  Bible  Studies,  pp.  308-10),  son  of  Nebo,  or  even  the 


S8        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Hebrew  Bar  Nebi  (son  of  a  prophet).  But,  whatever  the 
origin,  the  popular  use  is  given  by  Luke.  He  was  even  called 
apostle  along  with  Paul  (Acts  14:14)  in  the  broad  sense  of 
that  word. 

37.  Having  a  field  {huparchontos  autoi  agrou).  Genitive 
absolute  with  present  active  participle  of  huparchb  and 
dative  of  possession.  Sold  it  and  brought  {polesas  erugken). 
Aorist  active  pirticiple  of  poled  and  second  aorist  active 
indicative  of  pherb  because  a  single  definite  instance.  So  also 
with  etheken  (laid),  first  aorist  active. 


CHAPTER  V 

1.  Sold  {epblesen).  Aorist  active  indicative  again,  for  a 
single  case. 

2.  Kept  back  {enosphisato).  First  aorist  middle  indica- 
tive of  nosphizo,  old  verb  from  nosphi,  afar,  apart,  and  so  to 
set  apart,  to  separate  for  oneself,  but  only  here,  verse  3 
and  Tit.  2:10  in  the  N.T.  His  wife  also  being  privy  to  it 
{suneiduies  kai  tes  gunaikos).  Genitive  absolute  with  second 
perfect  participle  of  sunoida,  to  know  together  with  one, 
"his  wife  also  knowing  it  together  with  him."  Brought  a 
certain  part  {enegkas  meros  ti).  Aorist  active  participle  of 
phero,  for  a  definite  act.  The  praise  of  Joseph  was  too  much 
for  Ananias,  but  he  was  not  willing  to  turn  over  all.  He 
wanted  praise  for  giving  all  and  yet  he  took  care  of  himself 
by  keeping  some.  Thus  he  started  the  Ananias  Club  that 
gave  a  new  meaning  to  his  lovely  name  (God  is  gracious). 

3.  Filled  (eplerosen).  The  very  verb  used  of  the  filling 
by  the  Holy  Spirit  (4:31).  Satan  the  adversary  is  the  father 
of  lies  (John  8:44).  He  had  entered  into  Judas  (Luke  22:3; 
John  13 :27)  and  now  he  has  filled  the  heart  of  Ananias  with  a 
lie.  To  lie  to  the  Holy  Spirit  (pseusasthai  se  to  pneuma  to 
hagion).  Infinitive  (aorist  middle)  of  purpose  with  accusa- 
tive of  general  reference  {se)  and  the  accusative  of  the  person 
(object)  as  often  in  Greek  writers,  though  here  only  in  the 
N.T.  with  this  verb.  Usual  dative  of  the  person  in  verse  4 
{anthropois^  men,  toi  theoi,  God).  The  Holy  Spirit  had  been 
given  them  to  guide  them  into  truth  (John  15:13). 

4.  Whiles  it  remained  (menon).  Present  active  participle 
of  mendf  unsold,  Peter  means,  ^fter  it  was  sold  (prathen). 
First  aorist  passive  of  piprasko,  to  sell.  How  is  that  thou 
hast  conceived  (Ti  hoti  ethou).   Quid  est  quod.   See  Luke  2:49. 

59 


6o        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

See  also  Acts  5:9.  Second  aorist  middle  indicative  second 
person  singular  of  tithemi.  The  devil  filled  his  heart  (verse 
3),  but  all  the  same  Ananias  did  it  too  and  is  wholly  respon- 
sible. 

5.  Hearing  (akouon).  Present  active  participle  of  akouoy 
while  hearing.  Fell  down  {pes on).  Second  aorist  active  parti- 
ciple of  pipto,  fell  all  of  a  sudden  while  listening.  Gave  up 
the  ghost  {exepsuxen).  First  aorist  active  indicative  of  ek- 
psucho,  late  verb  in  LXX  and  Hippocrates,  to  breathe  out, 
to  expire.  In  the  N.T.  only  here,  verse  10,  and  12:23.  It  is 
needless  to  blame  Peter  for  the  death  of  Ananias.  He  had 
brought  the  end  upon  himself.  It  was  the  judgment  of  God. 
Physically  the  nervous  shock  could  have  caused  the  collapse. 

6.  The  young  men  (hoi  neoteroi).  Literally  the  younger 
men  (contrast  with  hoi  presbuteroi,  the  elder  men).  Same  as 
neaniskoi  in  verse  10  and  so  no  order  in  the  young  church. 
Perhaps  these  young  men  were  acting  as  ushers  or  actual 
pallbearers.  Wrapped  him  round  {sunesteilan).  First  aorist 
active  indicative  of  sustello,  old  verb,  to  draw  together,  or 
contract  (I  Cor.  7:29),  to  roll  together,  to  wrap  with  band- 
ages, to  enshroud  as  here.  Nowhere  else  in  the  N.T.  Fre- 
quent in  medical  writers.  They  may  have  used  their  own 
mantles.  The  time  for  burial  was  short  in  Jerusalem  for 
sanitary  reasons  and  to  avoid  ceremonial  defilement. 

7.  And  it  was  about  the  space  of  three  hours  after  {egeneto 
de  hos  horon  trion  diastema).  Literally  "Now  there  came  an 
interval  {diastema^  distance,  space  between)  of  about  {hos) 
three  hours."  When  {kai).  This  use  of  kai  after  egeneto  is 
characteristic  of  Luke's  style  in  the  Gospel.  Not  knowing 
{me  eiduia).  Feminine  singular  of  second  perfect  active  par- 
ticiple of  oida.  Me  usual  negative  of  the  participle  in  the 
Koine. 

8.  For  so  much  (tosoutou).  Genitive  of  price.  Perhaps 
Peter  pointed  to  the  pile  of  money  at  the  feet  of  the  apostles 
(verse  2).    The  use  of  ei  in  direct  questions  appears  in  Luke 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  6l 

(13:23;  22:49)  ^s  in  the  LXX  like  the  Hebrew  im  and  in 
Acts  1:6;  19:2,  etc. 

9.  Ye  have  agreed  together  {sunephbnethe  humin).  First 
aorist  passive  indicative  of  sumphoneo  (to  voice  together, 
symphony),  impersonal  with  dative;  It  was  agreed  together 
by  you  (or  for  you).  "Your  souls  were  allured  together 
respecting  this  deceit"  (Vincent).  To  tempt  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  {peirasai  to  pneuma  kuriou).  Like  "Thou  shalt  not 
tempt  the  Lord  thy  God."  It  was  close  to  the  unpardonable 
sin  which  was  attributing  the  manifest  work  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  Beelzebub.  The  feet  {hoi  podes).  Graphic  picture 
by  Peter  as  he  heard  the  steps  of  the  young  men  at  the  door. 

10.  Immediately  {parachrema).  Hence  her  death  was  re- 
garded as  supernatural  like  that  of  Ananias.  By  her  husband 
{pros  ton  andra  antes).   Face  to  face  to  her  husband. 

11.  Upon  the  whole  church  {eph^  hoi  en  ten  ekklesian).  Here 
ekklesia  for  the  first  time  in  Acts  of  the  believers  in  Jeru- 
salem. Twice  already  in  the  Gospels,  once  of  the  whole  body 
of  believers  or  the  Kingdom  (Matt.  16:18),  the  other  of  the 
local  body  (Matt.  18:17).  In  Acts  7:38  it  is  used  of  the  whole 
congregation  of  Israel  while  in  19:32  it  is  used  of  a  public 
assembly  in  Ephesus.  But  already  in  Acts  8:3  it  is  applied  to 
the  church  which  Saul  was  persecuting  in  their  homes  when 
not  assembled.  So  here  the  etymological  meaning  of  "as- 
sembly" disappears  for  "the  church"  were  now  the  scat- 
tered saints  hiding  in  their  separate  homes.  The  whole  body 
of  believers  in  Jerusalem  and  all  who  heard  of  the  fate  of 
Ananias  and  Sapphira  (beautiful,  her  name  means)  were  in 
awe  and  dread.  It  was  already  a  dangerous  thing  to  be  a 
follower  of  Christ  unless  one  was  willing  to  walk  straight. 

12.  Were  wrought  {egineto).  Imperfect  middle,  wrought 
from  time  to  time.  With  one  accord  {homothumadon) .  As  al- 
ready in  1:14;  2:46; 4:24  and  later  7:57;  8:6;  12:20;  15:25;  18: 
21 ;  19 :29,  old  adverb  and  only  in  Acts  in  the  N.  T.  Here  "  all " 
is  added.  In  Solomon's  Porch  again  as  in  3  :ii  which  see. 


62        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

13.  Durst  {etolma).  Imperfect  active  of  tolmaOj  old  verb, 
not  to  fear  or  shun  through  fear,  boldly  to  take  a  stand. 
The  fate  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira  continued  to  hold  many  in 
check.  Join  {kollasthai) .  Present  middle  infinitive  of  kollao, 
old  verb  to  cleave  to  like  glue  as  in  Luke  15:15  which  see. 
Seven  times  in  Acts  (9:26;  10:28;  17:34).  The  outsiders 
(the  rest)  preferred,  many  of  them,  to  remain  outside  for 
the  present,  especially  the  rulers.  Howheit  the  people  {aW — ho 
laos).  Probably  individuals  among  the  people,  the  populace 
as  distinct  from  the  rulers  and  hostile  outsiders. 

14.  Were  the  more  added  {mallon  prosetithento) .  Rather 
(mdllon)  instead  of  decrease  as  one  might  expect.  Imperfect 
passive  indicative  of  prostithemi  common  mi  verb,  kept  on 
being  added.  Both  of  men  and  women  {andron  te  kai  gunai- 
kon).  The  distinction  between  andres  and  gunaikes  and  to 
be  considered  in  connection  with  andres  in  4:4  which  see. 

15.  Insomuch  that  (hoste).  With  the  present  infinitive 
ekpherein  and  tithenai,  regular  Greek  idiom  for  result.  Into 
the  streets  {eis  tas  plateias).  Supply  hodous  (ways),  into  the 
broad  ways.  On  beds  and  couches  {epi  klinarion  kai  kra- 
hatton).  Little  beds  (klinaria  diminutive  of  kline)  and  camp 
beds  or  pallets  (see  on  Mark  2:4,  9,  11).  As  Peter  came  by 
{erchomenou  Petrou).  Genitive  absolute  with  present  middle 
participle.  At  the  least  his  shadow  might  overshadow  (kan  he 
skia  episkiasei).  Future  active  indicative  with  hina  (com- 
mon with  hop  OS  in  ancient  Greek)  and  kan  (crasis  for  kai 
ean  =  even  if),  even  if  only  the  shadow.  The  word  for  shadow 
{skia,  like  our  "sky")  is  repeated  in  the  verb  and  preserved 
in  our  "overshadow."  There  was,  of  course,  no  virtue  or 
power  in  Peter's  shadow.  That  was  faith  with  superstition, 
of  course,  just  as  similar  cases  in  the  Gospels  occur  (Matt. 
9:20;  Mark  6:56;  John  9:5)  and  the  use  of  Paul's  handker- 
chief (Acts  19:12).  God  honours  even  superstitious  faith 
if  it  is  real  faith  in  him.  Few  people  are  wholly  devoid  of 
superstition. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  AFOSTLES  63 

16.  Came  together  (sunercheto) .  Imperfect  middle,  kept  on 
coming.  Round  about  (perix).  Old  adverb,  strengthened 
form  of  peri  J  only  here  in  the  N.T.  Vexed  (ochloumenous). 
Present  passive  participle  of  ochleOj  to  excite  a  mob  (ochlos) 
against  one,  to  trouble,  annoy.  Old  word,  only  here  in  the 
N.T.,  though  enochleo  in  Luke  6:18.  Were  healed  every  one 
(etherapeuonto  hapantes).  Imperfect  passive,  were  healed 
one  at  a  time,  repetition. 

17.  Which  is  the  sect  of  the  Sadducees  (he  ousa  hairesis  ton 
Saddoukaion) .  Literally,  "the  existing  sect  of  the  Sad- 
ducees" or  "the  sect  which  is  of  the  Sadducees,"  he  being  the 
article,  not  the  relative.  Hairesis  means  a  choosing,  from 
haireomaij  to  take  for  oneself,  to  choose,  then  an  opinion 
chosen  or  tenet  (possibly  II  Pet.  2:1),  then  parties  or  fac- 
tions (Gal.  5:20;  I  Cor.  11:19;  possibly  II  Peter  2:1).  It  is 
applied  here  to  the  Sadducees;  to  the  Pharisees  in  Acts  15 :5; 
26:5;  to  the  Christians  In  24:5-14  and  28:22.  Already  Luke 
has  stated  that  the  Sadducees  started  the  persecution  of 
Peter  and  John  (Acts  4: if.).  Now  it  is  extended  to  "the 
apostles"  as  a  whole  since  Christianity  has  spread  more 
rapidly  in  Jerusalem  than  before  it  began. 

18.  With  jealousy  (zelou).  Genitive  case.  Old  word  from 
zeOf  to  boil,  our  zeal.  In  itself  it  means  only  warmth,  ardour, 
zeal,  but  for  a  bad  cause  or  from  a  bad  motive,  jealousy, 
envy,  rivalry  results  (Acts  13:45).  Common  in  the  epistles. 
In  public  ward  {en  teresei  demosidi).  As  in  4:3  only  with 
demosidi  (public)  added,  in  the  public  prison,  perhaps  not 
the  "common"  prison,  but  any  prison  is  bad  enough.  In 
verse  19  it  is  called  "the  prison"  {tes  phulakes),  the  guard- 
house. 

20.  And  stand  {kai  stathentes).  First  aorist  passive  par- 
ticiple (intransitive,  ingressive  aorist),  take  a  stand.  Bold 
and  pictorial  command.  All  the  words  of  this  life  (panta  ta 
rhemata  tes  zoes  tautes).  Not  just  a  Hebraism  for  "all  these 
words  of  life."    Probably  "this  life"  which  the  Sadducees 


64        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

deny  and  of  which  the  angel  is  now  speaking,  this  eternal 
life.    (John  6:63,  68;  I  Cor.  15:19). 

21.  About  daybreak  {hupo  ton  orthron).  From  ornumi,  to 
stir  up,  to  arouse,  so  the  dawn  (Luke  24:1;  John  8:2).  Old 
word,  but  in  the  N.T.  only  these  three  passages.  "Under 
the  dawn"  or  "about  dawn."  Sub  lucem.  The  temple  doors 
would  be  open  for  early  worshippers  and  traffickers  (John 
2:14).  Taught  {edidaskon).  Imperfect  active,  began  to  teach. 
The  council  {to  sunedrion).  The  Sanhedrin.  The  senate  {ten 
gerousian).  From  geron,  an  old  man,  just  as  the  Latin  senatus 
is  from  senex,  old.  Like  the  gerontes  in  Homer  and  the  Elder 
Statesmen  in  Japan.  Apparently  the  senate  of  the  people 
were  also  part  of  the  Sanhedrin  and  the  use  of  "and"  {kai) 
is  explanatory  and  adds  this  item  in  particular.  Page  thinks 
that  this  group  of  elders  were  not  members  of  the  Sanhedrin 
at  all.  To  the  prison  house  {eis  to  desmoterion)^  another  word 
for  prison  {teresis  demosia  in  verse  18,  he  phulake  in  verse  19). 
See  also  verses  22,  23,  25.  This  from  desmosy  bond,  and  tereo, 
to  keep,  place  where  bound  men  are  kept. 

22.  The  oficers  {hoi  huperetai).  Under-rowers,  literally 
(Matt.  5:25).  The  servants  or  officers  who  executed  the 
orders  of  the  Sanhedrin.  Shut  {kekleismenon).  Perfect  pas- 
sive participle  of  kleio.  Shut  tight.  Standing  at  the  doors 
{hestotas  epi  ton  thurbn).  Graphic  picture  of  the  sentinels 
at  the  prison  doors. 

24.  They  were  much  perplexed  {dieporoun).  Imperfect 
active  of  diaporeo  old  verb  by  Luke  only  in  the  N.T.  See 
already  on  Acts  2:12.  They  continued  puzzled.  Whereunto 
this  would  grow  {ti  an  genoito  touto).  More  exactly,  As  to  what 
this  would  become.  Second  aorist  middle  optative  of  ginomai 
with  an,  the  conclusion  of  a  condition  of  the  fourth  class 
(undetermined  with  less  Hkelihood  of  determination),  the 
unexpressed  condition  being  "if  the  thing  should  be  allowed 
to  go  on."  The  indirect  question  simply  retains  the  optative 
with  an  (Robertson,  Grammar^  pp.    1021,    1044).     If  they 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  65 

had  only  known  how  this  grain  of  mustard  seed  would  grow 
into  the  greatest  tree  on  earth  and  how  dwarfed  the  tree  of 
Judaism  would  be  beside  it! 

26.  Brought  {egen).  Imperfect  active  of  ago^  was  bringing 
(leading),  slowly  no  doubt,  and  solemnly.  But  without 
violence  (ou  meta  bias).  Literally,  not  with  violence.  For 
they  feared  (ephobounto  gar).  Imperfect  middle,  still  feared, 
kept  on  fearing.  Lest  they  be  stoned  (me  lithasthosin).  Nega- 
tive purpose  with  me  (like  hina  me),  probably  with  "not 
with  violence,"  though  possible  with  "they  feared."  They 
handled  the  apostles  gently  for  fear  of  being  stoned  them- 
selves by  the  people.  First  aorist  passive  subjunctive  of 
lithazo  (from  lithos,  stone),  old  verb  to  pelt  with  stones  (Acts 
14:19;  John  10:31-33). 

27.  They  set  them  (estesan).  First  aorist  active  indicative 
(transitive)  of  histemi. 

28.  fFe  straitly  charged  {Paraggelidi  pareggeilamen).  Like 
the  Hebrew  idiom  (common  in  the  LXX),  though  found  in 
Greek,  with  charging  (instrumental  case)  we  charged  (cf. 
same  idiom  in  Luke  22:15).  Somewhat  like  the  cognate 
accusative.  The  command  referred  to  occurs  in  Acts  4:17 
and  18  and  the  refusal  of  Peter  and  John  in  4:20.  To  bring 
upon  us  {epagagein  epW  hemds).  Note  repetition  of  epi.  Sec- 
ond aorist  active  infinitive  of  epago,  old  verb,  but  in  the 
N.T.  only  here  and  II  Pet.  2:1,  5.  The  Sanhedrin  gladly  took 
the  blood  of  Christ  on  their  heads  and  their  children  to 
Pilate  (Matt.  27:25).  Paul  tried  to  save  the  Jews  (Acts  18:6; 
22:20).  "  This  man^^  (tou  anthropou  toutou).  Contemptuous 
slur  and  refusal  to  call  the  name  of  Jesus  as  in  the  Talmud 
later. 

29.  We  must  (dei).  Moral  necessity  left  them  no  choice. 
They  stood  precisely  where  Peter  and  John  were  when  be- 
fore the  Sanhedrin  before  (Acts  4:20).  Obey  (peitharchein). 
Old  verb  from  peithomai  and  arche,  to  obey  a  ruler.  Only  by 
Luke  and  Paul  in  the  N.T. 


66        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

30.  Ye  slew  {diecheirisasthe).  First  aorist  middle  indic- 
ative of  diacheirizomai,  old  verb  from  dia  and  cheir  (hand), 
to  take  in  hand,  manage,  to  lay  hands  on,  manhandle,  kill. 
In  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Acts  26:21.  Hanging  him  upon  a 
tree  {kremasanies  epi  xulou).  First  aorist  active  participle 
of  kremannumi  {kremannuo  seen  already  in  Matt.  18:6  and 
Luke  23:39).  Peter  refers  to  Deut.  21:23  ^s.  Paul  does  in 
Gal.  3:13,  the  curse  pronounced  on  every  one  who  "hangs 
upon  a  tree." 

31.  Exalt  (upsosen).  In  contrast  to  their  murder  of  Christ 
as  in  2:23f.  Peter  repeats  his  charges  with  increased  bold- 
ness. fVith  his  right  hand  {tei  dexidi  autou).  So  instrumental 
case,  or  at  his  right  hand  (locative  case),  or  even  "to  his 
right  hand"  (dative  case)  as  in  2:33.  Prince  and  Saviour 
{archegon  kai  sotera).  See  on  3:15.  Clearly  "Prince"  here. 
To  give  {tou  dounai).  Genitive  of  articular  infinitive  (second 
aorist  active  of  didbmi)  of  purpose. 

32.  We  are  witnesses  {hemeis  esmen  martures).  As  in  2:32. 
Things  (rhematon).  Literally,  sayings,  but  like  the  Hebrew 
dabhar  for  "word"  it  is  here  used  for  "things."  And  so  is  the 
Holy  Ghost  {kai  to  pneuma  to  hagion).  The  word  for  "is" 
(estin)  is  not  in  the  Greek,  but  this  is  plainly  the  meaning. 
Peter  claims  the  witness  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  the  raising  of 
Jesus  Christ,  God's  Son,  by  the  Father. 

33.  Were  cut  to  the  heart  (dieprionto).  Imperfect  passive 
of  diaprio  old  verb  {dia,  prio),  to  saw  in  two  {dia),  to  cut  in 
two  (to  the  heart).  Here  it  is  rage  that  cuts  into  their  hearts, 
not  conviction  of  sin  as  in  Acts  2:37.  Only  hero  and  Acts 
7:54  (after  Stephen's  speech)  in  the  N.T.  (cf.  Simeon's 
prophecy  in  Luke  2:35).  Were  minded  {eboulonto).  Imper- 
fect middle  of  boulomai.  They  were  plotting  and  planning 
to  kill  {anelein,  as  in  Acts  2:23  and  Luke'23:33  which  see) 
then  and  there.  The  point  in  4:7  was  whether  the  apostles 
deserved  stoning  for  curing  the  cripple  by  demoniacal  power, 
but  here  it  was  disobedience  to  the  command  of  the  San- 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  67 

hedrin  which  was  not  a  capital  offence.   "They  were  on  the 
point  of  committing  a  grave  judicial  blunder"  (Furneaux). 

34.  Gamaliel  (Gamaliel).  The  grandson  of  Hillel,  teacher 
of  Paul  (Acts  22:3),  later  president  of  the  Sanhedrin,  and 
the  first  of  the  seven  rabbis  termed  "Rabban."  It  is  held  by 
some  that  he  was  one  of  the  doctors  who  heard  the  Boy 
Jesus  in  the  temple  (Luke  2:47)  and  that  he  was  a  secret 
disciple  like  Joseph  of  Arimathea  and  Nicodemus,  but  there 
is  no  evidence  of  either  position.  Besides,  he  appears  here  as 
a  loyal  Pharisee  and  "a  doctor  of  the  law"  {nomodidaskalos). 
This  word  appears  already  in  Luke  5:17  of  the  Pharisaic 
doctors  bent  on  criticizing  Jesus,  which  see.  Paul  uses  it  of 
Judaizing  Christians  (I  Tim.  1 7).  Like  other  great  rabbis 
he  had  a  great  saying:  "Procure  thyself  a  teacher,  avoid 
being  in  doubt;  and  do  not  accustom  thyself  to  give  tithes 
by  guess."  He  was  a  man  of  judicial  temper  and  not  prone 
to  go  off  at  a  tangent,  though  his  brilliant  young  pupil  Saul 
went  to  the  limit  about  Stephen  without  any  restraint  on 
the  part  of  Gamaliel  so  far  as  the  record  goes.  Gamaliel 
champions  the  cause  of  the  apostles  as  a  Pharisee  to  score  a 
point  against  the  Sadducees.  He  acts  as  a  theological  oppor- 
tunist, not  as  a  disciple  of  Christ.  He  felt  that  a  temporizing 
policy  was  best.  There  are  difficulties  in  this  speech  of 
Gamaliel  and  it  is  not  clear  how  Luke  obtained  the  data  for 
the  address.  It  is,  of  course,  possible  that  Saul  was  present 
and  made  notes  of  it  for  Luke  afterwards.  Had  in  honour  of 
all  the  people  {timios  panti  toi  laoi).  Ethical  dative.  Timios 
from  time,  old  word  meaning  precious,  dear.  The  men  (tons 
anthropous).  Correct  text  as  in  verse  35,  not  "the  apostles" 
as  Textus  Receptus. 

35.  Take  heed  {prosechete  heautois).  Hold  your  ^mind 
{noun,  unexpressed)  for  or  on  yourselves  (dative  case),  the 
usual  idiom. 

36.  Theudas  (Theudas).  Luke  represents  Gamaliel  here 
about  A.D.  35  as  speaking  of  a  man  who  led  a  revolt  before 


68        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

that  of  Judas  the  Galilean  in  connection  with  the  enrolment 
under  Quirinius  (Cyrenius)  in  a.d.  6.  But  Josephus  {j4nt. 
XX.  5,  i)  tells  of  a  Theudas  who  led  a  similar  insurrection 
in  the  reign  of  Claudius  about  a.d.  44  or  45.  Josephus  (Ant. 
XVIII.  I,  6;  XX.  5,  2;  War  ii.  8,  I  and  17,  8)  also  describes 
Judas  the  Galilean  or  Gaulonite  and  places  him  about  a.d. 
6.  It  is  not  certain  that  Josephus  and  Luke  (Gamaliel) 
refer  to  the  same  Theudas  as  the  name  is  an  abbreviation  of 
Theodosus,  a  common  name.  "Josephus  gives  an  account 
of  four  men  named  Simon  who  followed  each  other  within 
forty  years,  and  of  three  named  Judas  within  ten  years, 
who  were  all  instigators  of  rebellion"  (Hackett).  If  the  same 
Theudas  is  meant,  then  either  Josephus  or  Luke  (Gamaliel) 
has  the  wrong  historical  order.  In  that  case  one  will  credit 
Luke  or  Josephus  according  to  his  estimate  of  the  two  as 
reliable  historians.  To  be  somebody  (einai  tina).  Indirect 
assertion  with  the  infinitive  and  the  accusative  of  general 
reference  iheauton)  and  tina,  predicate  accusative.  Tina 
could  be  "anybody"  or  "somebody"  according  to  context, 
clearly  "somebody"  of  importance  here.  Joined  themselves 
(proseklithe).  Correct  text  and  not  prosekollethe  (Textus 
Reccptus).  First  aorist  passive  indicative  of  prosklino^  old 
verb  to  lean  towards,  to  incline  towards.  Here  only  in  the 
N.T.  Was  slain  (aneirethe).  First  aorist  passive  of  anaireo 
(cf.  verse  33).  Obeyed  (epeithonto).  Imperfect  middle,  kept 
on  obeying.  Were  dispersed  (dieluthesan).  First  aorist  pas- 
sive indicative  (effective  aorist)  of  dialuo,  old  verb  to  dis- 
solve, to  go  to  pieces.    Here  only  in  the  N.T. 

37.  Of  the  enrolment  {tes  apographes).  Described  by 
Josephus  [Ant.  XV.  1,1).  The  same  word  used  by  Luke  of 
the  first  enrolment  started  by  Augustus  B.C.  8  to  6  (Luke  2:2). 
See  the  discussion  on  Luke  2:2.  This  is  the  second  enrolment 
in  the  fourteen  year  cycle  carried  on  for  centuries  as  shown 
by  numerous  dated  papyri.  Ramsay  {The  Bearing  of  Recent 
Discovery  on  the  Trustworthiness  of  the  N.T.)  has  produced 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  69 

proof  from  inscriptions  that  Quirinius  was  twice  in  Syria  as 
Luke  reports  (Robertson,  Luke  the  Historian  in  the  Light 
of  Research).  Drew  away  (apestese).  Causative  sense  of  the 
first  aorist  active  indicative  of  aphistemi^  made  people  {laon, 
no  need  of  "some  of  the")  to  revolt  (apostatize)  with 
him.  He  also  (kakeinos,  crasis  for  kai  ekeinos).  That  one, 
also.  JVere  scattered  abroad  (dieskorpisthesan).  First  aorist 
(effective)  passive  indicative  of  diaskorpizo,  old  verb  to 
disperse.  Used  of  sheep  (Mark  14:27),  of  property  (Luke 
15:13).  Aorist  here  after  imperfect  {epeithonto)  as  in  verse  36. 

38.  Refrain  from  (apostete  apo).  Second  aorist  (ingressive) 
active  imperative  of  aphistemi  of  verse  37.  Do  ye  stand  off 
from  these  men.  "Hands  off"  was  the  policy  of  Gamaliel. 
For  if — be  {hoti  ean — ei).  Hoti  gives  the  reason  for  the  advice. 
Gamaliel  presents  two  alternatives  in  terms  of  two  condi- 
tional clauses.  The  first  one  is  stated  as  a  condition  of  the 
third  class,  ean  with  the  present  subjunctive  ei,  undeter- 
mined with  prospect  of  determination.  Assuming  that  it  is 
from  men,  *'it  will  be  overthrown"  (katalutheseiai,  first 
future  passive  of  kataluo,  to  loosen  down  like  a  falling  house) 
as  was  true  of  the  following  of  Theudas  and  Judas  the 
Galilean. 

39.  But  if  it  is  of  God  {ei  de  ek  theou  estin).  The  second  alter- 
native is  a  condition  of  the  first  class,  determined  as  ful- 
filled, ei  with  the  present  indicative.  By  the  use  of  this  idiom 
Gamaliel  does  put  the  case  more  strongly  in  favor  of  the 
apostles  than  against  them.  This  condition  assumes  that  the 
thing  is  so  without  affirming  it  to  be  true.  On  the  basis  of 
this  alternative  Gamaliel  warns  the  Sanhedrin  that  they 
cannot  "overthrow"  (katalusai)  these  men  for  they  in  that 
case  must  "overthrow"  God,  lest  haply  ye  be  found  {me 
pote — hurethete,  negative  purpose  with  first  aorist  passive 
subjunctive)  even  to  be  fighting  against  God  {kai  theomachoiy 
late  adjective  from  iheos  and  machomai,  in  LXX  and  here 
only  in  the  N.T.). 


70        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

40.  To  him  they  agreed  {epeisthesan  autoi).  First  aorist 
passive  indicative  of  peitho,  to  persuade,  the  passive  to  be 
persuaded  by,  to  listen  to,  to  obey.  Gamaliel's  shrewd  ad- 
vice scored  as  against  the  Sadducaic  contention  (verse  17). 
Not  to  speak  {me  lalein).  The  Sanhedrin  repeated  the  prohi- 
bition of  4:18  which  the  apostles  had  steadily  refused  to 
obey.  The  Sanhedrin  stood  by  their  guns,  but  refused  to 
shoot.  It  was  a  "draw"  with  Gamaliel  as  tactical  victor 
over  the  Sadducees.  Clearly  now  the  disciples  were  set 
free  because  only  the  Sadducees  had  become  enraged  while 
the  Pharisees  held   aloof. 

41.  They  therefore  {hoi  men  oun).  No  answering  de.  They 
were  counted  worthy  to  suffer  dishonour  for  the  Name  {kat- 
exiothesan  huper  ton  onomatos  atimasthenai) .  First  aorist 
passive  indicative  of  kataxioo,  old  verb  to  count  worthy. 
Three  times  in  N.T.  (Luke  20:35;  Acts  5:41;  II  Thess.  1:5). 
First  aorist  passive  infinitive  of  atimazo,  old  verb  to  make  one 
dishonoured  {atimos).  Forms  here  an  oxymoron  {oxus^  sharp, 
moros,  foolish)  pointedly  foolish  saying  "which  is  witty  or 
impressive  through  sheer  contradiction  or  paradox  as  labo- 
rious idleness,  sublime  indifference"  (Vincent).  The  apostles 
felt  honoured  by  dishonour.  Note  the  same  use  of  "the 
Name"  as  in  James  2:7;  III  John  7.  With  the  Jews  this  ab- 
solute use  of  "the  Name"  meant  Jehovah.  The  Christians 
now  apply  it  to  Jesus. 

42.  Every  day  {pdsan  hemeran).  Accusative  of  extent  of 
time,  all  through  every  day.  In  the  temple  and  at  home  {en 
tbi  hieroi  kai  kai*  oikon).  This  was  a  distinct  triumph  to  go 
back  to  the  temple  where  they  had  been  arrested  (verse  25) 
and  at  home  or  from  house  to  house,  as  it  probably  means 
(cf.  2:46).  It  was  a  great  day  for  the  disciples  in  Jerusalem. 
They  ceased  not  {ouk  epauonto).  Imperfect  middle.  They  kept 
it  up.  Jesus  as  the  Christ  {ton  Christon  lesoun).  Jesus  is  the 
direct  object  of  the  participles  didaskontes  (teaching)  and 
euaggelizomenoi    (preaching    or    evangelizing)    while    "the 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  7 1 

Christ"  {ton  Christon)  is  the  predicate  accusative.  These 
words  give  the  substance  of  the  early  apostolic  preaching  as 
these  opening  chapters  of  Acts  show,  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth 
is  the  Messiah  of  promise.  Gamaliel  had  opened  the  prison 
doors  for  them  and  they  took  full  advantage  of  the  opportu- 
nity that  now  was  theirs. 


CHAPTER  VI 

I.  fVhen  the  number  of  the  disciples  was  multiplying  {pie- 
thunontbn  ton  mathetbn).  Genitive  absolute  of  plethuno,  old 
verb  from  plethos,  fulness,  to  increase.  The  new  freedom  from 
the  intercession  of  Gamaliel  was  bearing  rich  fruit.  J  mur- 
muring of  the  Grecian  Jews  {goggusmos  ton  Helleniston).  Late 
onomatopoetic  word  (LXX)  from  the  late  verb  gogguzd,  to 
mutter,  to  murmur.  The  substantive  occurs  also  in  John 
7:12;  Phil.  2:14;  I  Peter  4:9.   Itjs  the  secret  grumblings^that 

buzz,  awav  till  they  are  heard. These  "Grecian  Jews"  or 

Hellenists  are  members  of  the  church  in  Jerusalem  who  are 
Jews  from  outside  of  Palestine  like  Barnabas  from  Cyprus. 
These  Hellenists  had  points  of  contact  with  the  Gentile 
world  without  having  gone  over  to  the  habits  of  the  Gentiles, 
the  Jews  of  the  Western  Dispersion.  They  spoke  Greek. 
Against  the  Hebrews  {pros  tous  Ebraious).  The  Jewish 
Christians  from  Jerusalem  and  Palestine.  The  Aramaean 
Jews  of  the  Eastern  Dispersion  are  usually  classed  with  the 
Hebrew  (speaking  Aramaic)  as  distinct  from  the  Grecian 
Jews  or  Hellenists.  Were  neglected  {paretheorounto) .  Imper- 
fect passive  of  paratheoreo,  old  verb,  to  examine  things 
placed  beside  (para)  each  other,  to  look  beyond  {para  also), 
To  overlook,  to  neglect.  Here  only  in  the  N.T.  These  widows 
may  receive  daily  {kathemerinei,  late  adjective  from  kath* 
hemeran,  only  here  in  the  N.T.)  help  from  the  common  fund 
provided  for  all  who  need  it  (Acts  4:32-37).  The  temple 
funds  for  widows  were  probably  not  available  for  those  who 
have  now  become  Christians.  Though  they  were  all  Chris- 
tians here  concerned,  yet  the  same  line  of  cleavage  existed 
as  among  the  other  Jews  (Hebrew  or  Aramaean  Jews  and 
Hellenists).     It  is  not  here  said  that  the  murmuring  arose 

72 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  73 

among  the  widows,  but  because  of  them.  Women  and  money 
occasion  the  first  serious  disturbance  in  the  church  life.  There 
was  evident  sensitiveness  that  called  for  wisdom. 

2.  The  multitude  {to  plethos).  The  whole_church,  not  just 
the  120.  Fil  (areston).  Pleasing,  verbal  adjective  from 
areskoj  to  please,  old  word,  but  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and 
Acts  12:3;  John  8:29;  I  John  3:22.  Non  placet.  Should  for- 
sake (kataleipsantas).  Late  first  aorist  active  participle  for 
usual  second  aorist  katalipontas  from  kataleipo,  to  leave 
behind.  Serve  tables  (diakonein  trapezais).  Present  active 
infinitive  of  diakoneo  from  diakonos  {dia  and  konis,  dust), 
to  raise  a  dust  in  a  hurry,  to  serve,  to  minister  either  at 
table  (John  12:20),  or  other  service  (John  I2:25f.),  to  serve  as 
deacon  (I  Tim.  3:10,  13).  "Tables"  here  hardly  means 
money-tables  as  in  John  2:15,  but  rather  the  tables  used  in 
the  common  daily  distribution  of  the  food  (possibly  including 
the  love-feasts.  Acts  2:43-47).  This  word  is  the  same  root 
as  diakonia  (ministration)  in  verse  i  and  deacon  {diakonos) 
in  Phil.  I  :i  and  I  Tim.  3 :8-i3.  It  is  more  frequently  used  in 
the  N.T.  of  ministers  (preachers)  than  of  deacons,  but  it  is 
quite  possible,  even  probable,  that  the  office  of  deacon  as 
separate  from  bishop  or  elder  grew  out  of  this  incident  in 
Acts  6:1-7.  Furneaux  is  clear  that  these  "seven"  are  not 
to  be  identified  with  the  later  "deacons"  but  why  he  does 
not  make  clear. 

3.  Of  good  report  {marturoumenous).  Present  passive  parti- 
ciple of  martureo,  to  bear  witness  to.  Men  with  a  good  reputa- 
tion as  well  as  with  spiritual  gifts  (the  Holy  Spirit  and 
wisdom).  fVe  may  appoint  {kataste somen).  Future  active 
indicative  of  kathistemi,  we  shall  appoint.  The  action  of  the 
apostles  follows  the  choice  by  the  church,  but  it  is  promised 
as  a  certainty,  not  as  a  possibility.  The  Textus  Receptus  has 
a  first  aorist  active  subjunctive  here  {katastesomen). 

4.  But  we  {hemeis  de).  In  contrast  to  the  work  given  the 
seven.   The  ministry  of  the  word  {tei  diakonidi  tou  logou).  The 


74        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

same  word  diakonidi  employed  in  verse  i,  but  here  about 
preaching  as  the  special  ministry  with  which  the  apostles 
were  concerned.  For  "continue  steadfastly"  (proskar- 
Uresomen)  see  on  2:42. 

5.  Pleased  (eresen).  Aorist  active  indicative  of  aresko 
like  Latin  placuit  when  a  vote  was  taken.  The  use  of  endpion 
before  "the  whole  multitude"  is  like  the  LXX.  They  chose 
(exelexanto).  First  aorist  middle  indicative  of  eklegOj  to  pick 
out  for  oneself.  Each  one  of  the  seven  has  a  Greek  name  and 
was  undoubtedly  a  Hellenist,  not  an  Aramaean  Jew.  Con- 
summate wisdom  is  here  displayed  for  the  murmuring  had 
come  from  the  Hellenists,  seven  of  whom  were  chosen  to 
take  proper  care  of  the  widows  of  Hellenists.  This  trouble 
was  settled  to  stay  settled  so  far  as  we  know.  Nothing  is 
here  told  of  any  of  the  seven  except  Stephen  who  is  "a  man 
full  of  faith  and  the  Holy  Spirit"  and  Nicolas  "a  proselyte 
of  Antioch  "  (who  was  not  then  born  a  Jew,  but  had  come  to 
the  Jews  from  the  Greek  world). 

6.  They  laid  their  hands  on  them  (epethekan  autois  tas 
cheiras).  First  aorist  active  indicative  of  epitithemi.  Prob- 
ably by  the  apostles  who  ratified  the  choice  (verse  3).  The 
laying  on  of  hands  "was  a  symbol  of  the  impartation  of  the 
gifts  and  graces  which  they  needed  to  qualify  them  for  the 
office.  It  was  of  the  nature  of  a  prayer  that  God  would  be- 
stow the  necessary  gifts,  rather  than  a  pledge  that  they  were 
actually  conferred"   (Hackett). 

7.  Increased  (euxanen).  Imperfect  active,  kept  on  growing 
all  the  more  because  the  apostles  were  now  relieved  from 
the  daily  ministration  of  the  food.  Multiplied  (eplethuneto). 
Imperfect  passive.  The  two  imperfects  kept  pace  with  each 
other.  Of  the  priests  {ton  hierbn).  Who  were  usually  Sad- 
ducees.  It  was  a  sad  day  for  Annas  and  Caiaphas  and  all 
the  sect  of  the  Sadducees  (5:17).  Were  obedient  to  (hupe- 
kouon).  Imperfect  active  of  hupakoud,  repetition,  one  after 
another.     The  faith  (tei  pistei).     Here  meaning  the  gospel, 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  75 

the  faith  system  as  in  Rom.  1:5;  Gal.  1:23;  Jude  3,  etc. 
Here  the  word  means  more  than  individual  trust  in  Christ. 

8.  Wrought  (epoiei).  Imperfect  active,  repeatedly  wrought. 
Evidently  a  man  like  Stephen  would  not  confine  his  "minis- 
try" to  "serving  tables."  He  was  called  in  verse  5  "full  of 
faith  and  the  Holy  Spirit."  Here  he  is  termed  "full  of 
grace  (so  the  best  MSS.,  not  faith)  and  power."  The  four 
words  give  a  picture  of  remarkable  attractiveness.  The  grace 
of  God  gave  him  the  power  and  so  "he  kept  on  doing  great 
wonders  and  signs  among  the  people."  He  was  a  sudden 
whirlwind  of  power  in  the  very  realm  of  Peter  and  John  and 
the  rest. 

9.  The  synagogue  of  the  Libertines  {ek  tes  sunagoges  tes 
legomenes  Liberiinon).  The  Libertines  (Latin  liberiinus,  a 
freedman  or  the  son  of  a  freedman)  were  Jews,  once  slaves 
of  Rome  (perhaps  descendants  of  the  Jews  taken  to  Rome 
as  captives  by  Pompey),  now  set  free  and  settled  in  Jeru- 
salem and  numerous  enough  to  have  a  synagogue  of  their 
own.  Schuerer  calls  a  Talmudic  myth  the  statement  that 
there  were  480  synagogues  in  Jerusalem.  There  were  many, 
no  doubt,  but  how  many  no  one  knows.  These  places  of 
worship  and  study  were  in  all  the  cities  of  the  later  times 
where  there  were  Jews  enough  to  maintain  one.  Apparently 
Luke  here  speaks  of  five  such  synagogues  in  Jerusalem 
(that  of  the  Libertines,  of  the  Cyrenians,  of  the  Alexan- 
drians, of  Cilicia,  and  of  Asia).  There  probably  were  enough 
Hellenists  in  Jerusalem  to  have  five  such  synagogues.  But 
the  language  of  Luke  is  not  clear  on  this  point.  He  may 
make  only  two  groups  instead  of  five  since  he  uses  the  article 
ton  twice  (once  before  Libertinon  kai  Kiirenaion  kai  Alex- 
andreon,  again  before  apo  Kilikias  kai  Asias).  He  also 
changes  from  the  genitive  plural  to  apo  before  Cilicia  and 
Asia.  But,  leaving  the  number  of  the  synagogues  unsettled 
whether  five  or  two,  it  is  certain  that  in  each  one  where 
Stephen  appeared  as  a  Hellenist  preaching  Jesus  as  the 


76        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Messiah  he  met  opposition.  Certain  of  them  ** arose" 
(anestesan)  "stood  up"  after  they  had  stood  all  that  they 
could  from  Stephen,  "disputing  with  Stephen"  {sunze- 
tountes  toi  Stephanoi).  Present  active  participle  of  sunzetedy 
to  question  together  as  the  two  on  the  way  to  Emmaus  did 
(Luke  24:15).  Such  interruptions  were  common  with  Jews. 
They  give  a  skilled  speaker  great  opportunity  for  reply 
if  he  is  quick  in  repartee.  Evidently  Stephen  was  fully 
equipped  for  the  emergency.  One  of  their  synagogues  had 
men  from  Cilicia  in  it,  making  it  practically  certain  that 
young  Saul  of  Tarsus,  the  brilliant  student  of  Gamaliel, 
was  present  and  tried  his  wits  with  Stephen.  His  igno- 
minious defeat  may  be  one  explanation  of  his  zest  in  the 
stoning  of  Stephen  (Acts  8:1). 

10.  They  were  not  able  to  withstand  {ouk  ischuon  antis- 
tenai).  Imperfect  active  of  ischuo,  to  have  strength,  and  in- 
gressive  second  aorist  active  (intransitive)  infinitive  of  an- 
thistemi.  They  continued  unable  (without  strength  enough) 
to  take  a  stand  against.  Stephen  knocked  them  down,  Saul 
included,  as  fast  as  they  got  up.  Stephen  was  like  a  battery 
charged  and  in  action.  The  wisdom  and  spirit  {tei  sophidi 
kai  pneumati).  Dative  case.  They  stood  up  against  Ste- 
phen's wisdom  and  the  Holy  Spirit  "by  whom  he  spoke" 
{hoi  elalei).  Instrumental  case  and  the  relative  agrees 
with  "Spirit."  He  kept  on  speaking  so  {elalei^  imperfect 
active).     It  was  a  desperate  situation. 

11.  Then  they  suborned  men  {tote  hupebalon  andras). 
Second  aorist  active  indicative  of  hupoballo,  old  verb,  but 
here  only  in  the  N.T.,  to  put  under  like  a  carpet,  to  bring 
men  under  one's  control  by  suggestion  or  by  money.  One 
recalls  the  plight  of  Caiaphas  in  the  trial  of  Jesus  when  he 
sought  false  witnesses.  Subornaverunt.  They  put  these  men 
forward  in  an  underhand  way  for  fraud.  Blasphemous 
words  against  Moses  and  God  {blasphema  eis  Mousen  kai 
ton  theon).    The  punishment  for  blasphemy  was  stoning  to 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  77 

death.  See  Matt.  12:31  for  discussion  of  the  word  hlasphe- 
mia,  blasphemed,  blasphemos,  all  in  the  N.T.  from  blapto, 
to  harm,  and  pheme,  speech,  harmful  speech,  or  blax,  stupid, 
and  pheme.  But  the  charge  against  Stephen  was  untrue. 
Please  note  that  Moses  is  here  placed  before  God  and  prac- 
tically on  a  par  with  God  in  the  matter  of  blasphemy.  The 
purpose  of  this  charge  is  to  stir  the  prejudices  of  the  people 
in  the  matter  of  Jewish  rights  and  privileges.  It  is  the  Phar- 
isees who  are  conducting  this  attack  on  Stephen  while  the 
Sadducees  had  led  them  against  Peter  and  John.  The  posi- 
tion of  Stephen  is  critical  in  the  extreme  for  the  Sadducees 
will  not  help  him  as  Gamaliel  did  the  apostles. 

12.  They  stirred  up  the  people  {sunekinesan  ton  laon). 
They  shook  the  people  together  like  an  earthquake.  First 
aorist  active  indicative  of  sunkineo,  to  throw  into  commo- 
tion. Old  verb,  but  here  only  in  the  N.T.  The  elders  and 
the  scribes  (Pharisees)  are  reached,  but  no  word  about  the 
Sadducees.  This  is  the  first  record  of  the  hostility  of  the 
masses  against  the  disciples  (Vincent).  Came  upon  him 
(epistantes) ,  Second  aorist  (ingressive)  active  participle  of 
ephistemi.  Rushed  at  him.  Seized  {sunerpasan) .  Effective 
aorist  active  of  sunarpazo  as  if  they  caught  him  after  pur- 
suit. 

13.  False  witnesses  [marturas  pseudeis).  Just  as  Caiaphas 
did  with  Jesus.  Ceaseth  not  (ou  pauetai).  Wild  charge  just 
like  a  false  witness  that  Stephen  talks  in  the  synagogues 
against  the  law  and  the  holy  temple. 

14.  We  have  heard  him  say  {akekoamen  autou  legontos). 
The  only  direct  testimony  and  evidently  wrong.  Curiously 
like  the  charge  brought  against  Jesus  before  Caiaphas  that 
he  would  destroy  the  temple  and  build  it  again  in  three  days. 
Undoubtedly  Stephen  had  said  something  about  Christi- 
anity before  as  meant  for  others  besides  Jews.  He  had  caught 
the  spirit  of  Jesus  about  worship  as  shown  to  the  woman  at 
Sychar  in  John  4  that  God  is  spirit  and  to  be  worshipped 


78        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

by  men  anywhere  and  everywhere  without  having  to  come 
to  the  temple  in  Jerusalem.  It  was  inflammable  material 
surely  and  it  was  easy  to  misrepresent  and  hard  to  clear  up. 
This  Jesus  of  Nazareth  {I e sous  ho  Nazoraios  houtos).  With 
contempt. 

15.  Js  if  the  face  of  an  angel  {hosei  prosopon  aggelou). 
Even  his  enemies  saw  that,  wicked  as  they  were.  See  Ex. 
34:30  for  the  face  of  Moses  when  he  came  down  from  Sinai 
(II  Cor.  3:7).  Page  quotes  Tennyson:  "God's  glory  smote 
him  on  the  face."  Where  were  Peter  and  John  at  this  crisis.^ 
Apparently  Stephen  stands  alone  before  the  Sanhedrin  as 
Jesus  did.  But  he  was  not  alone  for  he  saw  Jesus  standing 
at  the  right  hand  of  God  (Acts  7:56).  There  was  little  that 
Peter  and  John  could  have  done  if  they  had  been  present. 
Gamaliel  did  not  interpose  this  time  for  the  Pharisees  were 
behind  the  charges  against  Stephen,  false  though  they  were 
as  Gamaliel  could  have  found  out. 


CHAPTER  VII 

I.  Are  these  things  so?  {ei  tauta  houtos  echei).  On  this  use 
of  ei  in  a  direct  question  see  on  i:6.  Literally  "Do  these 
things  hold  thus?"  A  formal  question  by  the  high  priest  like 
our  "Do  you  plead  guilty,  or  not  guilty?"  (Furneaux). 
The  abrupt  question  of  the  high  priest  would  serve  to  break 
the  evident  spell  of  the  angelic  look  on  Stephen's  face.  Two 
charges  had  been  made  against  Stephen  (i)  speaking  against 
the  holy  temple,  (2)  changing  the  customs  which  Moses  had 
delivered.  Stephen  could  not  give  a  yes  or  no  answer  to  these 
two  charges.  There  was  an  element  of  truth  in  each  of  them 
and  a  large  amount  of  error  all  mixed  together.  So  he  under- 
takes to  explain  his  real  position  by  the  historical  method, 
that  is  to  say,  by  a  rapid  survey  of  God's  dealing  with  the 
people  of  Israel  and  the  Gentiles.  It  is  the  same  method 
adopted  by  Paul  in  Pisidian  Antioch  (Acts  i3:i6fF.)  after  he 
had  become  the  successor  of  Stephen  in  his  interpretation 
of  the  universal  mission  of  Christianity.  If  one  is  disposed 
to  say  that  Luke  made  up  this  speech  to  suit  Stephen's 
predicament,  he  has  to  explain  how  the  style  is  less  Lukan 
than  the  narrative  portions  of  Acts  with  knowledge  of 
Jewish  traditions  that  a  Greek  would  not  be  likely  to  know. 
Precisely  how  Luke  obtained  the  data  for  the  speech  we 
do  not  know,  but  Saul  heard  it  and  Philip,  one  of  the  seven, 
almost  certainly.  Both  could  have  given  Luke  help  about  it. 
It  is  even  possible  that  some  one  took  notes  of  this  impor- 
tant address.  We  are  to  remember  also  that  the  speech  was 
interrupted  at  the  end  and  may  not  include  all  that  Stephen 
meant  to  say.  But  enough  is  given  to  give  us  a  good  idea  of 
how  Stephen  met  the  first  charge  "by  showing  that  the  wor- 
ship of  God  is  not  confined   to  Jerusalem  or  the  Jewish 

79 


8o        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

temple"  (Page).  Then  he  answers  the  second  charge  by 
proving  that  God  had  many  dealings  with  their  fathers 
before  Moses  came  and  that  Moses  foretold  the  coming  of 
the  Messiah  who  is  now  known  to  be  Jesus.  It  is  at  this 
point  (verse  51)  that  Stephen  becomes  passionate  and  so 
powerful  that  the  wolves  in  the  Sanhedrin  lose  all  self- 
control.  It  is  a  great  and  masterful  exposition  of  the  world- 
wide mission  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  in  full  harmony  with 
the  Great  Commission  of  Christ.  The  apostles  had  been  so 
busy  answering  the  Sadducees  concerning  the  Resurrection 
of  Christ  and  maintaining  their  freedom  to  teach  and  preach 
that  they  had  not  pushed  the  world-wide  propaganda  of  the 
gospel  as  Jesus  had  commanded  after  they  had  received  the 
Promise  of  the  Father.  But  Stephen  had  proclaimed  the 
same  message  of  Christ  and  was  now  facing  the  same  fate. 
Peter's  mind  had  been  enlightened  by  the  Holy  Spirit  so 
that  he  could  rightly  interpret  Joel  and  David  in  the  light 
of  Pentecost.  "So  Stephen  read  the  history  of  the  Old 
Testament  with  new  eyes  in  the  light  of  the  life  and  death  of 
Jesus"  (Furneaux). 

2.  Brethren  and  fathers  {andres  adelphoi  kai  pater es). 
The  spectators  (brethren)  and  members  of  the  Sanhedrin 
(fathers)  as  Paul  in  Acts  22:1.  Hearken  (akousate).  First 
aorist  (ingressive)  active  imperative,  Give  me  your  attention 
now.  The  God  of  glory  (Ho  theos  tes  doxes).  The  God  char- 
acterized by  glory  (genitive  case,  genus  or  kind)  as  seen  in 
the  Shekinah,  the  visible  radiance  of  God.  Jesus  is  also 
called  "the  Glory "  =  the  Shekinah  in  James  2:1.  Cf.  Ex. 
25:22;  40:34;  Lev.  9:6;  Heb.  9:5.  By  these  words  Stephen 
refutes  the  charge  of  blasphemy  against  God  in  Acts  6:1 1. 
Appeared  (ophthe).  First  aorist  passive  indicative  of  horao. 
See  on  Luke  23:43.  Before  there  was  temple  or  tabernacle 
and  away  over  in  Mesopotamia  (Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  Gen. 
11:31),  even  before  (prin  e  with  the  infinitive)  he  dwelt  in 
Haran    (Charran,  or   Carrae   not  far  from   Edessa,   where 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  8 1 

Crassus  met  death  after  his  defeat  by  the  Parthians  B.C.  53). 

3.  Which  I  shall  shew  thee  {hen  an  soi  deixo).  Indefinite 
relative  clause  with  an  and  the  aorist  active  subjunctive 
(same  form  in  first  person  singular  as  the  future  active  indic- 
ative).    Abraham  followed  on  as  God  led  him. 

4.  When  his  father  was  dead  (meta  to  apothanein  anion). 
Meta  with  the  accusative  of  the  articular  infinitive  and  the 
accusative  of  general  reference  {auton),  regular  Greek  idiom. 
In  Gen.  11:32  it  is  stated  that  Terah  died  at  Haran  at  the 
age  of  205.  There  are  various  explanations  of  the  discrep- 
ancy, but  no  one  that  seems  certain.  It  is  possible  (Hackett, 
Felten)  that  Abraham  h  mentioned  first  in  Gen.  11:26 
because  he  became  the  most  prominent  and  was  really 
younger  than  Haran  his  brother  who  died  before  the  first 
migration  who  was  really  sixty  years  older  than  Abraham. 
According  to  this  view  Terah  was  130  years  old  at  the  birth 
of  Abraham,  leaving  Abraham  75  at  the  death  of  Terah  (205). 
Wherein  ye  now  dwell  {eis  hen  humeis  nun  kaioikeite).  Note 
eis  in  the  sense  of  en  as  often.  Note  also  emphatic  use  of 
humeis  (ye)  and  now  {nun). 

5.  Not  so  much  as  to  set  his  foot  on  {oude  hema  podos). 
From  Deut.  2:5.  Old  word  from  baino,  to  go,  to  step.  "Step- 
ping of  a  foot,"  only  instance  of  this  original  meaning  in  the 
N.T.  From  this  it  comes  to  mean  a  platform  reached  by 
steps,  official  seat  of  a  judge  (Matt.  27:19).  The  field  pur- 
chased by  Abraham  (Gen.  23 :9-i7)  was  not  a  gift  from  God. 
Promised  {epeggeilaio).  First  aorist  middle  indicative  of 
epaggello,  common  verb.  See  Gen.  12:7;  17:8;  48:4  for  this 
promise.  So  God  appeared  again  to  Abraham  in  a  strange 
land.  In  possession  {eis  kataschesin).  Late  word,  in  LXX, 
and  in  N.T.  only  here  and  verse  45.  From  katecho,  to  hold 
back,  then  to  hold  fast  {or  down),  to  possess.  It  was  ful- 
filled in  the  descendants  of  Abraham.  When  as  yet  he  had  no 
child  {ouk  ontos  autoi  teknou).  Genitive  absolute  with  nega- 
tive ouk  rather  than  me  to  emphasize  actual  absence  of  a 


82        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

child.    He  had  only  the  promise  of  God  about  the  land  and 
the  child. 

6.  On  this  wise  {houtos).  A  free  quotation  from  Gen.  15: 
13.  Should  sojourn  {estai  paroikon).  Shall  be  a  sojourner, 
Paroikos  {para^  beside,  oikos^  home),  one  dwelling  near  one's 
home,  but  not  of  it,  so  a  stranger,  foreigner,  old  word,  often 
in  LXX,  temporary  residence  without  full  rights  of  citizen- 
ship (7:29;  13:17),  and  descriptive  of  Christians  (Eph.  2:19; 
I  Peter  i  :I7;  2:11).  In  a  strange  land  {en  gei  allotridi).  In  a 
land  not  one's  own,  that  belongs  to  another,  alien  as  in  Matt. 
17 :25f.,  which  see.  Four  hundred  years  {ete  tetrakosia).  Ac- 
cusative of  duration  of  time.  As  in  Gen.  15:13,  but  a  round 
number  as  in  Ex.  12:40  the  time  is  430  years.  But  in  Gal. 
3:17  Paul,  following  the  LXX  in  Ex.  12:40,  takes  the  430 
years  to  cover  the  period  in  Canaan  and  the  stay  in  Egypt, 
cutting  the  sojourn  in  Egypt  to  about  half.  Josephus  gives 
it  both  ways.  Hackett  suggests  two  solutions,  one  that 
there  were  two  ways  of  reckoning  the  period  among  the  Jews 
with  no  way  of  settling  it,  the  other  that  by  the  430  years  in 
Egypt  the  writers  meant  to  include  Canaan  also  as  merely 
the  preliminary  to  the  period  in  Egypt. 

7.  Will  I  judge  {krino  ego).  Future  (accent  on  0)  active 
indicative  of  krino  and  ego  (I)  expressed  is  emphatic.  In 
this  place  {en  tbi  topoi  toutoi).  Quoted  from  Ex.  3:12  and 
referring  to  Sinai  or  Horeb,  but  Stephen  applies  it  to  the 
Promised  Land. 

8.  The  covenant  of  circumcision  (diatheken  peritomes).  A 
covenant  marked  by  (genitive)  circumcision  (no  article)  of 
which  circumcision  is  the  sign  (Rom.  4:11)  as  set  forth  in 
Gen.  17:9-14.  In  the  ancient  Greek  diaiheke  was  usually  will 
(Latin,  testamentum)  and  suntheke  was  used  for  covenant 
(jttn,  together,  rather  than  dia,  between).  But  the  LXX  and 
the  N.T.  use  diatheke  for  covenant  (will  in  Heb.  9:i5f.)  as 
Lightfoot  on  Gal.  3:16  says:  "The  LXX  translation  and 
New   Testament   writers    probably   preferred   diatheke   as 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  83 

better  expressing  the  jree  grace  of  God  than  suntheke.'* 
And  so  {kai  houtos).  After  the  covenant  was  made  and  as  a 
sign  and  seal  of  it. 

9.  Moved  with  jealousy  (zelosanies).  First  aorist  active 
participle  of  zeloo,  old  verb  from  zelos  (Acts  5:17),  to  burn 
or  boil  with  zeal,  and  then  with  envy  as  here  (17:5,  etc.)  and 
Gen.   37:11. 

10.  Delivered  him  out  (exeilato  auton  ek).  First  aorist 
middle  indicative  of  exaireo,  old  verb  to  take  out,  snatch  out. 
Note  repetition  of  ek.  Pharaoh  King  of  Egypt  (Pharao 
basileos  Aiguptou).  Pharaoh  is  not  a  name,  but  a  title,  the 
Egyptian  perdd  meaning  great  house. 

11.  Found  no  sustenance  {ouch  heuriskon  chortasmata) .  Im- 
perfect active,  kept  on  not  finding.  Chortasmata  is  from 
chortazo,  originally  to  feed  with  grass  (chortos)  or  herbs.  Old 
word,  but  only  here  in  the  N.T.  and  includes  food  for  both 
men  and  animals.  In  Gen.  24:25,  32  it  is  fodder  for  the 
cattle,  a  first  necessity  for  owners  of  herds  of  cattle. 

12.  That  there  was  corn  {onta  sitia).  Participle  (present 
active  of  eimi)  in  indirect  discourse,  after  akousas,  "heard  of 
corn  being  in  Egypt."  Sitia  is  diminutive  of  sitos  and  means 
grain  (wheat,  barley,  not  our  maize  or  Indian  corn),  old 
word  also  for  provisions,  victuals,  here  only  in  the  N.T. 
The  first  time  (proton).  While  Jacob  himself  remained  in 
Canaan  before  he  went  down  to  Egypt  and  died  there 
(verse  I5f.). 

13.  At  the  second  time  {en  toi  deuteroi).  This  expression 
only  here  in  the  N.T.  This  second  visit  is  recorded  in  Gen. 
45 :ifF.  Became  manifest  {phaneron  egeneto).  In  Gen.  41  :I2  the 
fact  that  Joseph  was  a  Hebrew  had  been  incidentally  men- 
tioned to  Pharaoh,  but  now  it  was  made  clear  to  him. 

14.  Three-score  and  fifteen  souls  {en  psuchais  hehdomekonta 
pente).  Stephen  follows  the  LXX  which  counts  some  grand- 
children of  Joseph  and  so  makes  it  75  whereas  Gen.  46:26 
has  66  and  then  the  next  verse  makes  it  70  including  Jacob 


I 


84       WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

and  Joseph  with  his  two  sons.    The  use  of  en  means  "con- 
sisting in." 

1 6.  They  were  carried  over  unto  Shechem  (metetethesan  eis 
Suchem).  First  aorist  passive  of  metatithemi,  only  here  in  the 
N.T.  in  this  sense  of  changing  places.  Jacob  was  buried  in 
the  cave  of  Machpelah  (Gen.  50:13).  The  O.T.  does  not 
say  where  the  sons  of  Jacob  were  buried  save  that  Joseph 
was  buried  in  Shechem  Qosh.  24:32).  Possibly  only  "our 
fathers"  without  Jacob  is  the  subject  of  "were  carried." 
Which  Abraham  bought  {hoi  onesato  Abraam).  Hackett  is 
sure  that  our  present  text  is  wrong.  Hort  notes  some  sixty 
"primitive  errors"  in  the  critical  text  of  the  N.T.  It  is 
possible  that  this  is  also  one.  If  "Jacob"  is  substituted  for 
"Abraham,"  the  matter  is  cleared  up.  "It  is  quite  as  hkely, 
judging  a  priori,tha.t  the  word  producing  the  error  escaped 
from  some  early  copyist  as  that  so  glaring  an  error  was  com- 
mitted by  Stephen"  (Hackett).  At  any  rate  Abraham 
bought  a  burying-place,  the  cave  of  Machpelah,  from 
Ephron  the  Hittite  at  Hebron  (Gen.  23:16),  while  Jacob 
bought  a  field  from  the  sons  of  Hamor  at  Shechem  (Gen. 
33*19;  Josh.  24:32).  Abraham  had  built  an  altar  at  Shechem 
when  he  entered  Canaan  (Gen.  I2:6f.).  It  is  possible,  of 
course,  that  Abraham  also  bought  the  ground  on  which  the 
altar  stood.  In  Shechem  (en  Suchem).  This  is  the  reading 
of  Aleph  B  C  instead  of  the  Textus  Receptus  tou  Suchem 
which  makes  it  "Hamar  the  father  of  Sichem."  "In  She- 
chem" is  the  true  reading. 

17.  Drew  nigh  (eggizen).  Imperfect  active,  was  drawing 
nigh. 

18.  Another  king  {basileus  heteros).  A  different  kind  of 
king  also,  probably  a  king  of  the  new  dynasty  after  the 
shepherd  kings  had  been  expelled  from  Egypt.  Who  knew 
not  Joseph  (hos  ouk  eidei  ton  loseph).  Second  past  perfect  of 
oida  used  like  an  imperfect.  Joseph's  history  and  services 
meant  nothing  to  the  new  king.     "The  previous  dynasty 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  85 

had  been  that  of  the  Hyksos :  the  new  king  was  Ahmes  who 
drove  out  the  Hyksos"  (Knobel). 

19.  Dealt  subtilly  {katasophisamenos).  First  aorist  middle 
participle  of  katasophizomai,  late  compound  {kata  and 
sophizoy  old  verb,  to  make  wise,  to  become  wise,  then  to 
play  the  sophist),  perfective  use  of  kata.  In  the  LXX,  but 
here  only  in  the  N.T.  To  use  fraud,  craft,  deceit.  That  they 
should  cast  out  their  babes  (tou  poiein  ta  brephe  ektheta).  Tou 
poiein  (genitive  of  the  articular  present  infinitive) can  be 
either  design  or  result.  The  Revised  Version  here  takes  it  as 
purpose  while  the  Authorized  as  result.  In  either  case 
Pharaoh  required  the  Israelites  to  expose  their  children  to 
death,  a  possible  practice  done  voluntarily  in  heathen  China 
and  by  heathen  in  so-called  Christian  lands.  But  the  Is- 
raelites fought  against  such  an  iniquity.  The  word  ektheta 
(exposed,  cast  out)  is  a  verbal  adjective  from  ektithemi.  It  is 
an  old  word,  but  here  only  in  the  N.T.  and  not  in  the  LXX. 
To  the  end  they  might  not  live  {eis  to  me  zoogoneisthai).  Purpose 
with  eis  and  the  articular  infinitive  (present  middle).  This 
compound  verb  is  from  zoogonos  (from  zoos,  alive,  and  geno, 
to  bear)  and  is  used  by  late  writers  and  the  LXX.  It  is  three 
times  in  the  N.T.  (here,  Luke  17:33;  I  Tim.  6:13)  in  the 
sense  to  preserve  alive. 

20.  Exceeding  fair  {asteios  toi  theoi).  Ethical  dative,  fair 
to  God  (as  God  looked  at  him).  Asteios  is  from  astu,  city, 
and  so  means  "of  the  city,"  with  city  manners  and  polish. 
Old  word,  only  twice  in  the  N.T.  (here  and  Heb.  1 1 :23)  and 
both  times  about  Moses  and  taken  from  Ex.  2:2.  He  was 
nourished  (anetraphe).  Second  aorist  passive  indicative  of 
anatrepho.  He  was  brought  up  at  home  for  three  months  in 
defiance  of  the  new  Pharaoh. 

21.  When  he  was  cast  out  {ektethentos  autou).  Genitive 
absolute  with  first  aorist  passive  participle  of  ektithemi. 
Took  up  (aneilato).  Second  aorist  middle  indicative  (with 
first  aorist  vowel  a  instead  of  e  as  often  in  the  Koini)  of 


86        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

anaireOy  common  in  the  N.T.  in  the  sense  of  take  up  and 
make  away  with,  to  kill  as  in  verse  28,  but  here  only  in  the 
N.T.  in  the  original  sense  of  taking  up  from  the  ground  and 
with  the  middle  voice  (for  oneself).  Quoted  here  from  Ex. 
2:5.  The  word  was  used  of  old  for  picking  up  exposed  chil- 
dren as  here.  Vincent  quotes  Aristophanes  {Clouds^  530 • 
"I  exposed  (the  child),  and  some  other  women,  having  taken 
it,  adopted  {aneileto)  it."  Vulgate  has  sustulit.  "Adopted" 
is  the  idea  here.  "After  the  birth  of  a  child  the  father 
took  it  up  to  his  bosom,  if  he  meant  to  rear  it;  otherwise 
it  was  doomed  to  perish"  (Hackett).  Nourished  him  for  her 
own  son  {anethrepsato  anion  heautei  eis  huion).  Literally, 
"she  nursed  him  up  for  herself  {heautei  besides  middle 
voice)  as  a  son."  This  use  of  eis  =  as  occurs  in  the  old  Greek, 
but  is  very  common  in  the  LXX  as  a  translation  of  the 
Hebrew  le.  The  tradition  is  that  she  designed  Moses  for 
the   throne  as   the   Pharaoh   had  no  son   (Josephus,  Ant, 

22.  Was  instructed  (epaideuthe).  First  aorist  passive  in- 
dicative of  paideud,  to  train  a  child  {pais),  the  usual  idea  in 
ancient  Greek  as  here.  The  notion  of  chastisement  (Heb. 
12:6)  is  also  in  the  old  Greek  and  especially  in  the  LXX  and 
the  N.T.  Here  with  instrumental  case  {pasei  sophidi)  or  the 
locative.  The  accusative  would  usually  be  retained  after 
this  verb.  The  priestly  caste  in  Egypt  was  noted  for  their 
knowledge  of  science,  astronomy,  medicine,  and  mathe- 
matics. This  reputation  was  proverbial  (I  Kings  4:30). 
Modern  discoveries  have  thrown  much  light  on  the  ancient 
civilization  of  Egypt.  Moses,  like  Paul,  was  a  man  of  the 
schools.  Mighty  in  his  words  and  works  {dun  at  as  en  logois 
kai  ergois  autou).  The  same  phrase  used  of  Jesus  in  Luke 
24:19.  The  adjective  dunatos  is  employed  of  Apollos  as  an 
interpreter  of  the  Scriptures  (Acts  18:24).  Moses  did  not 
have  the  rhetorical  skill  or  eloquence  of  Aaron  (Ex.  4:10), 
but  his  words  like  his  deeds  carried  weight  and  power. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  87 

23.  When  he  was  well-nigh  forty  years  old  (Hos  eplerouto 
autoi  tessarakontaetes  chronos).  A  rather  awkward  Greek 
idiom  for  the  English:  "When  a  forty  year  old  time  (same 
idiom  in  Acts  13:18  and  only  twice  in  the  N.T.)  was  being 
fulfilled  (eplerouto,  imperfect  passive)  for  him  (dative  case)." 
The  life  of  Moses  is  divided  into  three  periods  of  forty  years 
each  (in  Egypt  40  years,  in  Midian  40,  governed  Israel  40, 
120  when  he  died,  Deut.  34:7).  It  came  into  his  heart  {anebe 
epi  ten  kardian  autou).  Second  aorist  active  indicative  of 
anabaino,  common  verb.  Came  up  as  if  from  the  lower  deeps 
of  his  nature.  This  Hebrew  image  occurs  in  Jer.  3:16;  Isa. 
65:17;  I  Cor.  2:9.  To  visit  [episkepsasthai).  First  aorist 
middle  infinitive  of  episkeptomai,  old  verb  to  go  to  see  for 
oneself,  with  his  own  eyes,  to  help  if  possible.  Used  of  God 
visiting  his  people  (Luke  7:16).  Our  "visit"  is  from  Latin 
video,  to  see,  visito,  to  go  to  see.  During  the  Welsh  mining 
troubles  the  Prince  of  Wales  made  a  sympathetic  visit  to  see 
for  himself  the  actual  condition  of  the  coal  miners.  Moses 
desired  to  know  first  hand  how  his  kinsmen  were  faring. 

24.  Suffer  wrong  (adikoumenon).  Present  passive  partici- 
ple of  adikeo.  By  blows  (Ex.  2:11).  Avenged  (epoiesen 
ekdikesin).  First  aorist  active  indicative  of  poieo.  This 
idiom  occurs  in  Luke  18:7  with  ekdikesin  (this  from  ekdikeo 
and  that  from  ekdikos  without  right  or  law  dike  and  then 
exacting  law  of  right  out  of  ek  one,  exacting  vengeance). 
Him  that  was  oppressed  (toi  kataponoumenoi) .  Present 
passive  articular  participle  in  the  dative  case  of  kataponeOy 
to  tire  down  with  toil,  to  treat  roughly,  common  in  late 
Greek,  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  II  Pet.  2:7  (sore  distressed). 
The  man  was  on  the  point  of  being  overcome.  Smiting 
(pataxas).  First  aorist  active  participle  of  patasso,  in  the 
old  Greek  the  beat  of  the  heart,  only  in  the  LXX  and  N.T. 
to  smite  a  deadly  blow  as  here  like  plesso. 

25.  He  supposed  (enomizen).  Imperfect  active  of  nomizo. 
He  was  supposing,  Stephen  explains,  when  he  smote  the 


88        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Egyptian.  That  his  brethren  understood  {sunienai  tous 
adelphous).  Present  active  infinitive  of  suniemi,  to  send 
(put)  together,  to  grasp,  to  comprehend,  in  indirect  dis- 
course with  the  accusative  of  general  reference.  By  his  hand 
was  giving  them  deliverance  {dia  cheiros  autou  didosin  sote- 
rian  autois).  Picturesque  use  of  "hand"  as  in  2:23,  present 
active  indicative  of  didomi  retained  in  indirect  discourse 
after  imperfect  enomizen.  But  they  understood  not  [hoi  de  ou 
sunekan).  Page  notes  "the  rhetorical  power  of  these  words" 
from  Stephen.  Sunekan  (first  aorist  indicative,  k  aorist) 
refers  to  sunienai  just  before. 

26.  The  day  following  (tei  epiousei  hemerdi).  Locative 
case,  "on  the  following  day"  (from  epeimi,  to  come  upon, 
to  approach,  present  active  participle  epion  -ousa,  -on). 
Common  phrase  in  old  Greek  both  with  hemera  (day)  as 
here  and  without  as  16:11.  Only  in  Acts  in  the  N.T.  Ap- 
peared (ophthe).  First  aorist  passive  indicative  of  horao 
not  with  idea  that  only  a  vision  but  rather  that  it  was  sud- 
den or  unexpected.  As  they  strove  {machomenois).  Present 
middle  participle  of  machomai,  actually  fighting.  Would 
have  set  them  at  one  again  (sunellassen  autous  eis  eirenen). 
Better,  he  tried  to  reconcile  them  (or  change  them  into 
peace).  It  is  the  conative  imperfect  active  as  in  Matt.  3:14 
of  sunallasso,  only  here  in  the  N.T.  though  common  in  the 
old  Greek.  Vulgate  has  reconciliabat.  The  usual  word  in  the 
N.T.  for  reconcile  is  katallasso.  Do  ye  wrong  one  to  another 
{adikeite  allelous).  The  same  word  used  in  verse  24  of  the 
wrong  done  one  of  the  Hebrews  by  the  Egyptian,  but  here 
both  are  "brethren." 

27.  Thrust  him  away  {aposato  auton).  First  aorist  middle 
indicative  {Koine  for  Attic  apebsato)  of  apdtheo,  to  push  away 
from  oneself  in  middle  voice  as  here,  common  in  old  Greek. 
Again  in  verse  39;  13:46;  Rom.  ii:i;  I  Tim.  1:19.  It  is 
always  the  man  who  is  doing  the  wrong  who  is  hard  to  recon- 
cile. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  89 

28.  Wouldest  thou  kill  me?  {me  anelein  w£  su  theleis). 
Expecting  the  answer  no,  but  a  thrust  direct  at  Moses,  Do 
you  wish  to  kill  me  (note  me  su  right  together,  me  thou). 
See  Ex.  2:14  quoted  by  Stephen. 

29.  Sojourner  (paroikos).  Temporary  dweller  (cf.  Abra- 
ham in  verse  6)  in  Midian  though  for  forty  years. 

30.  Sentence  begins  with  genitive  absolute  again.  In  a 
flame  of  fire  in  a  bush  {en  phlogi  puros  baiou),  Horeb  in  Ex. 
3:1;  but  Sinai  and  Horeb  were  "probably  peaks  of  one 
mountain  range"  (Page),  Horeb  "the  mountain  of  the 
dried-up  ground,"  Sinai  "the  mountain  of  the  thorns." 
Literally,  "in  the  flame  of  fire  of  a  bush"  (two  genitives, 
puros  and  baiou  dependent  on  phlogi^  flame).  Descriptive 
genitives  as  in  9:15;  H  Thess.  1:8.  Batos  (bush)  is  the  wild 
acacia  {mimosa  nilotica).  In  Ex.  3:20  it  is  Jehovah  who 
speaks.  Hence  "angel"  here  with  Stephen  is  understood 
to  be  the  Angel  of  the  Presence,  the  Eternal  Logos  of  the 
Father,  the  Angel  of  Jehovah. 

31.  The  sight  {to  horama).  Used  of  visions  in  the  N.T. 
as  in  Matt.  17:9.  As  he  drew  near  {proserchomenou  autou). 
Genitive  absolute  with  present  middle  participle  of  proser- 
chomai.  A  voice  oj  the  Lord  {phone  kuriou).  Here  the  angel 
of  Jehovah  of  verse  30  is  termed  Jehovah  himself.  Jesus 
makes  powerful  use  of  these  words  in  his  reply  to  the  Sad- 
ducees  in  defence  of  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  and 
the  future  life  (Mark  12:26,  Matt.  22:32;  Luke  20:37f.)  that 
God  here  describes  himself  as  the  God  of  the  living.  Trem- 
bled {entromos  genomenos).  Literally,  becoming  tremulous 
or  terrified.  The  adjective  entromos  {en,  tromos  from  tremOj 
to  tremble,  to  quake)  occurs  in  Plutarch  and  the  LXX.  In 
the  N.T.  only  here  and  Acts  16:29.  Durst  not  {ouk  etolma). 
Imperfect  active,  was  not  daring,  negative  conative  imperfect. 

33.  Holy  ground  {ge  hagia).  The  priests  were  barefooted 
when  they  ministered  in  the  temple.  Moslems  enter  their 
mosques  barefooted  today.     Cf.  Josh.  5:15.     Sandal  {hup- 


90        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

odema,  bound  under)  is  here  "a  distributive  singular"  (Hack- 
ett).  Even  the  ground  near  the  bush  was  "holy,"  a  fine 
example  for  Stephen's  argument. 

34.  /  have  surely  seen  (idon  eidon).  Imitation  of  the 
Hebrew  infinitive  absolute,  (Ex.  3:7)  "Seeing  I  saw"  (cf. 
Heb.  6:14).  The  affliction  {ten  kakosin).  From  kakody  to 
treat  evilly  (from  kakos,  evil).  Old  word,  here  only  in  the 
N.T.  and  from  Ex.  3:7.  Groaning  (stenagmou) .  Old  word 
from  stenazo,  to  sigh,  to  groan.  In  the  N.T.  only  here  and 
Rom.  8:26.  Root  sten  in  our  word  stentorian.  I  am  come 
down  {kateben).  Second  aorist  active  indicative  of  katabainOy 
I  came  down.  To  deliver  (exelesthai) .  Second  aorist  middle 
infinitive  of  exaireo,  to  take  out  for  myself.  /  will  send 
{aposteilo).  First  aorist  active  subjunctive  (hortatory  of 
apostello,  "Let  me  send"). 

35.  This  Moses  {Touton  ton  M  bus  en).  Rhetorical  repeti- 
tion follows  this  description  of  Moses  (five  times,  anaphora, 
besides  the  use  here,  six  cases  of  houtos  here  about  Moses: 
verse  35  twice,  36,  37,  38,  40).  Clearly  Stephen  means  to 
draw  a  parallel  between  Moses  and  Jesus.  They  in  Egypt 
denied  (ernesanto)  Moses  as  now  you  the  Jews  denied  (erne- 
sasthe,  3:13)  Jesus.  Those  in  Egypt  scouted  Moses  as  "ruler 
and  judge"  (verses  27  and  35,  archonta  kai  dikasten)  and 
God  "hath  sent"  {apestalken,  perfect  active  indicative,  state 
of  completion)  Moses  "both  a  ruler  and  a  deliverer"  {ar- 
chonta kai  lutroten)  as  Jesus  was  to  be  (Luke  1:68;  2:38; 
Heb.  9:12;  Tit.  2:14).  "Ransomer"  or  "Redeemer"  {lu- 
trotes)  is  not  found  elsewhere,  lutron  (ransom),  lutroOy  to  ran- 
som, and  lutrosis,  ransoming  or  redemption,  are  found  often. 
In  Acts  5:31  Christ  is  termed  "Prince  and  Saviour."  With 
the  hand  {sun  cheiri) .  So  the  correct  text.  The  Pharisees  had 
accused  Stephen  of  blaspheming  "against  Moses  and  God" 
(6:11).  Stephen  here  answers  that  slander  by  showing  how 
Moses  led  the  people  out  of  Egypt  in  co-operation  {sun)  with 
the  hand  of  the  Angel  of  Jehovah. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  91 

37.  Like  unto  me  (hos  erne).  This  same  passage  Peter 
quoted  to  the  crowd  in  Solomon's  Porch  (Acts  3 122).  Stephen 
undoubtedly  means  to  argue  that  Moses  was  predicting  the 
Messiah  as  a  prophet  like  himself  who  is  no  other  than 
Jesus  so  that  these  Pharisees  are  in  reality  opposing  Moses. 
It  was  a  nea,t  turn. 

38.  In  the  church  in  the  wilderness  {en  tei  ekklesidi  en  tei 
eremoi).  Better  rendered  "congregation"  here  as  in  Heb.  2: 
12  (Psa.  22:22),  the  people  of  Israel  gathered  at  Mt.  Sinai, 
the  whole  nation.  Moses  is  here  represented  as  receiving  the 
law  from  an  angel  as  in  Heb.  2:2;  Gal.  3:19  (Deut.  33:2,  LXX) 
and  so  was  a  mediator  (mesites)  or  middle  man  between  the 
angel  and  the  people  whereas  Jesus  is  the  Mediator  of  a 
better  covenant  (Heb.  8:6).  But  Exodus  does  not  speak  of 
an  angel.  Living  oracles  {logia  zonta).  A  logion  is  a  little 
word  (diminutive  of  logos).  Common  in  the  old  Greek,  LXX, 
Philo,  in  ecclesiastical  writers  for  sayings  of  Christ,  Papias 
(for  instance)  saying  that  Matthew  wrote  in  Hebrew  (Ara- 
maic) "Logia  of  Jesus."  Oxyrhynchus  papyri  fragments 
called  "  Logia  of  Jesus "  are  of  much  interest  though  only 
fragments.  The  Greeks  used  it  of  the  "oracles"  or  brief 
sayings  from  Delphi.  In  the  N.T.  the  word  occurs  only  four 
times  (Acts  7:38;  Rom.  3:2;  Heb.  5:12;  I  Pet.  4:11).  Here 
the  participle  zonta,  living,  is  the  same  used  by  Peter  (I  Pe- 
ter 2:4f.),  stone  (lithos)  of  Christ  and  Christians.  The  words 
from  God  to  Moses  are  still  "living"  today.  In  I  Peter  4:11 
the  word  is  applied  to  one  who  speaks  logia  theou  (oracles  of 
God).  In  Rom.  3:2  Paul  refers  to  the  substance  of  the  law 
and  of  prophecy.  In  Heb.  5:12  the  writer  means  the  sub- 
stance of  the  Christian  religious  teaching. 

39.  To  whom  {hoi).  That  is  Moses,  this  Moses.  Would  not 
be  {ouk  ethelesan  genesthai).  Aorist  active,  negative  aorist, 
were  unwilling  to  become  {genesthai)  obedient.  Thrust  him 
from  them  {aposanto).  Indirect  middle  of  the  very  verb 
used  of  the  man  (verse  27)  who  "thrust"  Moses  away  from 


92        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

him.  Turned  back  {estraphesan).  Second  aorist  passive  in- 
dicative of  strepho,  to  turn.  They  yearned  after  the  fleshpots 
of  Egypt  and  even  the  gods  of  Egypt.  It  is  easy  now  to  see 
why  Stephen  has  patiently  led  his  hearers  through  this 
story.    He  is  getting  ready  for  the  home-thrust. 

40.  Gods  which  shall  go  before  us  (theous  hoi  proporeusontai 
hembn).  Ex.  32:1.  As  guides  and  protectors,  perhaps  with 
some  allusion  to  the  pillar  of  fire  and  of  cloud  that  had  gone 
before  them  (Ex.  13:21).  The  future  indicative  here  with 
hoi  (relative)  expresses  purpose.  We  wot  not  {ouk  oidamen). 
We  do  not  know.  How  quickly  they  had  forgotten  both 
God  and  Moses  while  Moses  was  absent  in  the  mount  with 
God.  Become  of  him  {egeneto  autoi).  Happened  to  him. 
"This"  (houtos)  here  is  a  contemptuous  allusion  to  Moses 
by  the  people. 

41.  They  made  a  calf  (emoschopoiesan).  First  aorist  active 
indicative  of  moschopoieo,  here  only  in  the  N.T.  and  unknown 
elsewhere.  The  LXX  (Ex.  32:3)  has  epoiese  moschon  from 
which  phrase  the  word  is  evidently  made.  Aaron  made  the 
calf,  but  so  did  the  people  (Ex.  32:35).  The  idol  {toi  eidoloi). 
Stephen  calls  it  by  the  right  name.  The  people  said  it  was 
their  way  of  worshipping  Jehovah!  So  the  Egyptians  wor- 
shipped the  bull  Apis  at  Memphis  as  the  symbol  of  Osiris 
(the  sun).  They  had  another  sacred  bull  Mnevis  at  Leontop- 
olis.  Eidolon  (from  eidos,  form  or  figure)  is  the  image  or 
likeness  of  anything.  The  heathen  worship  the  god  through 
the  image  or  idol.  Rejoiced  (euphrainonto) .  Imperfect, 
middle,  kept  on  rejoicing  (Ex.  32:6,  18)  or  making  merry. 

42.  Gave  thefn  up  (paredoken).  First  aorist  active  indica- 
tive of  paradidomi.  This  same  form  occurs  three  times  like 
clods  on  a  coffin  in  a  grave  in  Rom.  i  :24,  26,  28  where  Paul 
speaks  of  God  giving  the  heathen  up  to  their  lusts.  To  serve 
the  host  oj  heaven  (latreuein  tei  stratidi  tou  ouranou).  The 
verb  latreub  is  used  of  the  worship  of  God  (Matt.  4:10)  as' 
well  as  of  idols  as  here  (from  latron,  hire,  latris,  hireling,  then 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  93 

to  serve).  But  the  worship  of  the  host  of  heaven  (Deut.  17:3; 
II Kings  17:16; 21 :3;  II  Chron.33:3,  5;  Jer.  8:2;  19:13)  is  Sab- 
aism  or  worship  of  the  host  {stratia)  of  heaven  (sun,  moon,  and 
stars)  instead  of  the  Lord  of  hosts.  This  star-worship  greatly- 
injured  the  Jews.  In  the  book  of  the  prophets  {en  bibloi  ton 
propheton).  That  is  the  twelve  minor  prophets  which  the 
Jews  counted  as  one  book  (cf.  Acts  13:40),  This  quotation 
is  from  Amos  5:25-27.  The  greater  prophets  were  Isaiah, 
Jeremiah,  Ezekiel.  Slain  beasts  {sphagia).  Here  only  in  the 
N.T.  (from  Amos  5:25)  sphage,  slaughter,  sphazo,  to  day. 

43.  The  tabernacle  of  Moloch  {ten  skenen  tou  Moloch).  Or 
tent  of  Moloch  which  they  took  up  after  each  halt  instead  of 
the  tabernacle  of  Jehovah.  Moloch  was  the  god  of  the  Amor- 
ites  to  whom  children  were  offered  as  live  sacrifices,  an  ox- 
headed  image  with  arms  outstretched  in  which  children  were 
placed  and  hollow  underneath  so  that  fire  could  burn  under- 
neath. The  star  of  the  god  Rephan  {to  astron  tou  theou  Rom- 
pha).  Spelled  also  Romphan  and  Remphan.  Supposed  to  be 
Coptic  for  the  star  Saturn  to  which  the  Egyptians,  Arabs, 
and  Phoenicians  gave  worship.  But  some  scholars  take  the 
Hebrew  Kiyyoon  to  mean  statues  and  not  a  proper  name  at 
all,  "statues  of  your  gods"  carried  in  procession,  making 
"figures"  {tupous)  with  both  "tabernacle"  and  "star"  which 
they  carried  in  procession.  /  will  carry  {metoikio).  Attic 
future  of  metoikiso  from  metoikizb.  Beyond  Babylon  {epekeina 
Babulonos).  The  Hebrew  and  the  LXX  have  "beyond  Da- 
mascus." An  adverbial  preposition  {ep'  ekeina  with  mere 
understood)  used  in  the  old  Greek  and  the  LXX  with  the 
ablative  case  and  meaning  "beyond."  Here  only  in  the 
N.T.  in  quotation  from  Amos.  5:27. 

44.  The  tabernacle  of  the  testimony  {he  skene  tou  martu- 
riou).  Probably  suggested  by  the  mention  of  "the  taber- 
nacle of  Moloch"  (verse  43).  See  on  Matt.  17:4  for  dis- 
cussion of  skene  (from  skia,  shadow,  root  ska,  to  cover). 
This  first  sanctuary  was  not  the  temple,  but  the  tent  in  the 


94        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

wilderness.  "Stephen  passes  on  from  the  conduct  of  the 
Israelites  to  his  other  argument  that  God  is  not  necessarily- 
worshipped  in  a  particular  spot"  (Page).  According  to  the 
figure  {kata  ton  tupon).  According  to  the  type  or  pattern. 
Tupos  is  from  tupto,  to  strike,  to  smite,  and  is  the  print  of 
the  blow  (John  20:25),  then  the  figure  formed  by  a  blow  or 
impression  like  our  type,  a  model  or  example.  Quoted  from 
Ex.  25:40.  Common  word  in  the  old  Greek.  That  he  had 
seen  {hon  hedrakei).  Past  perfect  active  of  horao,  to  see 
(double  reduplication). 

45.  Which  (hen).  Agreeing  with  skenen,  not  with  tupon. 
In  their  turn  {diadexamenoi).  First  aorist  middle  participle 
of  diadechomai,  to  receive  through  another,  to  receive  in 
sucession  or  in  turn.  Late  Greek,  only  here  in  N.T.  Deiss- 
mann  {Bible  Studies,  p.  115)  argues  from  a  second  century 
B.C.  papyrus  that  diadochos  means  rather  deputy  or  court 
official  than  successor.  With  Joshua  {meta  lesou).  With 
Jesus,  the  Greek  form  of  Joshua  (contracted  from  Jehoshua, 
Matt.  1:21),  as  in  Heb.  4:8.  When  they  entered  on  the  pos- 
session of  the  nations  {en  tei  kataschesei  ton  ethnon).  Lit- 
erally "in  (or  at  the  time  of)  the  possession  of  the  nations." 
See  on  7:5  for  the  only  other  N.T.  instance  of  kataschesis. 
Which  {hon).  The  nations,  genitive  by  attraction  to  case  of 
ethnon.  Thrust  out  {exosen).  First  aorist  active  indicative  of 
exothed,  to  push  out,  common  verb,  here,  only  in  N.T.  save 
some  MSS.  in  Acts  27:39. 

46.  Asked  {eitesato).  Aorist  middle  (indirect)  indicative, 
asked  for  himself  (as  a  favour  to  himself).  Cf.  II  Sam.  7:2f. 
A  habitation  {skenbma).  Like  Psa.  132:5,  but  it  was  a  house 
that  David  proposed  to  build  (II  Sam.  7:2),  not  a  tent 
(skene)  which  already  existed.  Skenoma  here  means  a  more 
permanent  abode  {oikon,  house,  in  verse  47),  though  from 
the  same  root  as  skene. 

48.  Howbeit  {all').  By  contrast  with  what  Solomon  did 
and   David   planned.      Note  emphatic   position  of  "not" 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  95 

(aW  ouch),  "But  not  does  the  Most  High  dwell."  The 
presence  of  the  Most  High  is  not  confined  in  any  building, 
even  one  so  splendid  as  Solomon's  Temple  as  Solomon  him- 
self foresaw  and  acknowledged  in  his  prayer  (I  Kings  8:27; 
n  Chron.  6:18).  In  houses  made  with  hands  {en  cheiropoie- 
tois).  No  word  here  for  "houses"  or  "temples"  in  correct 
text  {naois  temples  in  Textus  'Receptus).  Literally,  "In 
things  made  with  hands"  (cheir,  hand,  poietos,  verbal  adjec- 
tive of  poieo).  It  occurs  in  Mark  14:58  of  the  temple  and 
of  the  sanctuary  of  Moab  (Isa.  16:12).  It  occurs  also  in  Acts 
17:24;  Heb.  9:11,  24;  Eph.  2:11.  Common  in  the  old  Greek. 
The  prophet  {ho  prophet es).  Isa.  66:i.  Isaiah  taught  plainly 
that  heaven  is  God's  throne. 

49.  What  manner  of  house  {Poion  oikon).  What  sort  of  a 
house.''  This  interrogative  is  sometimes  scornful  as  in  4:7 
and  Luke  6:32!^.  (Page).  So  Stephen  shows  by  Isaiah  that 
Solomon  was  right  that  the  temple  was  not  meant  to  "con- 
fine" God's  presence  and  that  Jesus  had  rightly  shown  that 
God  is  a  spirit  and  can  be  worshipped  anywhere  by  any 
individual  of  any  race  or  land.  It  is  a  tremendous  argument 
for  the  universality  and  spirituality  of  Christianity  free 
from  the  shackles  of  Jewish  racial  and  national  limitations, 
but  its  very  strength  only  angered  the  Sanhedrin  to  des- 
peration. 

51.  Stiffnecked  {sklerotracheloi) .  From  skleros  (hard)  and 
tracheloSy  neck,  both  old  words,  but  this  compound  only  in 
the  LXX  and  here  alone  in  the  N.T.  Critics  assume  that 
Stephen  was  interrupted  at  this  point  because  of  the  sharp 
tone  of  the  speech.  That  may  be  true,  but  the  natural 
climax  is  sufficient  explanation.  Uncircumcised  in  heart 
{aperitmetoi  kardiais).  Late  adjective  common  in  LXX  and 
here  only  in  the  N.T.  Verbal  of  peritemnOj  to  cut  around 
and  a  privative.  Both  of  these  epithets  are  applied  to  the 
Jews  in  the  O.T.  (Ex.  32:9;  33:3,  5;  34:9;  Lev.  26:41;  Deut. 
9:6;  Jer.  6:10).    Kardiais  Is  locative  plural  like  osin  (ears), 


96        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

but  some  MSS.  have  genitive  singular  kardias  (objective 
genitive).  No  epithet  could  have  been  more  galling  to  these 
Pharisees  than  to  be  turned  "uncircumcised  in  heart" 
(Rom.  2:29).  They  had  only  the  physical  circumcision  which 
was  useless.  Ye  always  {humeis  aei).  Emphatic  position  of 
humeis  and  "always"  looks  backward  over  the  history  of 
their  forefathers  which  Stephen  had  reviewed.  Resist  (anti- 
piptete).  Old  word  to  fall  against,  to  rush  against.  Only  here 
in  the  N.T.,  but  used  in  the  O.T.  which  is  here  quoted 
(Numb.  27:14).  Their  fathers  had  made  "external  worship 
a  substitute  for  spiritual  obedience"  (Furneaux).  Stephen 
has  shown  how  God  had  revealed  himself  gradually,  the 
revelation  sloping  upward  to  Christ  Jesus.  "And  as  he  saw 
his  countrymen  repeating  the  old  mistake — clinging  to  the 
present  and  the  material,  while  God  was  calling  them  to 
higher  spiritual  levels — and  still,  as  ever,  resisting  the  Holy 
Spirit,  treating  the  Messiah  as  the  patriarchs  had  treated 
Joseph,  and  the  Hebrews  Moses — the  pity  of  it  overwhelmed 
him,  and  his  mingled  grief  and  indignation  broke  out  in  words 
of  fire,  such  as  burned  of  old  on  the  lips  of  the  prophets" 
(Furneaux).  Stephen,  the  accused,  is  now  the  accuser,  and 
the  situation  becomes  intolerable  to  the  Sanhedrin. 

52.  Which  of  the  prophets  {tina  ton  propheton).  Jesus 
(Luke  11:47  and  Matt.  23:29-37)  had  charged  them  with 
this  very  thing.  Cf.  II  Chron.  36:16.  Which  shewed  before 
{prokataggeilantas) .  The  very  prophets  who  foretold  the 
coming  of  the  Messiah  their  fathers  killed.  The  coming 
{tes  eleuseos).  Not  in  ancient  Greek  or  LXX  and  only  here 
in  the  N.T.  (in  a  few  late  writers).  Betrayers  (prodotai). 
Just  like  Judas  Iscariot.  He  hurled  this  old  biting  word  at 
them.  In  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Luke  6:16;  II  Tim.  3:4. 
It  cut  like  a  knife.  It  is  blunter  than  Peter  in  Acts  3:13. 
Murderers  (phoneis).  The  climax  with  this  sharp  word  used 
of  Barabbas  (3:14). 

53.  Ye  who  (hoitines).     The  very  ones  who,  quippe  qui. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  97 

often  in  Acts  when  the  persons  are  enlarged  upon  (8:15; 
9:35;  10:41,  47).  As  it  was  ordained  by  angels  (eis  diatagas 
aggelon).  About  angels  see  on  7:38.  Diatage  (from  diatasso, 
to  arrange,  appoint)  occurs  in  late  Greek,  LXX,  inscriptions, 
papyri,  Deissmann,  Light  from  the  Ancient  East,  pp.  Sgff., 
and  in  N.T.  only  here  and  Rom.  13:2.  At  (or  as)  the  ap- 
pointment of  angels  (cf.  Matt.  10:41;  12:41  for  this  use  of 
eis).  And  kept  it  not  (kai  ouk  ephulaxate).  Like  a  whip- 
cracker  these  words  cut  to  the  quick.  They  gloried  in  pos- 
sessing the  law  and  openly  violated  it  (Rom.  2:23). 

54.  When  they  heard  (akouontes).  Present  active  participle 
of  akouo,  while  hearing.  They  were  cut  to  the  heart  (diepri- 
onto  tais  kardiais).  See  5:33  where  the  same  word  and  form 
(imperfect  passive  of  diaprio)  is  used  of  the  effect  of  Peter's 
speech  on  the  Sadducees.  Here  Stephen  had  sent  a  saw 
through  the  hearts  of  the  Pharisees  that  rasped  them  to  the 
bone.  They  gnashed  on  him  with  their  teeth  (ebruchon  ious 
odontas  ep*  auton).  Imperfect  (inchoative)  active  of  brucho 
(Attic  brukd)y  to  bite  with  loud  noise,  to  grind  or  gnash  the 
teeth.  Literally,  They  began  to  gnash  their  teeth  at  (ep') 
him  (just  like  a  pack  of  hungry,  snarling  wolves).  Stephen 
knew  that  it  meant  death  for  him. 

55.  And  Jesus  standing  {kai  lesoun  hestota).  Full  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  gazing  steadfastly  into  heaven,  he  saw  God's 
glory  and  Jesus  "standing"  as  if  he  had  risen  to  cheer  the 
brave  Stephen.  Elsewhere  (save  verse  56  also)  he  is  pic- 
tured as  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God  (the  Session  of 
Christ)  as  in  Matt.  26:64;  Mark  16:19;  Acts  2:34;  Eph. 
1:20;  CoL  3:1;  Heb.  1:3. 

56.  Opened  (dienoigmenous).  Perfect  passive  predicate 
participle  of  dianoignumi  (cf.  Matt.  3:16  =  Luke  3:21). 
The  son  of  man  {ton  huion  tou  anthropou).  Elsewhere  in  the 
N.T.  in  Christ's  own  words.  Here  Stephen  may  refer  to  the 
words  of  Jesus  as  preserved  in  Matt.  26:64. 

57.  Stopped  their  ears  {suneschon  ta  ota  auton).     Second 


98        WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

aorist  active  of  sunecho,  to  hold  together.  They  held  their 
ears  together  with  their  hands  and  affected  to  believe  Stephen 
guilty  of  blasphemy  (cf.  Matt.  26:65).  Rushed  upon  him 
with  one  accord  {hormesan  homothumadon  ep^  anion).  Ingres- 
sive  aorist  active  indicative  of  hormao,  to  rush  impetuously 
as  the  hogs  did  down  the  cliff  when  the  demons  entered  them 
(Luke  8:33).  No  vote  was  taken  by  the  Sanhedrin.  No 
scruple  was  raised  about  not  having  the  right  to  put  him  to 
death  (John  8:31).  It  may  have  taken  place  after  Pilate's 
recall  and  before  his  successor  came  or  Pilate,  if  there, 
just  connived  at  such  an  incident  that  did  not  concern  Rome. 
At  any  rate  it  was  mob  violence  like  modern  lynching  that 
took  the  law  into  the  hands  of  the  Sanhedrin  without  further 
formalities.  Out  of  the  city  {ek  tes  poleos).  To  keep  from 
defiling  the  place  with  blood.  But  they  sought  to  kill  Paul 
as  soon  as  they  got  him  out  of  the  temple  area  (Acts  21 :3of.). 
Stoned  {eliihoholoun) .  Imperfect  active  indicative  of  litho- 
boleOy  began  to  stone,  from  lithoholos  {lithos,  stone,  balld, 
to  throw),  late  Greek  verb,  several  times  in  the  N.T.  as  Luke 
13:34.  Stoning  was  the  Jewish  punishment  for  blasphemy 
(Lev.  24:14-16).  The  witnesses  {hoi  martures).  The  false 
testifiers  against  Stephen  suborned  by  the  Pharisees  (Acts 
6:11,  13).  These  witnesses  had  the  privilege  of  casting  the 
first  stones  (Deut.  13:10;  177)  against  the  first  witness  for 
Christ  with  death  {martyr  in  our  modern  sense  of  the  word). 
At  the  feet  of  a  young  man  named  Saul  {para  tous  podas 
neaniou  kaloumenou  Saulou).  Beside  (para)  the  feet.  Our 
first  introduction  to  the  man  who  became  the  greatest  of  all 
followers  of  Jesus  Christ.  Evidently  he  was  not  one  of  the 
"witnesses"  against  Stephen,  for  he  was  throwing  no  stones 
at  him.  But  evidently  he  was  already  a  leader  in  the  group 
of  Pharisees.  We  know  from  later  hints  from  Saul  (Paul) 
himself  that  he  had  been  a  pupil  of  Gamaliel  (Acts  22:3). 
Gamaliel,  as  the  Pharisaic  leader  in  the  Sanhedrin,  was  prob- 
ably on  hand  to  hear  the  accusations  against  Stephen  by 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  99 

the  Pharisees.  But,  if  so,  he  does  not  raise  his  voice  against 
this  mob  violence.  Saul  does  not  seem  to  be  aware  that  he  is 
going  contrary  to  the  views  of  his  master,  though  pupils 
often  go  further  than  their  teachers. 

59.  They  stoned  (elithoboloun) .  Same  verb  and  tense  re- 
peated, they  kept  on  stoning,  they  kept  it  up  as  he  was 
calling  upon  the  Lord  Jesus  and  making  direct  prayer  to 
him  as  "Lord  Jesus"  {Kurie  lesou).  Receive  my  spirit  {dexai 
to  pneuma  mou).  Aorist  middle  imperative,  urgency,  re- 
ceive it  now.  Many  have  followed  Stephen  into  death  with 
these  words  upon  their  dying  lips.     Sec.  9:14,  21,  22:16. 

60.  Kneeled  down  {theis  ta  gonata).  Second  aorist  active 
participle  of  tithemi,  placing  the  knees  (on  the  ground). 
This  idiom  is  not  in  the  old  Greek  for  kneeling,  but  Luke  has 
it  five  times  (Luke  22:41;  Acts  7:60;  9:40;  22:36;  21:5) 
and  Mark  once  (15:19).  Jesus  was  standing  at  the  right  hand 
of  God  and  Stephen  knelt  before  him  in  worship  and  called 
on  him  in  prayer.  Lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge  {me  steseis 
autois  tauten  ten  hamartian).  First  aorist  (ingressive)  active 
subjunctive  with  me,  regular  Greek  idiom.  Place  not  to  them 
or  against  them  (dative  autois)  this  sin.  The  very  spirit  of 
Jesus  towards  his  enemies  as  he  died  upon  the  Cross  (Luke 
23:34).  He  fell  asleep  (ekoimethe).  First  aorist  passive  indic- 
ative of  koimao,  to  put  to  sleep.  Old  verb  and  the  metaphor 
of  sleep  for  death  is  common  in  all  languages,  but  it  is  pe- 
culiarly appropriate  here  as  Jesus  used  it  of  Lazarus.  See 
also  Acts  13:36;  I  Cor.  15:18,  etc.  Our  word  cemetery 
(koimeterion)  is  the  sleeping  place  of  the  dead.  Knowling 
calls  ekoimethe  here  "a  picture  word  of  rest  and  calmness 
which  stands  in  dramatic  contrast  to  the  rage  and  violence 
of  the  scene." 


CHAPTER  VIII 

1.  Was  consenting  {en  suneudokon) .  Periphrastic  imperfect 
oi  suneudokeo,  a  late  double  compound  {sun,  eu,  dokeo)  that 
well  describes  Saul's  pleasure  in  the  death  {anairesis,  taking 
off,  only  here  in  the  N.T.,  though  old  word)  of  Stephen. 
For  the  verb  see  on  Luke  23:32.  Paul  himself  will  later  con- 
fess that  he  felt  so  (Acts  22:20),  coolly  applauding  the  murder 
of  Stephen,  a  heinous  sin  (Rom.  1:32).  It  is  a  gruesome 
picture.  Chapter  VII  should  have  ended  here.  On  that  day 
{en  ekeinei  tei  hemerdi).  On  that  definite  day,  that  same  day 
as  in  2:41.  A  great  persecution  {diogmos  megas).  It  was  at 
first  persecution  from  the  Sadducees,  but  this  attack  on 
Stephen  was  from  the  Pharisees  so  that  both  parties  are 
now  united  in  a  general  persecution  that  deserves  the  ad- 
jective "great."  See  on  Matt.  13:21  for  the  old  word  diog- 
mos from  dioko,  to  chase,  hunt,  pursue,  persecute.  Were  all 
scattered  abroad  {pantes  die  spares  an).  Second  aorist  passive 
indicative  of  diaspeiro,  to  scatter  like  grain,  to  disperse,  old 
word,  in  the  N.T.  only  in  Acts  8:1,  4;  11:19.  Except  the 
apostles  {plen  ton  apostolon).  Preposition  plen  (adverb  from 
pleon,  more)  with  the  ablative  often  in  Luke.  It  remains  a 
bit  of  a  puzzle  why  the  Pharisees  spared  the  apostles.  Was 
it  due  to  the  advice  of  Gamaliel  in  Acts  5:34-40?  Or  was  it 
the  courage  of  the  apostles.'*  Or  was  it  a  combination  of 
both  with  the  popularity  of  the  apostles  in  addition."* 

2.  Devout  {eulaheis).  Only  four  times  in  the  N.T.  (Luke 
2:25;  Acts  2:5;  8:2;  22:12).  Possibly  some  non-Christian 
Jews  helped.  The  burial  took  place  before  the  Christians 
were  chiefly  scattered.  Buried  {sunekomisan).  Aorist  active 
indicative  of  sunkomizo,  old  verb  to  bring  together,  to  col- 
lect, to  join  with  others  in  carrying,  to  bury   (the  whole 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  lOI 

funeral  arrangements).  Only  here  in  the  N.T.  Lamentation 
(kopeton).  Late  word  from  koptomai,  to  beat  the  breast,  in 
LXX,  Plutarch,  etc.,  only  here  in  the  N.T. 

3.  Laid  waste  {elumaineto) .  Imperfect  middle  of  lumai- 
nomai,  old  verb  (from  lume^  injury),  to  dishonour,  defile, 
devastate,  ruin.  Only  here  in  the  N.T.  Like  the  laying  waste 
of  a  vineyard  by  a  wild  boar  (Psa.  79:13).  Picturesque  de- 
scription of  the  havoc  carried  on  by  Saul  now  the  leader  in  the 
persecution.  He  is  victor  over  Stephen  now  who  had  probably 
worsted  him  in  debate  in  the  Cilician  synagogue  in  Jeru- 
salem. Into  every  house  (kata  tons  oikous).  But  Luke  terms 
it  "the  church"  {ten  ekklesian).  Plainly  not  just  an  "as- 
sembly," but  an  organized  body  that  was  still  "the  church" 
when  scattered  in  their  own  homes,  "an  unassembled  as- 
sembly" according  to  the  etymology.  Words  do  not  remain 
by  the  etymology,  but  travel  on  with  usage.  Haling  (suron). 
Literally,  dragging  forcibly  (  =  hauling).  Present  active 
participle  of  surd,  old  verb.  Men  and  women  {andras  kai 
gunaikas).  A  new  feature  of  the  persecution  that  includes  the 
women.  They  met  it  bravely  as  through  all  the  ages  since 
(cf.  9:2;  22:4).  This  fact  will  be  a  bitter  memory  for  Paul 
always.  Committed  (paredidou) .  Imperfect  active  of  para- 
didomi,  old  verb,  kept  on  handing  them  over  to  prison. 

4.  They  therefore  (hoi  men  oun).  Demonstrative  hoi  as 
often  (i  :6,  etc.)  though  it  will  make  sense  as  the  article  with 
the  participle  diasparentes.  The  general  statement  is  made 
here  by  men  and  a  particular  instance  {de)  follows  in  verse  5. 
The  inferential  particle  {oun)  points  back  to  verse  3,  the 
persecution  by  young  Saul  and  the  Pharisees.  Jesus  had 
commanded  the  disciples  not  to  depart  from  Jerusalem  till 
they  received  the  Promise  of  the  Father  (i  4),  but  they  had 
remained  long  after  that  and  were  not  carrying  the  gospel 
to  the  other  peoples  (1:8).  Now  they  were  pushed  out  by 
Saul  and  began  as  a  result  to  carry  out  the  Great  Commis- 
sion for  world  conquest,  that  is  those  "scattered  abroad" 


102      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

(diasparentes,  second  aorist  passive  participle  of  diaspeiro). 
This  verb  means  disperse,  to  sow  in  separate  or  scattered 
places  (dia)  and  so  to  drive  people  hither  and  thither.  Old 
and  very  common  verb,  especially  in  the  LXX,  but  in  the 
N.T.  only  in  Acts  8:i,  4;  11:19.  f^^nt  about  {dielthon). 
Constative  second  aorist  active  of  dierchomai,  to  go  through 
(from  place  to  place,  dia).  Old  and  common  verb,  frequent 
for  missionary  journeys  in  the  Acts  (5:40;  8:40;  9:32;  11:19; 
13 :6).  Preaching  the  word  {euaggelizomenoi  ton  logon).  Evan- 
gelizing or  gospelizing  the  word  (the  truth  about  Christ). 
In  11:19  Luke  explains  more  fully  the  extent  of  the  labours 
of  these  new  preachers  of  the  gospel.  They  were  emergency 
preachers,  not  ordained  clergymen,  but  men  stirred  to  ac- 
tivity by  the  zeal  of  Saul  against  them.  The  blood  of  the 
martyrs  (Stephen)  was  already  becoming  the  seed  of  the 
church.  "The  violent  dispersion  of  these  earnest  disciples 
resulted  in  a  rapid  diffusion  of  the  gospel"  (Alvah  Hovey). 

5.  Philip  (Philippos).  The  deacon  (6:5)  and  evangelist 
(21:8),  not  the  apostle  of  the  same  name  (Mark  3:18). 
To  the  city  of  Samaria  (eis  ten  polin  tes  Samarias).  Genitive 
of  apposition.  Samaria  is  the  name  of  the  city  here.  This  is 
the  first  instance  cited  of  the  expansion  noted  in  verse  4. 
Jesus  had  an  early  and  fruitful  ministry  in  Samaria  (John  4), 
though  the  twelve  were  forbidden  to  go  into  a  Samaritan 
city  during  the  third  tour  of  Galilee  (Matt.  10:5),  a  tem- 
porary prohibition  withdrawn  before  Jesus  ascended  on  high 
(Acts  1:8).  Proclaimed  (ekerussen).  Imperfect  active,  began 
to  preach  and  kept  on  at  It.  Note  euaggelizomenoi  in  verse  4 
of  missionaries  of  good  news  (Page)  while  ekerussen  here 
presents  the  preacher  as  a  herald.  He  is  also  a  teacher 
{didaskalos)  like  Jesus.  Luke  probably  obtained  valuable 
information  from  Philip  and  his  daughters  about  these  early 
days  when  in  his  home  in  Caesarea  (Acts  21:8). 

6.  Gave  heed  (proseichon) .  Imperfect  active  as  in  verses 
10  and  II,  there  with  dative  of  the  person  (autoi),  here  with 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  103 

the  dative  of  the  thing  (tois  legomenois).  There  is  an  ellipse 
of  noun  {mind).  They  kept  on  giving  heed  or  holding  the 
mind  on  the  things  said  by  Philip,  spell-bound,  in  a  word. 
When  they  heard  {en  toi  akouein  autous).  Favourite  Lukan 
idiom,  en  and  the  locative  case  of  the  articlar  infinitive  with 
the  accusative  of  general  reference  "in  the  hearing  as  to 
them."  Which  he  did  {ha  epoiei).  Imperfect  active  again, 
which  he  kept  on  doing  from  time  to  time.  Philip  wrought 
real  miracles  which  upset  the  schemes  of  Simon  Magus. 

7.  For  many  {polloi  gar).  So  the  correct  text  of  the  best 
MSS.,  but  there  is  an  anacoluthon  as  this  nominative  has  no 
verb  with  it.  It  was  "the  unclean  spirits"  that  "came  out" 
{exerchonto,  imperfect  middle).  The  margin  of  the  Revised 
Version  has  it  "came  forth,"  as  if  they  came  out  of  a  house, 
a  rather  strained  translation.  The  loud  outcry  is  like  the 
demons  cast  out  by  Jesus  (Mark  3:11;  Luke  4:41).  Palsied 
{paralelumenoi,  perfect  passive  participle).  Luke's  usual 
word,  loosened  at  the  side,  with  no  power  over  the  muscles. 
Furneaux  notes  that  "the  servant  was  reaping  where  the 
Master  had  sown.  Samaria  was  the  mission  field  white  for 
the  harvest  (John  4:35)."  The  Samaritans  who  had  been 
bewitched  by  Simon  are  now  carried  away  by  Philip. 

9.  Simon  {Simon).  One  of  the  common  names  (Josephus, 
Ant.  XX.  7,  2)  and  a  number  of  messianic  pretenders  had 
this  name.  A  large  number  of  traditions  in  the  second  and 
third  centuries  gathered  round  this  man  and  Baur  actually 
proposed  that  the  Simon  of  the  Clementine  Homilies  is 
really  the  apostle  Paul  though  Paul  triumphed  over  the 
powers  of  magic  repeatedly  (Acts  13:6-12;  19:11-19),  "a 
perfect  absurdity"  (Spitta,  Jpostelgeschichte,  p.  149).  One 
of  the  legends  is  that  this  Simon  Magus  of  Acts  is  the  father 
of  heresy  and  went  to  Rome  and  was  worshipped  as  a  god  (so 
Justin  Martyr).  But  a  stone  found  in  the  Tiber  a.d.  1574 
has  an  inscription  to  Semoni  Sanco  Deo  Fidio  Sacrum  which 
is  (Page)  clearly  to  Hercules,  Sancus  being  a  Sabine  name 


104      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

for  Hercules.  This  Simon  in  Samaria  is  simply  one  of  the 
many  magicians  of  the  time  before  the  later  gnosticism  had 
gained  a  foothold,  "In  his  person  Christianity  was  for  the 
first  time  confronted  with  superstition  and  religious  impos- 
ture, of  which  the  ancient  world  was  at  this  period  full" 
(Furneaux).  Which  beforetime  used  sorcery  {proiiperchen 
mageuon).  An  ancient  idiom  (periphrastic),  the  present 
active  participle  mageuon  with  the  imperfect  active  verb 
from  proiiparcho,  the  idiom  only  here  and  Luke  23:12  in  the 
N.T.  Literally  "Simon  was  existing  previously  practising 
magic."  This  old  verb  mageud  is  from  magos  (a  magus,  seer, 
prophet,  false  prophet,  sorcerer)  and  occurs  here  alone  in  the 
N.T.  Amazed  (existandn).  Present  active  participle  of  the 
verb  existano,  later  form  of  existemi,  to  throw  out  of  position, 
displace,  upset,  astonish,  chiefly  in  the  Gospels  in  the  N.T. 
Same  construction  as  mageuon.  Some  great  one  (tina  megan). 
Predicate  accusative  of  general  reference  (infinitive  in  in- 
direct discourse).  It  is  amazing  how  gullible  people  are  in 
the  presence  of  a  manifest  impostor  like  Simon.  The  Magi 
were  the  priestly  order  in  the  Median  and  Persian  empires 
and  were  supposed  to  have  been  founded  by  Zoroaster.  The 
word  magoi  {magi)  has  a  good  sense  in  Matt.  2:1,  but  here 
and  in  Acts  13:6  it  has  the  bad  sense  like  our  "magic." 

10.  That  power  of  God  which  is  called  Great  {he  Dunamis  tou 
theou  he  kaloumene  Megale).  Apparently  here  already  the 
oriental  doctrine  of  emanations  or  aeons  so  rampant  in  the 
second  century.  This  "power"  was  considered  a  spark  of 
God  himself  and  Jerome  {in  Matt.  c.  24)  quotes  Simon 
(Page)  as  saying:  Ego  sum  sermo  Dei,  .  .  .  ego  omnipotens, 
ego  omnia  Dei.    Simon  claimed  to  impersonate  God. 

1 1 .  Because  that  of  long  time  he  had  amazed  them  with  his 
sorceries  {dia  to  hikanoi  chronoi  tais  magiais  exestakenai 
autous).  Causal  use  of  dia  with  the  accusative  articular 
infinitive  (perfect  active  Koine  form  and  transitive,  exestak- 
enai).   Same  verb  as  in  verse  9  participle  existandn  and  in 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  105 

verse  13  imperfect  passive  existato  (cf.  also  2:7  already). 
Chronoi  is  associative  instrumental  and  magiais  instrumental 
case. 

12.  They  were  baptized  (ebaptizonto) .  Imperfect  passive 
(repetition,  from  time  to  time),  while  believed  (episteusan) 
is  constative  aorist  antecedent  to  the  baptism.  Note  dative 
case  of  Philip  with  episteusan.  Note  the  gospel  of  Philip 
"concerning  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  the  name  of  Jesus 
Christ." 

13.  j4nd  Simon  also  himself  believed  {Ho  de  Simon  kai 
autos  episteusen).  Note  the  same  verb  in  the  aorist  tense 
episteusen.  What  did  he  believe  .'*  Evidently  that  Jesus  was 
this  "power  of  God"  not  himself  (Simon).  He  saw  that  the 
miracles  wrought  by  Philip  in  the  name  of  Christ  were  gen- 
uine while  he  knew  that  his  own  were  frauds.  He  wanted  this 
power  that  Philip  had  to  add  to  his  own  pretensions.  "He 
was  probably  half  victim  of  self-delusion,  half  conscious 
impostor"  (Furneaux).  He  was  determined  to  get  this  new 
"power,"  but  had  no  sense  of  personal  need  of  Jesus  as 
Saviour  for  his  sins.  So  he  submitted  to  baptism  (baptis- 
theis,  first  aorist  passive  participle  of  baptizo),  clear  proof  that 
baptism  does  not  convey  salvation.  He  continued  with  Philip 
{en  proskarteron  tbi  Philippoi).  Periphrastic  imperfect 
of  the  verb  proskartereo  (see  on  2:46).  He  stuck  to  Philip 
(dative  case)  to  find  out  the  secret  of  his  power.  Beholding 
{the  or  on).  Watching  the  signs  and  miracles  (powers,  dun- 
ameis  that  threw  his  "power"  in  the  shade)  as  they  were 
wrought  {ginomenas,  present  middle  participle  of  ginomai). 
The  more  he  watched  the  more  the  wonder  grew  {existato). 
He  had  "amazed"  (verse  9)  the  people  by  his  tricks  and  he 
was  himself  more  "amazed"  than  they  by  Philip's  deeds. 

14.  That  Samaria  had  received  {hoti  dedektai  he  Samaria). 
The  district  here,  not  the  city  as  in  verse  5,  Perfect  middle 
indicative  of  dechomai  retained  in  indirect  discourse.  It  was 
a  major  event  for  the  apostles  for  now  the  gospel  was  going 


I06      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

into  Samaria  as  Jesus  had  predicted  (i:8).  Though  the 
Samaritans  were  nominally  Jews,  they  were  not  held  so  by 
the  people.  The  sending  of  Peter  and  John  was  no  reflec- 
tion on  Philip,  but  was  an  appropriate  mission  since  "many 
Christian  Jews  would  be  scandalized  by  the  admission  of 
Samaritans"  (Furneaux).  If  Peter  and  John  sanctioned  it, 
the  situation  would  be  improved.  John  had  once  wanted  to 
call  down  fire  from  heaven  on  a  Samaritan  village  (Luke 

9:54)- 

15.  That  they  might  receive  {hopos  lahosin).    Second  aorist 

active  subjunctive  of  lambano,  final  clause  with  hopos.  Did 
they  wish  the  Samaritan  Pentecost  to  prove  beyond  a  doubt 
that  the  Samaritans  were  really  converted  when  they  be- 
lieved.^ They  had  been  baptized  on  the  assumption  that 
the  Holy  Spirit  had  given  them  new  hearts.  The  coming 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  with  obvious  signs  (cf.  10:44-48)  as  in 
Jerusalem  would  make  it  plain. 

16.  He  was  fallen  {en  epipeptokos).  Periphrastic  past  per- 
fect active  of  epipipto,  old  verb.  The  participle  is  neuter 
here  because  of  the  grammatical  gender  of  pneuma,  but  the 
translation  should  be  "he"  (natural  gender),  not  "it."  We 
should  not  use  "it"  for  the  Holy  Spirit.  Only  they  had  been 
baptized  (monon  de  babaptismenoi  huperchon) .  Periphrastic 
past  perfect  passive  of  baptizo  with  huparcho  (see  verse  9 
proiiperchon)^  instead  of  esan.  Into  the  name  {eis  to  onoma). 
Better,  in  the  name  (see  on  2:38). 

17.  Laid  they  their  hands  (epetithesan  tas  cheiras).  Im- 
perfect active,  repetition.  The  laying  on  of  hands  did  not 
occur  at  the  great  Pentecost  (2:4,  33)  nor  in  4:31;  10:44  ^^^ 
is  it  mentioned  in  I  Corinthians  12  and  14.  It  is  mentioned 
in  Acts  6:7  about  the  deacons  and  in  13:3  when  Barnabas 
and  Saul  left  Antioch.  And  in  Saul's  case  it  was  Ananias 
who  laid  his  hands  on  him  (9:17).  Hence  it  cannot  be  con- 
cluded that  the  Holy  Spirit  was  received  only  by  the  laying 
on  of  the  hands  of  the  apostles  or  by  the  hands  of  anyone. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  107 

The  so-called  practice  of  "confirmation"  appeals  to  this 
passage,  but  inconclusively.  They  received  (elambanon). 
Imperfect  active,  repetition  as  before  and  pari  passu  with  the 
laying  on  of  the  hands. 

18.  When  Simon  saw  {I don  de  ho  Simon).  This  participle 
(second  aorist  active  of  horao)  shows  plainly  that  those  who 
received  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  spoke  with  tongues.  Si- 
mon now  saw  power  transferred  to  others.  Hence  he  was 
determined  to  get  this  new  power.  He  offered  them  money 
(prosenegken  chremata).  Second  aorist  active  indicative  of 
prosphero.  He  took  Peter  to  be  like  himself,  a  mountebank 
performer  who  would  sell  his  tricks  for  enough  money. 
Trafficking  in  things  sacred  like  ecclesiastical  preferments 
in  England  is  called  "Simony"  because  of  this  offer  of  Simon. 

19.  Me  also  (kamoi).  This  is  the  whole  point  with  this 
charlatan.  He  wants  the  power  to  pass  on  "this  power." 
His  notion  of  "The  Holy  Spirit"  was  on  this  low  level. 
He  regarded  spiritual  functions  as  a  marketable  commodity. 
Money  "can  buy  diamonds,  but  not  wisdom,  or  sympathy, 
or  faith,  or  holiness"  (Furneaux). 

20.  Perish  with  thee  {sun  soi  eie  eis  apoleian).  Literally, 
Be  with  thee  for  destruction.  Optative  for  a  future  wish. 
The  use  of  eis  with  the  accusative  in  the  predicate  is  espe- 
cially common  in  the  LXX.  The  wish  reveals  Peter's  indigna- 
tion at  the  base  offer  of  Simon.  Peter  was  no  grafter  to 
accept  money  for  spiritual  power.  He  spurned  the  tempta- 
tion. The  natural  meaning  of  Peter's  language  is  that  Simon 
was  on  the  road  to  destruction.  It  is  a  warning  and  almost 
a  curse  on  him,  though  verse  22  shows  that  there  was  still 
room  for  repentance.  To  obtain  {ktdsthai).  To  acquire. 
Usual  meaning  of  the  present  tense  (infinitive  middle)  of 
ktaomai. 

21.  Lot  (kleros).  Same  idea  as  "part"  (meris)j  only  as  a 
figure.  Matter  (logoi).  Literally,  word  or  subject  (as  in 
Luke  1 4;  Acts  15:6),  the  power  of  communicating  the  Holy 


I08      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Spirit.  This  use  of  logos  is  in  the  ancient  Greek.  Straight 
{eutheia).  Quotation  from  Psa.  78:37.  Originally  a  mathe- 
matically straight  line  as  in  Acts  9:11,  then  moral  rectitude 
as  here. 

22.  Wickedness  (kakias).  Only  here  in  Luke's  writings, 
though  old  word  and  in  LXX  (cf.  I  Pet.  2:1,  16).  If  per- 
haps {ei  ara).  Si  forte.  This  idiom,  though  with  the  future 
indicative  and  so  a  condition  of  the  first  class  (determined 
as  fulfilled),  yet  minimizes  the  chance  of  forgiveness  as  in 
Mark  11  :i3.  Peter  may  have  thought  that  his  sin  was  close 
to  the  unpardonable  sin  (Matt.  12:31),  but  he  does  not  close 
the  door  of  hope.  The  thought  (he  epinoia).  Old  Greek  word 
from  epinoeoy  to  think  upon,  and  so  purpose.  Only  here  in 
the  N.T. 

23.  That  thou  art  (se  onta).  Participle  in  indirect  dis- 
course after  horo  (I  see).  In  the  gall  of  bitterness  {eis  cholen 
pikrias).  Old  word  from  cholas  either  from  cheb,  to  pour,  or 
chloe^  yellowish  green,  bile  or  gall.  In  the  N.T.  only  in  Matt. 
27:34  and  here.  In  LXX  in  sense  of  wormwood  as  well  as 
bile.  See  Deut.  29:18;  32:32;  Lam.  3:15;  Job  16:14.  "Gall 
and  bitterness"  in  Deut.  29:18.  Here  the  gall  is  described 
by  the  genitive  pikrias  as  consisting  in  "bitterness."  In 
Heb.  12:15  "a  root  of  bitterness,"  a  bitter  root.  This  word 
pikria  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Heb.  12:15;  Roiri-  3^14; 
Eph.  4:31.  The  "bond  of  iniquity"  (sundesmon  adikias) 
is  from  Isa.  58:6.  Paul  uses  this  word  of  peace  (Eph.  4:3), 
of  love  (Col.  3:14),  of  the  body  (Col.  2:19).  Peter  describes 
Simon's  offer  as  poison  and  a  chain. 

24.  Pray  ye  for  me  (Deethete  humeis  huper  emou).  Empha- 
sis on  humeis  (you).  First  aorist  passive  imperative.  Simon 
is  thoroughly  frightened  by  Peter's  words,  but  shows  no 
sign  of  personal  repentance  or  change  of  heart.  He  wants  to 
escape  the  penalty  for  his  sin  and  hopes  that  Peter  can  avert 
it.  Peter  had  clearly  diagnosed  his  case.  He  was  an  uncon- 
verted man  in  spite  of  his  profession  of  faith  and  baptism. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  109 

There  is  no  evidence  that  he  ever  changed  his  life  at  all. 
Which  (hon).  Genitive  by  attraction  of  the  accusative  rela- 
tive ha  to  case  of  the  unexpressed  antecedent  iouton  (of 
those  things),  a  common  Greek  idiom. 

25.  They  therefore  {hoi  men  oun).  Demonstrative  hoi  with 
men  (no  following  de)  and  the  inferential  oun  (therefore)  as 
often  in  Acts  (1:6,  etc.).  Returned  (hupestrephon).  Imper- 
fect active  picturing  the  joyful  journey  of  preaching  {eueg- 
gelizonto,  imperfect  middle)  to  the  Samaritan  villages.  Peter 
and  John  now  carried  on  the  work  of  Philip  to  the  Samari- 
tans.   This  issue  was  closed. 

26.  Toward  the  South  {kata  mesembrian).  Old  word  from 
mesos  and  hemera,  midday  or  noon  as  in  Acts  22:16,  the 
only  other  example  in  the  N.T.  That  may  be  the  idea 
here  also,  though  "towards  the  South"  gets  support  from 
the  use  of  kata  liba  in  Acts  27:12.  The  same  is  desert 
{haute  estin  eremos).  Probably  a  parenthetical  remark  by 
Luke  to  give  an  idea  of  the  way.  One  of  the  ways  ac- 
tually goes  through  a  desert,  Gaza  itself  was  a  strong 
city  that  resisted  Alexander  the  Great  five  months.  It 
was  destroyed  by  the  Romans  after  war  broke  out  with  the 
Jews. 

27.  A  eunuch  of  great  authority  {eunouchos  dunastes). 
Eunuchs  were  often  employed  by  oriental  rulers  in  high 
posts.  Dynasty  comes  from  this  old  word  dunastes  used  of 
princes  in  Luke  1:52  and  of  God  in  I  Tim.  6:15.  Eunuchs 
were  not  allowed  to  be  Jews  in  the  full  sense  (Deut.  23:1), 
but  only  proselytes  of  the  gate.  But  Christianity  is  spread- 
ing to  Samaritans  and  to  eunuchs.  Candace  {Kandakes). 
Not  a  personal  name,  but  like  Pharaoh  and  Ptolemy,  the 
title  of  the  queens  of  Ethiopia.  This  eunuch  apparently 
brought  the  gospel  to  Ethiopia.  Treasure  {gazes).  Persian 
word,  common  in  late  Greek  and  Latin  for  the  royal  treasure, 
here  only  in  the  N.T.  For  to  worship  {proskuneson).  Future 
active  participle  expressing  purpose,  a  common  idiom  in 


no      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

the  ancient  Greek,  but  rare  in  the  N.T.  (Robertson,  Gram- 
mar, p.   1 1 28). 

28.  Was  reading  {aneginosken).  Imperfect  active  de- 
scriptive, not  periphrastic  like  the  two  preceding  verbs  (was 
returning  and  sitting).  He  was  reading  aloud  as  Philip 
"heard  him  reading"  {ekousen  auton  anaginoskontos),  a  com- 
mon practice  among  orientals.  He  had  probably  purchased 
this  roll  of  Isaiah  in  Jerusalem  and  was  reading  the  LXX 
Greek  text.    See  imperfect  again  in  verse  32. 

29.  Join  thyself  (kolletheti).  See  this  vivid  word  (be  glued 
to,  first  aorist  passive  imperative)  already  in  5:13  and  Luke 
10:11;  15:15.  Philip  probably  jumped  on  the  running  board 
on  the  side  of  the  chariot. 

30.  Understandest  thou  what  thou  readest?  {Ara  ge  ginbs- 
keis  ha  anaginoskeis?)  The  interrogative  particle  ara  and 
the  intensive  particle  ge  indicate  doubt  on  Philip's  part. 
The  play  (paranomasia)  upon  the  words  in  the  Greek  is 
very  neat:  Do  you  know  what  you  know  again  (read)?  The 
verb  for  read  (anaginosko)  means  to  know  the  letters  again, 
recognize,  read.  The  famous  comment  of  Julian  about  the 
Christian  writings  is  often  quoted:  Anegnon,  egndn,  kate- 
gnon  (I  read,  I  understood,  I  condemned).  The  keen  retort 
was:  Anegnos,  all'ouk  egnos,  ei  gar  egnos,  auk  an  kategnos 
(You  read,  but  did  not  understand;  for  if  you  had  under- 
stood, you  would  not  have  condemned). 

31.  How  can  I,  except  some  one  shall  guide  me?  (Pos  gar 
an  dunaimen  ean  me  tis  hodegesei  me?).  This  is  a  mixed  con- 
dition, the  conclusion  coming  first  belongs  to  the  fourth  class 
(undetermined  with  less  likelihood  of  being  determined) 
with  an  and  the  optative,  but  the  condition  {ean,  instead  of 
the  usual  ei,  and  the  future  indicative)  is  of  the  first  class 
(determined  or  fulfilled.  Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  1022),  a 
common  enough  phenomenon  in  the  Koine.  The  eunuch 
felt  the  need  of  some  one  to  guide  {hodegeo  from  hodegoSj 
guide,  and  that  from  hodos,  way,  and  hegeomai,  to  lead). 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  1 1 1 

32.  The  place  {he  perioche).  See  the  verb  periechei  so 
used  in  I  Pet.  2:6.  The  word  is  used  either  of  the  section  as 
in  Codex  A  before  the  beginning  of  Mark  or  the  contents  of  a 
passage.  He  was  here  reading  one  particular  passage  (Isa. 
53:7f.).  The  quotation  is  from  the  LXX  which  has  some 
variations  from  the  Hebrew. 

33.  Was  taken  away  (erthe).  First  aorist  passive  indica- 
tive of  airoy  to  take  away.  It  is  not  clear  what  the  meaning 
is  here  either  in  the  Hebrew  or  the  LXX.  Knowling  sug- 
gests that  the  idea  is  that  justice  was  withheld,  done  away 
with,  in  his  death,  as  it  certainly  was  in  the  death  of  Christ. 

34.  Of  whom  (peri  tinos).  Concerning  whom,  a  pertinent 
inquiry  surely  and  one  that  troubles  many  critics  today. 

35.  Beginning  from  this  scripture  {arxamenos  apo  tes 
graphes  tautes).  As  a  text.  Philip  needed  no  better  opening 
than  this  Messianic  passage  in  Isaiah.  Preached  unto  him 
Jesus  {eueggelisato  autbi  ton  lesoun).  Philip  had  no  doubt 
about  the  Messianic  meaning  and  he  knew  that  Jesus  was 
the  Messiah.  There  are  scholars  who  do  not  find  Jesus 
in  the  Old  Testament  at  all,  but  Jesus  himself  did  (Luke 
24:27)  as  Philip  does  here.  Scientific  study  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment (historical  research)  misses  its  mark  if  it  fails  to  find 
Christ  the  Center  of  all  history.  The  knowledge  of  the  indi- 
vidual prophet  is  not  always  clear,  but  after  events  throw  a 
backward  light  that  illumines  it  all  (I  Pet.  i:iif.;  II  Pet. 
1:19-21). 

36.  What  doth  hinder  me  to  he  baptized?  (Ti  koluei  me  bap- 
tisthenai?).  Evidently  Philip  had  said  something  about 
baptism  following  faith  and  conversion.  Verse  37  is  not  a 
genuine  part  of  Acts,  a  western  addition.  Later  baptismal 
liturgies   had    it. 

39.  Out  of  the  water  {ek  tou  hudatos).  Not  from  the  edge 
of  the  water,  but  up  out  of  the  water  as  in  Mark  i:io. 
Caught  away  (herpasen).  Suddenly  and  miraculously,  for 
harpazo,  like  the  Latin  rapioj  means  to  carry  off.  Cf.  II  Cor. 


112      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

12:2;  I  Thess.  4:17.    Went  on  his  way  {eporeueto).    Kept  on 
going,  imperfect  active. 

40.  He  preached  the  gospel  {eueggelizeto).  Imperfect  middle 
describing  the  evangelistic  tour  of  Philip  "till  he  came  to 
Caesarea"  {hebs  tou  elthein  auton^  genitive  articular  infini- 
tive with  the  preposition  hebs  and  the  accusative  of  general 
reference)  where  he  made  his  home  and  headquarters  there- 
after (Acts  21:28)  and  was  known  as  the  Evangelist. 


CHAPTER   IX 

1,  Yet  (eti).  As  if  some  time_ela^s£d  between  the  death  of 
Stephen  as  is  naturally  implied  by  the  progressive  persecu- 
tion  described  in  8:3.  The  zeal  of  Saul  the  persecutor  in- 
creased with  success.  Breathing  threatening  and  slaughter 
(enpneon  apeiles  kai  phonou).  Present  active  participle  of 
old  and  common  verb.  Not  "breathing  out,"  but  "breath- 
ing in"  (inhaling)  as  in  Aeschylus  and  Plato  or  "breathing 
on"  (from  Homer  on).  The  partitive  genitive  of  apeiles  and 
phonou  means  that  threatening  and  slaughtfirJmd  come  to-be 
the  very  hreaih  that  Saul  breathed,  like  a  warhorse  who  sniffed 
the_smell  of-battle.  He  breathed  on  the  remaining  disciples 
the  murder  that  he  had  already  breathed  in  from  the  death 
of  the  others.  He  exhaled  what  he  inhaled.  Jacob  had  said 
that  "Benjamin  shall  ravin  as  a  wolf!'  (Gen.  49:27).  This 
greatest  son  of  Benjamin  was  fulfilling  this  prophecy  (Fur- 
neaux).  The  taste  of  blood  in  the  death  of  Stephen  was  pleas- 
ing to  young  Saul  (8:1)  and  now  he  revelled  in  the  slaughter 
of  the  saints  both  men  and  women.  In  26:11  Luke  quotes  Paul 
as  saying  that  he  was  "exceedingly  mad  against  them." 

2.  Asked  (eitesato).  First  aorist  middle  indicative,  the 
indirect  middle,  asked  for  himself  (as_a  favour  to  himself). 
Felten  notes  that  "Saul  as  a  Pharisee  makes  request  of 
a  Sadducee"  (the  high  priest)  either  Caiaphas  if  before 
A.D.  35,  but  if  in  36  Jonathan,  son  of  Caiaphas  or  if  in  37 
Theophilus,  another  son  of  Caiaphas.  Letters  {epistolas). 
Julius  Ceasar  and  Augustus  had  granted  the  high  priest  and 
Sanhedrin  jurisdiction  over  Jews  in  foreign  cities,  but  this 
central  ecclesiastical  authority  was  not  always  recognized 
in  every  local  community  outside  of  Judea.  Paul  says  that 
he  received  his  authority  to  go  to  Damascus  from  the  priests 

"3 


< 


114      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

(Acts  26:10)  and  "the  estate  of  the  elders"  (22:5),  that  is 
the  Sanhedrin.  To  Damascus  {eis  Damaskon).  As  if  no 
disciples  of  importance  (outside  the  apostles  in  Jerusalem) 
were  left  in  Judea.  Damascus  at  this  time  may  have  been 
under  the  rule  of  Aretas  of  Arabia  (tributary  to  Rome)  as  it 
certainly  was  a  couple  of  ^earg  later  when  Saul  escaped  in  a 
basket  (II  Cor.  11:32).  Thjs_old  city  is  the  most  enduring 
in  theJhistQty-ofjtheja^Qrld  (Knowling).  It  is  some  150  miles 
Northeast  from  Jerusalem  and  watered  by  the  river  Abana 
from  Anti-Lebanon.  Here  the  Jews  were  strong  in  numbers 
(10,000  butchered  by  Nero  later)  and  here  some  disciples 
had  found  refuge  from  Saul's  persecution  in  Judea  and  still 
worshipped  in  the  synagogues.  Paul's  language  in  Acts  26:11 
seems  to  mean  that  Damascus  is  merely  one  of  other  "foreign 
cities"  to  which  he  carried  the  persecution.  //  he  found 
{ean  heurei).  Third  class  condition  with  aorist  subjunctive 
retained  after  secondary  tense  (asked).  The  Way  {tes  ho- 
dou).  A  common  method  in  the  Acts  for  describing  Chris- 
tianity as  the  Way  of  life,  absolutely  as  also  in  19:9,  23; 
22:4;  24:14,  22  or  the  way  of  salvation  (16:17)  or  the  way 
of  the  Lord  (18:25).  It  is  a  Jewish  definition  of  life  as  in 
Isa.  40:3  "the  way  of  the  Lord,"  Psa.  i  :6  "the  way  of  the 
righteous,"  "the  way  of  the  wicked."  Jesus  called  himself 
"the  way"  (John  14:6),  the  only  way  to  the  Father.  The  so- 
called  Epistle  of  Barnabas  presents  the  Two  Ways.  The 
North  American  Indians  call  Christianity  the  Jesus  Road. 
That  he  might  bring  them  bound  (hopos  dedemenous  agagei). 
.Final  clause  with  hopos  (less  common  than  hina)  and  aorist 
(eflFective)  subjunctive  {agagei,  reduplicated  aorist  of  ago^ 
common  verb)  and  perfect  passive  participle  {dedemenous) 
of  deb,  in  a  state  of  sheer  helplessness  like  his  other  victims 
both  men  and  women.  Three  times  (8:3;  9:2;  22:4)  this 
fact  of  persecuting  women  is  mentioned  as  a  special  hlot  in 
Paul's  rriielty  (the  third  time  by  Paul  himself)  and  one  of 
the  items  in  his  being  chief  of  sinners  (I  Tim.  I  :I5). 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  115 

3.  As  he  journeyed  {en  toi  poreuesthai),  Luke's  common 
idiom  for  a  temporal  clause  (in  the  journeying),  en  with  the 
locative  articular  middle  infinitive.  Drew  nigh  (eggizein). 
Present  active  infinitive,  was  drawing  nigh.  Shone  round 
about  him  {auton  perie  straps  en).  First  aorist  (ingressive) 
active  indicative  of  periastrapto,  late  compound  verb  com- 
mon in  LXX  and  Byzantine  writers,  here  and  22:6  alone  in 
the  N.T.  "A  light  from  heaven  suddenly  flashed  around 
him."  It  was  like  a  flash  of  lightning.  Paul  uses  the  same 
verb  in  22:5,  but  in  26:13  he  employs  perilampsan  (shin- 
ing around).  There  are  numerous  variations  in  the  historical 
narrative  of  Saul's  conversion  in  9:3-18  and  Luke's  report 
of  Paul's  two  addresses,  one  on  the  steps  of  the  Tower  of 
Antonia  facing  the  murderous  mob  (22:6-16),  the  other 
before  Festus  and  Agrippa  (26:12-20).  A  great  deal  of 
capital  has  been  made  of  these  variations  to  the  discredit  of 
Luke  as  a  writer  as  if  he  should  have  made  Paul's  two 
speeches  conform  at  every  point  with  his  own  narrative. 
This  objection  has  no  weight  except  for  those  who  hold 
that  Luke  composed  Paul's  speeches  freely  as  some  Greek 
writers  used  to  do.  But,  if  Luke  had  notes  of  Paul's  speeches 
or  help  from  Paul  himself,  he  naturally  preserved  the  form 
of  the  two  addresses  without  trying  to  make  them  agree 
with  each  other  in  all  details  or  with  his  own  narrative  in 
chapter  9.  Luke  evidently  attached  great  importance  to  the 
story  of  Saul's  conversion  as  the  turning  point  not  simply 
in  the  career  of  the  man,  but  an  epoch  in  the  history  of 
apostolic  Christianity.  In  broad  outline  and  in  all  essentials 
the  three  accounts  agree  and  testify  to  the  truthfulness  of 
the  account  of  the  conversion  of  Saul.  It  is  impossible  to 
overestimate  the  worth  to  the  student  of  Christianity  of  this 
event  from  every  angle  because  we  have  in  Paul's  Epistles 
his  own  emphasis  on  the  actual  appearance  of  Jesus  to  him 
as  the  fact  that  changed  his  whole  life  (I  Cor.  15:8;  Gal. 
i:i6f.).    The  variations  that  appear  in  the  three  accounts 


Il6      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

do  not  mar  the  story,  when  rightly  understood,  as  we  shall 
see.  Here,  for  instance,  Luke  simply  mentions  "a  light 
from  heaven,"  while  in  22:6  Paul  calls  it  "a  great  (hikanon) 
light"  "about  noon"  and  in  26:13  "above  the  brightness  of 
the  sun,"  as  it  would  have  to  be  "at  midday"  with  the  sun 
shining. 

4.  He  fell  upon  the  earth  {pes on  epi  ten  gen).  Second 
aorist  active  participle.  So  in  22.7  Paul  says:  "I  fell  unto 
the  ground"  {epesa  eis  to  edaphos)  using  an  old  word  rather 
than  the  common  gen.  In  26:14  Paul  states  that  "we  were 
all  fallen  to  the  earth"  {panton  katapesonton  hemon  eis  ten 
gen,  genitive  absolute  construction).  But  here  in  verse  7 
"the  men  that  journeyed  with  him  stood  speechless"  {his- 
tekeisan  eneoi).  But  surely  the  points  of  time  are  different. 
In  26:14  Paul  refers  to  the  first  appearance  of  the  vision 
when  all  fell  to  the  earth.  Here  in  verse  7  Luke  refers  to 
what  occurred  after  the  vision  when  both  Saul  and  the  men 
had  risen  from  the  ground.  Saul,  Saul  (Saoul,  Saoul).  The 
Hebrew  form  occurs  also  in  22:7  and  26:14  where  it  is 
expressly  stated  that  the  voice  was  in  the  Hebrew  (Aramaic) 
tongue  as  also  in  9:17  (Ananias).  Deissmann  {Bihle  Studies^ 
p.  316)  terms  this  use  of  Saoul  "the  historian's  sense  of 
liturgical  rhythm."  For  the  repetition  of  names  by  Jesus 
note  Luke  10:41  (Martha,  Martha),  Luke  22:31  (Simon, 
Simon).  Me  {me).  In  persecuting  the  disciples,  Saul  was 
persecuting  Jesus,  as  the  words  of  Jesus  in  verse  5  made 
plain.  Christ  had  already  spoken  of  the  mystic  union  be- 
tween himself  and  his  followers  (Matt.  10:40;  25:40,  45; 
John  15:1-5).  The  proverb  (Pindar)  that  Jesus  quotes 
to  Saul  about  kicking  against  the  goad  is  genuine  in  26:14, 
but  not  here. 

5.  Lord  {kurie).  It  is  open  to  question  if  kurie  should  not 
here  be  translated  "Sir"  as  in  16:30  and  in  Matt.  21 :29  (30); 
John  5:7;  12:21;  20:15;  ^"<^  should  be  so  in  John  9:36.  It 
is  hardly  likely  that  at  this  stage  Saul  recognized  Jesus  as 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  117 

Lord,  though  he  does  so  greet  him  in  22:10  "What  shall  I 
do,  Lord?"  Saul  may  have  recognized  the  vision_as_frQm^ 
,.God  as  Cornelius  says  "LorH^Mn  10:4.  Saul  surrendered 
instantly  as  'Ihomas  did  (John  20:28)  and  as  little  Samuel 
(I  Sam.  3:9).  This  surrender  of  the  will  to  Christ  was  the 
conversion  of  Saul.  He  saw  a  real  Person,  the  Risen  Christ, 
to  whom  he  surrendered  his  life.  On  this  point  he  never 
wavered  for  a  moment  to  the  end. 

6.  The  best  MSS.  do  not  have  "trembling  and  aston- 
ished," and  "What  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do.  Lord.?"  The 
Textus  Receptus  put  these  words  in  here  without  the  author- 
ity of  a  Greek  codex.  See  22:10  above  for  the  genuine  text. 
It  shall  he  told  thee  Qalethesetai).  Future  passive  indicative 
of  laleo.  It  is  hardly  likely  that  Luke  records  all  that  Jesus 
said  to  Saul,  but  more  was  to  come  on  his  arrival  in  Damas- 
cus. Saul  had  received  all  that  he  could  bear  just  now 
Qohn  16:12).  What  (hoti).  Rare  in  Koine  use  of  this  indef- 
inite neuter  relative  in  an  indirect  question,  the  only  example 
in  the  N.T.  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  731).  Human  agents 
like  Ananias  can  finish  what  Jesus  by  supernatural  manifes-  / 
tation  has  here  begun  in  Saul. 

7.  That  journeyed  with  him  {hoi  sunodeuontes  autoi).  Not 
in  the  older  Greek,  but  in  the  Koine,  with  the  associative 
instrumental.  Speechless  (eneoi).  Mute.  Only  here  in  N.T., 
though  old  word.  Hearing  the  voice,  but  beholding  no  man 
{akouontes  men  tes  phones,  medena  de  theorountes).  Two 
present  active  participles  in  contrast  {men,  de).  In  22:9 
Paul  says  that  the  men  "beheld  the  light"  {to  men  phos 
etheasanto),  but  evidently  did  not  discern  the  person.  Paul 
also  says  there,  "but  they  heard  not  the  voice  of  him  that 
spake  to  me"  {ten  de  phonen  ouk  ekousan  tou  lalountos  moi). 
Instead  of  this  being  a  flat  contradiction  of  what  Luke  says 
in  9:7  it  is  natural  to  take  it  as  being  likewise  (as  with  the 
"light"  and  "no  one")  a  distinction  between  the  "sound" 
(original  sense  of  phone  as  in  John  3  :8)  and  the  separate 


Il8      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

words  spoken.  It  so  happens  that  akouo  is  used  either  with 
the  accusative  (the  extent  of  the  hearing)  or  the  genitive 
(the  specifying).  It  is  possible  that  such  a  distinction  here 
coincides  with  the  two  senses  of  phone.  They  heard  the  sound 
(9:7),  but  did  not  understand  the  words  (22:9).  However, 
this  distinction  in  case  with  akouo,  though  possible  and  even 
probable  here,  is  by  no  means  a  necessary  one  for  in  John 
3:8  where  phbnen  undoubtedly  means  "sound"  the  accusa- 
tive occurs  as  Luke  uses  ekousen  phbnen  about  Saul  in  Acts 
9:4.  Besides  in  22:7  Paul  uses  ekousa  phones  about  himself, 
but  ekousa  phonen  about  himself  in  26:14,  interchangeably. 

8.  He  saw  nothing  {ouden  ehlepen).  Imperfect  active  in- 
dicative, was  seeing  nothing.  "The  glory  of  that  light" 
(22:11)  when  he  saw  Jesus  had  blinded  his  eyes  now  wide 
open  {aneoigmenon,  perfect  passive  participle  of  anoigo  with 
double  reduplication).  The  blindness  was  proof  that  some- 
thing had  happened  to  him  and  that  it  was  no  hallucination 
that  he  had  seen  the  Risen  Christ.  Saul  arose  after  the  others 
were  on  their  feet.  They  led  him  by  the  hand  (cheiragogountes) . 
From  cheiragogos  {cheir,  hand  and  ago,  to  lead).  Only  here 
in  the  N.T.,  but  in  LXX  and  late  writers  though  not  in  the 
old  Greek.  It  was  a  pathetic  picture  to  see  the  masterful 
Saul,  victorious  persecutor  and  conqueror  of  the  disciples, 
now  helpless  as  a  child. 

9  Not  seeing  {me  blepdn).  The  usual  negative  me  of  the 
participle.  It  was  a  crisis  for  Saul,  this  sudden  blindness  for 
three  days  {hemeras  treis,  accusative  of  extent  of  time).  Later 
(Gal.  4:15)  Paul  has  an  affection  of  the  eyes  which  may  have 
been  caused  by  this  experience  on  the  road  to  Damascus  or 
at  least  his  eyes  may  have  been  predisposed  by  it  to  weak- 
ness in  the  glare  of  the  Syrian  sun  in  the  land  where  today 
so  much  eye  trouble  exists.  He  neither  ate  nor  drank  any- 
thing, for  his  appetite  had  gone  as  often  happens  in  a  crisis 
of  the  soul.  These  must  have  been  days  of  terrible  stress 
and  strain. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  1 19 

10.  Ananias  {Hananias).  Name  common  enough  (cf.  5:1 
for  another  Ananias)  and  means  "Jehovah  is  gracious." 
Nomen  et  omen  (Knowling).  This  Ananias  had  the  respect 
of  both  Jews  and  Christians  in  Damascus  (22:12).  In  a  vision 
(en  horamati).  Zeller  and  others  scout  the  idea  of  the  historic- 
ity of  this  vision  as  supernatural.  Even  Furneaux  holds 
that  "it  is  a  characteristic  of  the  Jewish  Christian  sources 
to  point  out  the  Providential  ordering  of  events  by  the 
literary  device  of  a  vision,"  as  "in  the  early  chapters  of 
Matthew's  and  Luke's  Gospels."  He  is  content  with  this 
"beautiful  expression  of  the  belief"  with  no  interest  in  the  ac- 
tual facts.  But  that  is  plain  illusion,  not  to  say  delusion,  and 
makes  both  Paul  and  Luke  deceived  by  the  story  of  Ananias 
(9:10-18;  22:12-16,  26).  One  MS.  of  the  old  Latin  Version 
does  omit  the  vision  to  Ananias  and  that  is  basis  enough  for 
those  who  deny  the  supernatural  aspects  of  Christianity. 

11.  To  the  street  (epi  ten  rhumen).  See  on  Luke  14:21.  A 
run  way  (from  rhed,  to  run)  between  the  houses.  So  were  the 
narrow  lanes  or  alleys  called  streets  and  finally  in  later 
Greek  the  word  is  applied  to  streets  even  when  broad. 
Straight  {eutheian).  Most  of  the  city  lanes  were  crooked  like 
the  streets  of  Boston  (old  cow-paths,  people  say),  but  this 
one  still  runs  "in  a  direct  line  from  the  eastern  to  the  western 
gate  of  the  city"  (Vincent).  Since  the  ancients  usually  rebuilt 
on  the  same  sites,  it  is  probable  that  the  line  of  the  street  of 
that  name  today  is  the  same,  though  the  actual  level  has 
been  much  raised.  Hence  the  identification  of  the  house  of 
Ananias  and  the  house  of  Judas  are  very  precarious. 

12.  Coming  in  and  laying  {eiselthonta  kai  epithenta). 
Second  aorist  (ingressive)  active  participles  picturing  the 
punctiliar  act  as  a  sort  of  indirect  discourse  after  verbs  of 
sensation  (Robertson,  Grammar,  pp.  1040-2).  Some  ancient 
documents  do  not  have  "in  a  vision"  here.  Receive  his  sight 
(anablepsei) .  First  aorist  active  subjunctive  with  hopos 
(purpose).   See  again  as  in  9:17. 


I20      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

13.  How  much  evil  {hosa  kaka).  How  many  evil  things. 
Saul's  reputation  (26:10)  as  a  persecutor  had  preceded  him. 
To  thy  saints  {tois  hagiois).  Dative  of  disadvantage.  "Used 
here  for  the  first  time  as  a  name  for  the  Christians"  (Know- 
ling),  but  it  came  to  be  the  common  and  normal  (Hackett) 
term  for  followers  of  Christ  (9:32,  41 ;  26:10;  I  Cor.  i  :2,  etc.). 
This  common  word  is  from  to  hagos,  religious  awe  or  reverence 
and  is  applied  to  God's  name  (Luke  1:49),  God's  temple 
(Matt.  24:15),  God's  people  as  set  apart  for  God  (Luke 
1:70;  2:23;  Rom.  1:7,  etc.).  Ananias  in  his  ignorance  saw  in 
Saul  only  the  man  with  an  evil  reputation  while  Jesus  saw  in 
Saul  the  man  transformed  by  grace  to  be  a  messenger  of 
mercy. 

14.  Hath  authority  {echei  exousian).  Probably  Ananias 
had  received  letters  from  the  Christians  left  in  Jerusalem 
warning  him  of  the  coming  of  Saul.  The  protest  of  Ananias 
to  Jesus  against  any  dealing  with  Saul  is  a  fine  illustration 
of  our  own  narrow  ignorance  in  our  rebellious  moods  against 
the  will  of  God. 

15.  A  chosen  vessel  {skeuos  ekloges).  A  vessel  of  choice 
or  selection.  The  genitive  of  quality  is  common  in  the  He- 
brew, as  in  the  vernacular  Koine.  Jesus  chose  Saul  before 
Saul  chose  Jesus,  He  felt  of  himself  that  he  was  an  earthen 
vessel  (II  Cor.  4:7)  unworthy  of  so  great  a  treasure.  It  was  a 
great  message  that  Ananias  had  to  bear  to  Saul.  He  told  it 
in  his  own  way  (9:17;  22:i4f.)  and  in  26:i6f.  Paul  blends 
the  message  of  Jesus  to  Ananias  with  that  to  him  as  one. 
Before  the  Gentiles  {endpion  ton  ethnbn).  This  was  the  chief 
element  in  the  call  of  Saul.  He  was  to  be  an  apostle  to  the 
Gentiles  (Eph.  3:6-12). 

16.  /  will  shew  {hupodeixo).  Beforehand  as  a  warning  as 
in  Luke  3:7  and  from  time  to  time.  He  must  suffer  (dei 
auton  pathein).  Constative  aorist  active  infinitive  {pathein, 
from  pascho)  covering  the  whole  career  of  Saul.  Suffering 
is  one  clement  in  the  call  that  Saul  receives.    He  will  learn 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  1 21 

"how  many  things"  (hosa)  are  included  in  this  list  by  degrees 
and  by  experience.  A  glance  at  II  Cor.  10-12  will  show  one 
the  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy.  But  it  was  the  "gift"  of 
Christ  to  Paul  to  go  on  suffering  (paschein,  present  infini- 
tive, Phil.  1:39). 

17.  Laying  his  hands  on  him  (epithets  ep*  auton  tas  cheiras). 
As  in  the  vision  Saul  saw  (verse  12).  Brother  Saul  {Saoul 
adelphe).  All  suspicion  has  vanished  and  Ananias  takes  Saul 
to  his  heart  as  a  brother  in  Christ.  It  was  a  gracious  word  to 
Saul  now  under  suspicion  on  both  sides.  The  Lord,  even 
Jesus  {ho  kurios,  lesous).  Undoubted  use  of  kurios  as  Lord 
and  applied  to  Jesus.  Who  appeared  {ho  ophtheis).  First 
aorist  passive  participle  of  horao,  was  seen  as  in  26:16  and 
with  the  dative  also  {soi).  Thou  earnest  {erchou).  Imperfect 
indicative  middle,  "thou  wert  coming."  Be  filled  with  the 
Holy  Spirit  {plestheis  pneumatos  hagiou).  This  enduement  of 
special  power  he  will  need  as  an  apostle  (Hackett)  and  as 
promised  by  Jesus  (1:8;  Gal.  2:7). 

18.  Fell  off  {apepesan).  Second  aorist  active  indicative 
(note — an  ending  like  first  aorist)  of  apopipto,  old  verb,  but 
here  alone  in  the  N.T.  As  if  it  were  scales  {hos  lepides). 
Chiefly  late  word  (LXX)  from  lepb,  to  peel,  and  only  here  in 
the  N.T.  See  Tobit  11:13,  "The  white  film  peeled  from  his 
eyes"  {eUpisthe).  Luke  does  not  say  that  actual  "scales"  fell 
from  the  eyes  of  Saul,  but  that  it  felt  that  way  to  him  as  his 
sight  returned,  "as  if"  {hos).  Medical  writers  use  the  word 
lepis  for  pieces  of  the  skin  that  fall  off  (Hobart,  Medical 
Language  of  St.  Luke,  p.  39).  Luke  may  have  heard  Paul 
tell  of  this  vivid  experience.  Was  baptized  {ebaptisthe).  First 
aorist  passive  indicative.  Apparently  by  Ananias  (22:16)  as  a 
symbol  of  the  new  life  in  Christ  already  begun,  possibly  in 
the  pool  in  the  house  of  Judas  as  today  water  is  plentiful 
in  Damascus  or  in  Abana  or  Pharpar  (Furneaux),  better 
than  all  the  waters  of  Israel  according  to  Naaman  (II  Kings 
5:12). 


122      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

19.  fFas  strengthened  (enischuthe).  First  aorist  passive 
indicative  of  enischuo,  to  receive  strength  (ischus),  compara- 
tively late  verb  and  here  only  in  the  N.T.  save  Luke  22:43 
where  it  is  doubtful.  Poor  verse  division.  This  clause  be- 
longs in  sense  to  verse  18.  Some  days  {hemeras  tinas).  An 
indefinite  period,  probably  not  long,  the  early  period  in 
Damascus  before  Saul  left  for  Arabia  (Gal.  1:13-24). 

20.  He  proclaimed  Jesus  {ekerussen  ton  lesoun).  Imper- 
fect indicative,  inchoative,  began  to  preach.  Jesus,  not 
Christ,  is  the  correct  text  here.  He  did  this  first  preaching 
in  the  Jewish  synagogues,  a  habit  of  his  life  when  possible, 
and  following  the  example  of  Jesus.  That  he  is  the  Son  of 
God  (hoti  houtos  estin  ho  huios  tou  theou).  This  is  Paul's 
platform  as  a  Christian  preacher,  one  that  he  always  occupied 
to  the  very  end.  It  was  a  complete  reversal  of  his  previous 
position.  Jesus  had  turned  him  completely  around.  It  is 
the  conclusion  that  Saul  now  drew  from  the  vision  of  the 
Risen  Christ  and  the  message  through  Ananias.  By  "the  Son 
of  God"  Saul  means  the  Messiah  of  promise  and  hope,  the 
Messianic  sense  of  the  Baptist  (John  i  :34)  and  of  Nathanael 
(John  1 :49)  for  Saul  is  now  proclaiming  his  faith  in  Jesus  in 
the  very  synagogues  where  he  had  meant  to  arrest  those  who 
professed  their  faith  in  him.  Peter  laid  emphasis  on  the 
Resurrection  of  Jesus  as  a  glorious  fact  and  proclaimed  Jesus 
as  Lord  and  Christ.  Paul  boldly  calls  Jesus  the  Son  of  God 
with  full  acknowledgment  of  his  deity  from  the  very  start. 
Thomas  had  come  to  this  place  slowly  (John  20:28).  Saul 
begins  with  this  truth  and  never  leaves  it.  With  this  faith 
he  can  shake  the  world.  There  is  no  power  in  any  other 
preaching. 

21.  Were  amazed  (existanto).  Imperfect  middle  indicative 
of  exisiemi.  They  continued  to  stand  out  of  themselves  in 
astonishment  at  this  violent  reversal  in  Saul  the  persecutor. 
Made  havock  (porthesas).  First  aorist  active  participle  of 
porthedy  to  lay  waste,  an  old  verb,  but  only  here  and  Gal. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  123 

1:13,  23  by  Paul,  an  interesting  coincidence.  It  is  the  old 
proverb  about  Saul  among  the  prophets  (I  Sam.  10:12)  re- 
vived with  a  new  meaning  (Furneaux).  Had  come  {elelu- 
thei).  Past  perfect  indicative  active.  Might  bring  {agagei). 
Second  aorist  (effective)  active  subjunctive  of  ago  with 
hina  (purpose).  Bound  {dedemenous).  Perfect  passive  parti- 
ciple of  deo.    Interesting  tenses. 

22.  Increased  the  more  {mdllon  enedunamouto) .  Imperfect 
passive  indicative  of  endunamoo,  to  receive  power  (late 
verb),  progressive  increase  in  strength  as  opposition  grew. 
Saul's  recantation  stirred  controversy  and  Saul  grew  in 
power.  See  also  Paul  in  Phil.  4:13;  T  Tim.  1:12;  II  Tim. 
2:1;  4:17;  Rom.  4:20.  Christ,  the  dynamo  of  spiritual 
energy,  was  now  pouring  power  (Acts  i  :8)  into  Paul  who  is 
already  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit  (Acts  9:17).  Confounded 
{sunechunnen) .  Imperfect  active  indicative  of  sunchunno 
(late  form  of  sunched,  to  pour  together,  commingle,  make 
confusion.  The  more  Saul  preached,  the  more  the  Jews  were 
confused.  Proving  {sunbibazon).  Present  active  participle 
of  sunbibazo,  old  verb  to  make  go  together,  to  coalesce,  to 
knit  together.  It  is  the  very  word  that  Luke  will  use  in  16:10 
of  the  conclusion  reached  at  Troas  concerning  the  vision  of 
Paul.  Here  Saul  took  the  various  items  in  the  life  of  Jesus 
of  Nazareth  and  found  in  them  the  proof  that  he  was  in 
reality  "the  Messiah"  {ho  Christos).  This  method  of  argu- 
ment Paul  continued  to  use  with  the  Jews  (Acts  17:3).  It 
was  irresistible  argument  and  spread  consternation  among 
the  Jews.  It  was  the  most  powerful  piece  of  artillery  in  the 
Jewish  camp  that  was  suddenly  turned  round  upon  them.  It 
is  probable  that  at  this  juncture  Saul  went  into  Arabia  for 
several  years  (Gal.  i  :i2-24).  Luke  makes  no  mention  of  this 
important  event,  but  he  leaves  ample  room  for  it  at  this 
point. 

23.  When  many  days  were  fulfilled  {Hbs  eplerounto  hemerai 
hikanai).     Imperfect  passive  indicative  of  pleroo,  old  and 


124      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

common  verb,  were  in  process  of  being  fulfilled.  How 
"many"  (considerable,  hikanai,  common  word  for  a  long 
period)  Luke  does  not  say  nor  does  he  say  that  Saul  spent 
all  of  this  period  in  Damascus,  as  we  know  from  Gal.  i  :i6-i8 
was  not  the  case.  Paul  there  states  definitely  that  he  went 
away  from  Damascus  to  Arabia  and  returned  there  before 
going  back  to  Jerusalem  and  that  the  whole  period  was 
about  "three  years"  which  need  not  mean  three  full  years, 
but  at  least  portions  of  three.  Most  of  the  three  years  was 
probably  spent  in  Arabia  because  of  the  two  explosions  in 
Damascus  (before  his  departure  and  on  his  return)  and  be- 
cause he  was  unknown  in  Jerusalem  as  a  Christian  on  his 
arrival  there.  It  cannot  be  argued  from  the  frequent  lacunae 
in  the  Acts  that  Luke  tells  all  that  was  true  or  that  he  knew. 
He  had  his  own  methods  and  aims  as  every  historian  has. 
We  are  at  perfect  liberty  to  supplement  the  narrative  in  the 
Acts  with  items  from  Paul's  Epistles.  So  we  must  assume 
the  return  of  Saul  from  Arabia  at  this  juncture,  between 
verses  22  and  23,  when  Saul  resumed  his  preaching  in  the 
Jewish  synagogues  with  renewed  energy  and  grasp  after 
the  period  of  mature  reflection  and  readjustment  in  Arabia. 
Took  counsel  together  {sunehouleusanto).  First  aorist  (effec- 
tive) middle  indicative  of  sunbouleuo,  old  and  common  verb 
for  counselling  {bouleub)  together  {sun).  Things  had  reached 
a  climax.  It  was  worse  than  before  he  left  for  Arabia.  Paul 
was  now  seeing  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  of  Jesus  about 
him  (9:16).  To  kill  him  (anelein  auton).  Second  aorist 
(effective)  active  infinitive  of  anaireo,  to  take  up,  to  make 
away  with,  to  kill  (Luke  23:32;  Acts  12:1,  etc.).  The  infini- 
tive expresses  purpose  here  as  is  done  in  verse  24  by  hopos 
and  the  aorist  active  subjunctive  of  the  same  verb  (anelosin). 
Saul  now  knew  what  Stephen  had  suffered  at  his  hands  as 
his  own  life  was  in  peril  in  the  Jewish  quarter  of  Damascus. 
It  was  a  picture  of  his  old  self.  He  may  even  have  been 
scourged  here  (II  Cor.   11:24). 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  125 

24.  Plot  {epiboule).  Old  word  for  a  plan  (boule)  against 
(epi)  one.  In  the  N.T.  only  in  Acts  (9:24;  20:3,  19;  23:30). 
They  watched  (pareterounto).  Imperfect  middle  indicative 
of  paratereo,  common  verb  in  late  Greek  for  watching  beside 
{para)  or  insidiously  or  on  the  sly  as  in  Luke  6:7,  they  kept 
on  watching  by  day  and  night  to  kill  him.  In  II  Cor.  11 132 
Paul  says  that  the  Ethnarch  of  Aretas  "kept  guard"  {eph- 
rourei,  imperfect  active  of  phroureo)  to  seize  him.  Probably 
the  Jews  obtained  the  consent  of  the  Ethnarch  and  had  him 
appoint  some  of  them  as  guards  or  watchers  at  the  gate  of 
the  city. 

25.  Through  the  wall  (dia  tou  teichous).  Paul  in  II  Cor. 
II  :33  explains  dia  tou  teichous  as  being  dia  thuridos  (through 
a  window)  which  opened  into  the  house  on  the  inside  of  the 
wall  as  is  true  today  in  Damascus  as  Hackett  saw  there.  See 
Joshua  2:i5f.  (cf.  I  Sam.  19:12)  for  the  way  that  Rahab  let 
out  the  spies  "by  a  cord  through  the  window."  Lowering  him 
{auton  chalasantes).  First  aorist  active  participle  of  chalao, 
old  and  common  verb  in  a  nautical  sense  (Acts  lyiij,  30)  as 
well  as  otherwise  as  here.  Same  verb  used  by  Paul  of  this 
experience  (II  Cor.  11:33).  -^^  ^  basket  {en  sphuridi).  The 
word  used  when  the  four  thousand  were  fed  (Mark  8:8  = 
Matt.  15:37).  A  large  basket  plaited  of  reeds  and  distin- 
guished in  Mark  8:i9f.  (  =  Matt.  i6:9f.)  from  the  smaller 
kophinos.  Paul  uses  sargane,  a  basket  made  of  ropes.  This 
escape  by  night  by  the  help  of  the  men  whom  he  had  come 
to  destroy  was  a  shameful  memory  to  Paul  (II  Cor.  11:33). 
Wendt  thinks  that  the  coincidences  in  language  here  prove 
that  Luke  had  read  II  Corinthians.  That,  of  course,  is 
quite  possible. 

26.  He  assayed  {epeirazen).  Imperfect  active  of  conative 
action.  To  join  himself  {kollasthai).  Present  middle  (direct) 
infinitive  of  conative  action  again.  Same  word  kollao  in 
Luke  15:15  and  Acts  10:28.  See  on  Matt.  19:5  for  discussion. 
fFere  all  afraid  of  him  {pantes  ephobounto  auton).   They  were 


126      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

fearing  him.  Imperfect  middle  picturing  the  state  of  mind 
of  the  disciples  who  had  vivid  recollections  of  his  conduct 
when  last  here.  What  memories  Saul  had  on  this  return 
journey  to  Jerusalem  after  three  years.  He  had  left  a  con- 
quering hero  of  Pharisaism.  He  returns  distrusted  by  the 
disciples  and  regarded  by  the  Pharisees  as  a  renegade  and  a 
turncoat.  He  made  no  effort  to  get  in  touch  with  the  Sanhe- 
drin  who  had  sent  him  to  Damascus.  He  had  escaped  the 
plots  of  the  Jews  in  Damascus  only  to  find  himself  the  object 
of  suspicion  by  the  disciples  in  Jerusalem  who  had  no  proof 
of  his  sincerity  in  his  alleged  conversion.  Not  believing  {me 
pisteuontes).  They  had  probably  heard  of  his  conversion, 
but  they  frankly  disbelieved  the  reports  and  regarded  him 
as  a  hypocrite  or  a  spy  in  a  new  role  to  ruin  them.  fFas 
(estin).  The  present  tense  Is  here  retained  in  indirect  dis- 
course according  to  the  common  Greek  idiom. 

27.  Took  him  {epilabomenos).  Second  aorist  middle  (in- 
direct) participle  of  epilambano,  common  verb  to  lay  hold  of. 
Barnabas  saw  the  situation  and  took  Saul  to  himself  and 
listened  to  his  story  and  believed  it.  It  is  to  the  credit  of 
Barnabas  that  he  had  the  insight  and  the  courage  to  stand 
by  Saul  at  the  crucial  moment  in  his  life  when  the  evidence 
seemed  to  be  against  him.  It  is  a  pleasing  hypothesis  that 
this  influential  disciple  from  Cyprus  had  gone  to  the  Univer- 
sity of  Tarsus  where  he  met  Saul.  If  so,  he  would  know 
more  of  him  than  those  who  only  knew  his  record  as  a  perse- 
cutor of  Christians.  That  fact  Barnabas  knew  also,  but  he 
was  convinced  that  Jesus  had  changed  the  heart  of  Saul 
and  he  used  his  great  influence  (Acts  4:36;  11:22)  to  win 
the  favour  of  the  apostles,  Peter  in  particular  (Gal.  i  :i9)  and 
James  the  half-brother  of  Jesus.  The  other  apostles  were 
probably  out  of  the  city  as  Paul  says  that  he  did  not  sec 
them.  To  the  apostles  {pros  tons  apostolous) .  Both  Barnabas 
and  James  are  termed  apostles  in  the  general  sense,  though 
not  belonging  to  the  twelve,  as  Paul  did  not,  though  himself 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  127 

later  a  real  apostle.  So  Barnabas  introduced  Saul  to  Peter 
and  vouched  for  his  story,  declared  it  fully  {diegesato,  in 
detail)  including  Saul's  vision  of  Jesus  (eiden  ton  kurion) 
as  the  vital  thing  and  Christ's  message  to  Saul  {elalesen 
autoi)  and  Saul's  bold  preaching  (eparresiasato,  first  aorist 
middle  indicative  of  parresiazo  from  pan — resia  telling  it  all 
as  in  Acts  2:29),  Peter  was  convinced  and  Saul  was  his  guest 
for  two  weeks  (Gal.  i:i8)  with  delightful  fellowship  (his- 
toresai).  He  had  really  come  to  Jerusalem  mainly  "to  visit" 
(to  see)  Peter,  but  not  to  receive  a  commission  from  him. 
He  had  that  from  the  Lord  (Gal.  inf.).  Both  Peter  and 
James  could  tell  Saul  of  their  special  experiences  with  the 
Risen  Christ.  Furneaux  thinks  that  Peter  was  himself  stay- 
ing at  the  home  of  Mary  the  mother  of  John  Mark  (Acts 
12:12)  who  was  a  cousin  of  Barnabas  (Col.  4:10).  This  is 
quite  possible.  At  any  rate  Saul  is  now  taken  into  the  inner 
circle  of  the  disciples  in  Jerusalem. 

28.  Going  in  and  going  out  {eisporeumenos  kai  ekporeuo- 
menos).  Barnabas  and  Peter  and  James  opened  all  the  doors 
for  Saul  and  the  fear  of  the  disciples  vanished. 

29.  Preaching  boldly  (parresiazomenos).  For  a  while. 
Evidently  Saul  did  not  extend  his  preaching  outside  of 
Jerusalem  (Gal.  i  :22)  and  in  the  city  preached  mainly  in 
the  synagogues  of  the  Hellenists  (pros  tous  Hellenistas)  as 
Stephen  had  done  (Acts  8:9).  As  a  Cilician  Jew  he  knew 
how  to  speak  to  the  Hellenists.  Disputed  (sunezeiei).  Im- 
perfect active  of  sunzeteo,  the  very  verb  used  in  6:9  of  the  dis- 
putes with  Stephen  in  these  very  synagogues  in  one  of 
which  (Cilicia)  Saul  had  probably  joined  issue  with  Stephen 
to  his  own  discomfort.  It  was  intolerable  to  these  Hellenistic 
Jews  now  to  hear  Saul  taking  the  place  of  Stephen  and  using 
the  very  arguments  that  Stephen  had  employed.  But  they 
went  about  to  kill  him  {Hoi  de  epecheiroun  anelein  auton). 
Demonstrative  hoi  with  de  and  the  conative  imperfect  of 
epicheireo,  to  put  the  hand  to,  to  try,  an  old  verb  used  in 


128      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

the  N.T.  only  three  times  (Luke  i  :i;  Acts  9:29;  19:3).  They 
offer  to  Saul  the  same  conclusive  answer  that  he  gave  to 
Stephen,  death.  Paul  tells  how  the  Lord  Jesus  appeared  to 
him  at  this  juncture  in  a  vision  in  the  temple  (Acts  22:17-21) 
with  the  distinct  command  to  leave  Jerusalem  and  how 
Paul  protested  that  he  was  willing  to  meet  the  fate  of  Stephen 
in  whose  death  he  had  a  shameful  part.  That  is  to  Saul's 
credit,  but  the  Lord  did  not  want  Saul  to  be  put  to  death  yet. 
His  crown  of  martyrdom  will  come  later. 

30.  Knew  it  (epignontes).  Second  aorist  active  participle 
of  epiginosko,  to  know  fully.  The  disciples  saw  it  clearly,  so 
they  conducted  {kategagon,  effective  second  aorist  active 
indicative  of  katago).  Sent  forth  {exapesteilan).  Double 
compound  {ex^  out,  apOj  away  or  off).  Sent  him  out  and  off 
to  Tarsus  {eis  Tarson).  Silence  is  preserved  by  Luke.  But 
it  takes  little  imagination  to  picture  the  scene  at  home  when 
this  brilliant  young  rabbi,  the  pride  of  Gamaliel,  returns 
home  a  preacher  of  the  despised  Jesus  of  Nazareth  whose 
disciples  he  had  so  relentlessly  persecuted.  What  will  father, 
mother,  sister  think  of  him  now.** 

31.  So  the  church  {He  men  oun  ekklesia).  The  singular 
ekklesia  is  undoubtedly  the  true  reading  here  (all  the  great 
documents  have  it  so).  By  this  time  there  were  churches 
scattered  over  Judea,  Galilee,  and  Samaria  (Gal.  1:22),  but 
Luke  either  regards  the  disciples  in  Palestine  as  still  members 
of  the  one  great  church  in  Jerusalem  (instance  already  the 
work  of  Philip  in  Samaria  and  soon  of  Peter  in  Joppa  and 
Caesarea)  or  he  employs  the  term  ekklesia  in  a  geographical 
or  collective  sense  covering  all  of  Palestine.  The  strictly 
local  sense  we  have  seen  already  in  8:1  and  3  (and  Matt. 
18:17)  ^^<^  the  general  spiritual  sense  in  Matt.  16:18.  But 
in  Acts  8:3  it  is  plain  that  the  term  is  applied  to  the  organiza- 
tion of  Jerusalem  Christians  even  when  scattered  in  their 
homes.  The  use  of  men  oun  (so)  is  Luke's  common  way 
of  gathering  up  the  connection.     The  obvious  meaning  is 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  129 

that  the  persecution  ceased  because  the  persecutor  had  been 
converted.  The  wolf  no  longer  ravined  the  sheep.  It  is 
true  also  that  the  effort  of  Caligula  a.d.  39  to  set  up  his 
image  in  the  temple  in  Jerusalem  for  the  Jews  to  worship 
greatly  excited  the  Jews  and  gave  them  troubles  of  their 
own  (Josephus,  Ant.  XVIII.  8,  2-9).  Had  peace  (eichen 
eirenen).  Imperfect  active.  Kept  on  having  peace,  enjoying 
peace,  because  the  persecution  had  ceased.  Many  of  the 
disciples  came  back  to  Jerusalem  and  the  apostles  began 
to  make  preaching  tours  out  from  the  city.  This  idiom  {echo 
eirenen)  occurs  again  in  Rom.  5:1  {eirenen  echomen,  present 
active  subjunctive)  where  it  has  been  grievously  misunder- 
stood. There  it  is  an  exhortation jtojceep  on  enjoying  the 
peace  with  God  _alrea(iy-_inade,  not  to  make  peace  with 
God  which  would  be  eirenen  schomen  (ingressive  aorist  sub- 
junctive). Edified  {oikodomoumene) .  j'resent  passive  par- 
ticiple, linear  action  also.  One  result  of  the  enjoyment  of 
peace  after  the  persecution  was  the  continued  edification 
(Latin  word  aedificatio  for_buj1Hing  np  a  hnnsp)^  a  favourite 
figure  with  Paul  (I  Cor.  14;  Eph.  3)  and  scattered  throughout 
the  N.T.,  old  Greek  verb.  In  I  Peter  2:5  Peter  speaks  of  "the 
spiritual  house"  throughout  the  five  Roman  provinces  being 
"built  up"  (cf.  Matt.  16:18).  In  the  comfort  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  {tei  paraklesei  tou  hagiou  pneumatos).  Either  locative 
(in)  or  .instrumental  case  {by).  The  Holy  Spirit  had  been 
promised  by  Jesus  as  "another  Paraclete"  and  now  this  is 
shown  to  be  true.  The  only  instance  in  Acts  of  the  use  of 
paraklesis  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  word,  of  course,  means 
jcanin£jto_one^s_side  {parakaleb)  either  for  advice  or  for  con- 
solation. Was  multiplied  {eplethuneto).  Imperfect  middle 
passive.  The  multiplication  of  the  disciples  kept  pace  with 
the  peace,  the  edification,  the  walking  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord, 
the  comfort  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  blood  of  the  martyrs  was 
already  becoming  the  seed  of  the  church.  Stephen  had  not 
borne  his  witness  in  vain. 


I30      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

32.  Lydda  (Ludda).  In  O.T.  Lod  (I  Chron.  8:12)  and  near 
Joppa.    Later  Diospolis. 

33.  Aenias  {Ainean).  Old  Greek  name  and  so  probably 
a  Hellenistic  Jew.  He  was  apparently  a  disciple  already 
(the  saint,  verse  32).  Luke  the  physician  notes  that  he 
had  been  bed  ridden  for  eight  years.  See  on  5:15  for  "bed" 
{krahattou)  and  8:7  and  Luke  5:18  for  "paralyzed"  {parale- 
lumenos,  perfect  passive  participle  of  paraluo  with  en,  peri- 
phrastic past  perfect  passive). 

34.  Healeth  {idtai).  Aoristic  present  middle  indicative, 
heals  here  and  now.  Make  thy  bed  {strbson  seautoi).  First 
aorist  (ingressive)  active  imperative  of  stronnumi  {-uo). 
Old  word  with  "bed"  (krabatton)  understood  as  the  object. 
Literally,  spread  thy  bed  for  thyself  (dative  case),  what 
others  for  eight  years  have  done  for  thee. 

35.  Sharon  (Sarona).  The  Plain  of  Sharon,  not  a  town. 
Thirty  miles  long  from  Joppa  to  Caesarea. 

36.  At  Joppa  (En  loppei).  The  modern  Jaffa,  the  port  of 
Jerusalem  (II  Chron.  2:16).  Disciple  {mathetria).  Feminine 
form  of  mathetes,  a  learner  from  manthanb,  to  learn,  a  late 
word  and  only  here  in  the  N.T.  Tabitha  {Tabeitha).  Ara- 
maic form  of  the  Hebrew  Tsebi  and,  like  the  Greek  word 
Dorcas  (Dorkas),  means  Gazelle,  "the  creature  with  the 
beautiful  look"  (or  eyes),  from  derkomai.  The  gazelle  was 
a  favourite  type  for  beauty  in  the  orient  (Song  of  Solomon 
2:9,  17;  4:5;  7:3).  She  may  have  had  both  the  Aramaic 
and  the  Greek  name,  Tabitha  Dorcas  like  John  Mark. 
There  is  nothing  said  about  a  husband  and  so  she  was 
probably  unmarried.  She  is  the  second  woman  mentioned 
by  name  after  Pentecost  (Sapphira  the  other).  She  did  her 
beautiful  deeds  by  herself.  She  did  not  have  a  Dorcas 
society.    Did  {epoiei).    Imperfect  active,  her  habit. 

37.  In  an  upper  chamber  [en  huperoibi).  See  on  1:13. 
Also  in  verse  39.  In  that  house.  This  service  was  rendered 
by  the  women,  though  Luke  has  lousantes  (masculine  plural 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  13  I 

aorist  active  participle  of  loud),  a  general  way  of  saying 
"they  washed."  The  interment  was  not  hurried  as  in 
Jerusalem  (Ananias  and  Sapphira)  and  the  upper  room  is 
where  the  body  was  usually  placed. 

38.  Delay  not  {me  okneseis).  Ingressive  aorist  active 
subjunctive  in  prohibition.  Direct  discourse  and  not  in- 
direct as  late  MSS.  have  (aorist  active  infinitive,  oknesai). 
Possibly  the  two  messengers  started  before  Dorcas  was 
quite  dead,  though  we  do  not  know.  Peter  had  recently 
healed  Aeneas  and  the  disciples  may  have  had  faith  enough 
to  believe  that  he  could  raise  the  dead  by  the  power  of 
Christ.  W.  M.  Ramsay  doubts  if  Dorcas  was  really  dead, 
but  why  see  legends  in  these  supernatural  events.'' 

39.  Stood  by  him  {parestesan  autdi).  Second  aorist  active 
indicative,  intransitive,  of  paristemi).  Vivid  picture  of  this 
group  of  widows  as  they  stood  around  Peter,  weeping 
{klaiousai)  and  showing  {epideiknumenai,  present  middle  as 
belonging  to  themselves,  pointing  with  pride  to)  the  very 
inner  garments  (chitonas)  and  outer  garments  (himatia), 
like  the  Latin  tunica  and  toga,  which  she  made  from  time 
to  time  {epoiei,  imperfect  active,  repeated  action).  It  was  a 
heart-breaking  scene. 

40.  Put  them  all  forth  (ekbalon  exo  pantas).  Second  aorist 
(effective)  active  participle  of  ekballo,  a  rather  strong  word, 
perhaps  with  some  difficulty.  Cf.  Mark  5:40  which  incident 
Peter  may  have  recalled.  The  words  are  not  genuine  in 
Luke  8:54.  Peter's  praying  alone  reminds  one  of  Elijah  (I 
Kings  17:20)  and  the  widow's  son  and  Elisha  for  the  Shu- 
nammite's  son  (II  Kings  4:33).  Tabitha,  arise  {Tabeitha, 
anastethi).  With  sublime  faith  like  Taleitha  koum  of  Jesus 
in  Mark  5:41.  She  sat  up  (anekathisen).  Effective  aorist 
active  indicative  of  anakathizo.  Often  in  medical  writers, 
only  here  in  the  N.T.  and  Luke  7:15  where  Westcott  and 
Hort  have  in  the  margin  the  uncompounded  form  ekathisen. 
Vivid  picture. 


132      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

41.  Raised  her  up  {anestesen  auien).  First  aorist  active 
indicative,  transitive,  of  anistemi.  Presented  (parestesen). 
First  aorist  active  indicative,  transitive  of  paristemi  (cf. 
intransitive  second  aorist  in  verse  39  above).  It  was  a  joy- 
ful time  for  Peter,  the  widows,  all  the  saints,  and  for  Dorcas. 

43.  Many  days  [hemeras  hikanas).  See  on  verse  23.  Luke 
is  fond  of  the  phrase  and  uses  it  for  time,  number,  size.  It 
might  be  "ten  days,  ten  months,  or  ten  years"  (Page). 
With  one  Simon  a  tanner  {para  tini  Simoni  hursei).  The  use 
of  para  is  usual  for  staying  with  one  (by  his  side).  "The 
more  scrupulous  Jews  regarded  such  an  occupation  as  un- 
clean, and  avoided  those  who  pursued  it.  The  conduct  of 
Peter  here  shows  that  he  did  not  carry  his  prejudices  to  that 
extent"  (Hackett).  One  of  the  rabbis  said:  "It  is  impossi- 
ble for  the  world  to  do  without  tanners;  but  woe  to  him  who 
is  a  tanner."  A  Jewess  could  sue  for  divorce  if  she  discovered 
that  her  husband  was  a  tanner.  And  yet  Peter  will  have 
scruples  on  the  housetop  in  the  tanner's  house  about  eating 
food  considered  unclean.  "The  lodging  with  the  tanner  was 
a  step  on  the  road  to  eating  with  a  Gentile"  (Furneaux). 


CHAPTER  X 

1.  Cornelius  (Kornelios).  The  great  Cornelian  family  of 
Rome  may  have  had  a  freedman  or  descendant  who  is 
centurion  (hekaton-tarches,  leader  of  a  hundred,  Latin  cen- 
turio).  See  on  Matt.  8:5.  These  Roman  centurions  always 
appear  in  a  favourable  light  in  the  N.T.  (Matt.  8:5;  Luke 
7:2;  23:47;  Acts  10:1;  22:25;  27:3).  Furneaux  notes  the 
contrasts  between  Joppa,  the  oldest  town  in  Palestine,  and 
Caesarea,  built  by  Herod;  the  Galilean  fisherman  lodging 
with  a  tanner  and  the  Roman  officer  in  the  seat  of  govern- 
mental authority.  Of  the  band  called  the  Italian  {ek  speires 
tes  kaloumenes  Italikes).  A  legion  had  ten  cohorts  or  "  bands  " 
and  sixty  centuries.  The  word  speires  (note  genitive  in  ~es 
like  the  Ionic  instead  of  -as)  is  here  equal  to  the  Latin 
cohors.  In  the  provinces  were  stationed  cohorts  of  Italic 
citizens  (volunteers)  as  an  Inscription  at  Carnuntum  on  the 
Danube  (Ramsay)  has  shown  (epitaph  of  an  officer  in  the 
second  Italic  cohort).  Once  more  Luke  has  been  vindicated. 
The  soldiers  could,  of  course,  be  Roman  citizens  who  lived 
in  Caesarea.  But  the  Italian  cohorts  were  sent  to  any  part 
of  the  empire  as  needed.  The  procurator  at  Caesarea  would 
need  a  cohort  whose  loyalty  he  could  trust,  for  the  Jews  were 
restless. 

2.  Devout  {eusebes).  Old  word  from  eu  (well)  and  sebomai 
(to  worship,  to  reverence),  but  rare  in  the  N.T.  (Acts  10: 
2,  7;  II  Peter  2:1).  It  might  refer  to  a  worshipful  pagan  (Acts 
17:23,  sebasmata,  objects  of  worship),  but  connected  with 
"one  that  feared  God"  {phoboumenos  ton  theon)  Luke  de- 
scribes "a  God-fearing  proselyte"  as  in  10:22,  35.  This  is 
his  usual  term  for  the  Gentile  seekers  after  God  (13:16,  26; 
17:4,  17,  etc.),  who  had  come  into  the  worship  of  the  syna- 

^33 


134      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

gogue  without  circumcision,  and  were  not  strictly  prose- 
lytes, though  some  call  such  men  "proselytes  of  the  gate" 
(cf.  Acts  13:43);  but  clearly  Cornelius  and  his  family  were 
still  regarded  as  outside  the  pale  of  Judaism  (10:28,  34; 
II  :i,  8;  15:7).  They  had  seats  in  the  synagogue,  but  were 
not  Jews.  Gave  much  alms  {poion  eleemosunas  pollas). 
Doing  many  alms  (the  very  phrase  in  Matt.  6:2),  a  char- 
acteristic mark  of  Jewish  piety  and  from  a  Gentile  to  the 
Jewish  people.  Prayed  {deomenos).  Begging  of  God.  Alms- 
giving and  prayer  were  two  of  the  cardinal  points  with  the 
Jews  (Jesus  adds  fasting  in  his  picture  of  the  Pharisee  in 
Matt.    6:1-18). 

3.  Coming  in  {eiselthonta).  Ingressive  second  aorist  active 
participle,  not  present.  So  punctiliar,  "saw  come,"  not 
"saw  coming."  So  also  "say"  or  "speak,"  not  "saying." 
Luke  repeats  the  account  of  this  vision  to  Cornelius  twice 
(10:30;  11:13)  ^^'^  ^Iso  the  story  of  the  vision  to  Peter 
(10:1-16,  28;  11:5). 

4.  Lord  (kurie).  Cornelius  recognizes  the  angel  of  God 
(verse  3)  as  God's  messenger.  Jre  gone  up  {anehesan). 
Timeless  second  aorist  active  indicative  of  anabaino.  Gone 
up  like  the  smoke  of  incense  in  sacrifices.  For  a  memorial 
(eis  mnemosunon).  Old  word  from  mnemon.  The  only  other 
instance  in  the  N.T.  is  by  Jesus  about  the  act  of  Mary  of 
Bethany  (Matt.  26:13;  Mark  14:9).  His  prayers  and  his 
alms  proved  his  sincerity  and  won  the  ear  of  God. 

5.  Fetch  (metapempsai).  First  aorist  middle  (indirect, 
for  one's  self)  imperative  of  metapempo,  usual  voice  in 
ancient  Greek  with  this  verb  in  sense  of  sending  another  for 
one's  own  sake.   Only  in  Acts  in  the  N.T.   See  also  10:22. 

6.  Lodgeth  (xenizetai).  Present  passive  indicative  of 
xenizb  old  verb  from  xenos,  a  stranger  as  a  guest.  So  to  en- 
tertain a  guest  as  here  or  to  surprise  by  strange  acts  (Acts 
17:20;  I  Peter  4:4).  Whose  {hoi).  To  whom,  dative  of  posses- 
sion.    By  the  seaside  {para  thalassan).     Along  by  the  sea. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  135 

Note  accusative  case.  Outside  the  city  walls  because  a 
tanner  and  to  secure  water  for  his  trade.  Some  tanneries 
are  by  the  seashore  at  Jaffa  today. 

8.  Rehearsed  {exegesamenos).  See  on  Luke  24:35.  All 
the  details  about  the  vision.  The  soldier  was  "devout"  like 
Cornelius  and  would  protect  the  two  household  servants 
[oiketon). 

9.  On  the  morrow  {tei  epaurion).  Locative  case  of  article 
with  the  compound  adverb  {hemerdi  day  being  understood), 
the  second  day  after  leaving  Caesarea,  28  miles  from  Joppa. 
The  third  day  (the  next  morrow,  verse  23)  they  start  back 
home  and  the  fourth  day  (on  the  morrow  again,  verse  24) 
they  reach  Caesarea.  As  thsy  (ekeinon).  The  party  of  three 
from  Caesarea.  Genitive  absolute  with  present  participle 
hodoiporounton  (journeying)  and  eggizonton  (drew  nigh). 
The  housetop  {to  doma).  Old  word  and  in  Gospels  (Luke 
3:19,  etc.),  but  only  here  in  Acts,  From  demo,  to  build,  and 
so  any  part  of  the  building  (hall,  dining  room,  and  then  roof). 
The  roof  was  nearly  flat  with  walls  around  and  so  was  a 
good  place  for  meditation  and  prayer  and  naps. 

10.  Hungry  {prospeinos).  Only  instance  of  the  word 
known,  a  hapax  legomenon.  Probably  "very  hungry" 
(^roj  =  besides,  in  addition).  Desired  (ethelen).  Imperfect 
active.  Was  longing  to  eat.  It  was  about  twelve  o'clock 
noon  and  Peter  may  even  have  smelt  the  savory  dishes, 
"while  they  made  ready"  (paraskeuazonton) .  "The  natural 
and  the  supernatural  border  closely  on  one  another,  with  no 
definable  limits"  (Furneaux).  He  fell  into  a  trance  {ege- 
neto  ep^  auion  ek stasis).  More  exactly,  "An  ecstasy  came 
upon  him,"  in  which  trance  he  passed  out  of  himself  {ekstasisj 
from  exist emi)  and  from  which  one  came  to  himself  (12:11). 
Cf.  also  11:5  and  22:17.  I^  is  thus  different  from  a  vision 
{horama)  as  in  verse  3. 

11.  Beholdeth  itheorei).  Vivid  historical  present  and 
change    from    past    time.       Opened    {aneoigmenon,    perfect 


136      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

passive  participle  with  double  reduplication,  state  of  comple- 
tion). Descending  {katabainon).  Present  active  participle 
describing  the  process.  Sheet  (othonen).  Old  word  for  linen 
cloth  and  only  here  in  the  N.T.  Accusative  case  in  apposi- 
tion with  skeuos  (vessel).  Let  down  {Kathiemenon) .  Present 
passive  participle  of  Kathiemi.  Old  verb,  but  in  the  N.T. 
only  here  and  Luke  5:19  and  Acts  9:25.  Linear  action  here 
picturing  the  process,  ** being  let  down."  By  four  corners 
{tessarsin  archais).  Instrumental  case  of  arche,  beginning. 
We  say  "end"  or  extremity  for  this  use  of  the  word.  The 
picture  is  the  sheet  held  up  by  four  cords  to  which  the  sheet 
is  fastened.  Isa.  11:12  had  said  that  Israel  would  be  gathered 
from  the  four  corners  of  the  earth.  Knowling  follows  Hobart 
in  taking  the  four  corners  of  the  sheet  to  be  a  medical  phrase 
for  bandage  (the  end  of  a  bandage). 

12.  Were  {huperchen).  Imperfect  of  huparcho  in  sense  of 
en,  to  exist,  be.  Fish  are  not  mentioned,  perhaps  because  the 
sheet  had  no  water,  though  they  were  clean  and  unclean 
also  (Lev.  11:9;  Deut.  14:9).  All  manner  0/  {panto).  Lit- 
erally, all,  but  clearly  all  varieties,  not  all  individuals.  Both 
clean  and  unclean  animals  are  in  the  sheet. 

14.  Not  so,  Lord  {Medamos,  kurie).  The  negative  meda- 
mos  calls  for  the  optative  eie  (may  it  not  be)  or  the  impera- 
tive est 5  (let  it  be).  It  is  not  oudamos,  a  blunt  refusal  (I 
shall  not  do  it).  And  yet  it  is  more  than  a  mild  protest  as 
Page  and  Furneaux  argue.  It  is  a  polite  refusal  with  a  rea- 
son given.  Peter  recognizes  the  invitation  to  slay  (tkuson) 
the  unclean  animals  as  from  the  Lord  (kurie)  but  declines 
it  three  times.  For  I  have  never  eaten  anything  (hoti  oudepote 
ephagon  pan).  Second  aorist  active  indicative,  I  never  did 
anything  like  this  and  I  shall  not  do  it  now.  The  use  of  pan 
(everything)  with  oudepote  (never)  is  like  the  Hebrew  (/o — 
kol)  though  a  like  idiom  appears  in  the  vernacular  KoinS 
(Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  752).  Common  and  unclean  {koinon 
kai  akatharton).    Koinos  from  epic  xunos  (xun^  sun^  together 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  137 

with)  originally  meant  common  to  several  (Latin  communis) 
as  in  Acts  2:44;  4:32;  Tit.  1:4;  Jude  3.  The  use  seen  here 
(also  Mark  7:2,  5;  Rom.  14:14;  Heb.  10:29;  R^v.  21:27; 
Acts  10:28;  11:8),  like  Latin  vulgaris  is  unknown  in  ancient 
Greek.  Here  the  idea  is  made  plain  by  the  addition  of 
akatharton  (unclean),  ceremonially  unclean,  of  course.  We 
have  the  same  double  use  in  our  word  ''common."  See  on 
Mark  7:i8f.  where  Mark  adds  the  remarkable  participle 
katharizon  (making  all  meats  clean),  evidently  from  Peter 
who  recalls  this  vision.  Peter  had  been  reared  from  child- 
hood to  make  the  distinction  between  clean  and  unclean 
food  and  this  new  proposal  even  from  the  Lord  runs  against 
all  his  previous  training.  He  did  not  see  that  some  of  God's 
plans  for  the  Jews  could  be  temporary.  This  symbol  of  the 
sheet  was  to  show  Peter  ultimately  that  Gentiles  could  be 
saved  without  becoming  Jews.  At  this  moment  he  is  in 
spiritual  and  intellectual  turmoil. 

15.  Make  not  thou  common  (su  me  koinou).  Note  emphatic 
position  of  su  (thou).  Do  thou  stop  making  common  what 
God  cleansed  (ekatharisen).  The  idiom  of  me  with  the  pres- 
ent active  imperative  koinou  means  precisely  this.  Peter 
had  just  called  "common"  what  God  had  invited  him  to 
slay  and  eat. 

16.  Thrice  (epitris) .  For  three  times.  Peter  remained  uncon- 
vinced even  by  the  prohibition  of  God.  Here  is  a  striking  il- 
lustration of  obstinacyiQiUlie  part  of  one  who  acknowledges 
jJT^_v2ir^  '^f  G^d  to  him  whfn  the  ^'^mmand  nf  thf^jjjTrd 
crosses  one's  preferP"<'P'?  ^^id  prejndirps.  There  are  abundant 
examples  today  of  precisely  this  thing.  In  a  real  sense  Peter 
was  maintaining  a  pose  of  piety  beyond  the  will  of  the  Lord. 
Peter  was  defiling  what  God  had  cleansed.  fFas  received  up 
{anelemphthe) .  First  aorist  passive  indicative  of  analambano, 
to  take  up.  The  word  used  of  the  Ascension  (i  :22). 

17.  Was  much  perplexed  in  himself  {en  heautoi  dieporei). 
Imperfect    active    of    diaporeo,    intensive    compound    {dia, 


138      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

thoroughly,  and  a  privative  and  poros^  way)jjtobe  cpmpi^letely 
^t  a  loss  to  know  what  road  to  take.  Old  verb,  but  in  N.T. 
only  in  Luke  and  Acts.  Page  notes  that  Luke  is  singularly 
fond  of  verbs  compounded  with  dia.  See  on  Luke  9:7  and 
Acts  2:12.  Wh£iiJi]iLofthe^cstasy  he  was  rnore  puzzled  than 
ever.  Might  be  {an  eie).  Optative  with  an  in  indirect  ques- 
tion simply  retained  from  the  direct  (Robertson,  Grammar^ 
pp.  102 1,  1044).  See  Acts  17:18,  for  the  direct  ano  Luke 
1:62  for  the  indirect  [an  theloi  both  times).  It  is  the  con- 
clusion of  a  fourth  class  condition.  Having  made  inquiry 
{dierotes antes).  First  aorist  active  participle  of  dierotaOy 
another  compound  of  dia,  to  ask  one  after  another,  to  ask 
through,  old  verb,  but  only  here  in  the  N.T.  It  took  diligent 
inquiry  to  find  the  obscure  house  of  Simon  the  tanner. 
Stood  before  the  gate  {epestesan  epi  ton  pulona).  Second  aorist 
active  indicative  of  ephistemi,  intransitive.  Note  repetition 
of  epi.  The  messengers  stopped  right  at  the  folding  gates  of 
the  passage  (pulona)  which  led  from  the  street  to  the  inner 
court  or  house. 

18.  Called  {phone sanies).  In  a  loud  voice  that  those  inside 
the  house  might  hear.  Asked  {epunthanonto).  Imperfect 
middle  of  punthanomai,  old  verb  to  make  inquiry  especially 
with  an  indirect  question  as  here._Kegt_on_iiiqiiiring.  West- 
cott  and  Hort  follow  B  C  here  and  read  epuihonto  (second 
aorist  middle,  effective  aorist).  Either  makes  sense,  though 
the  imperfect  is  more  picturesque.  Were  lodging  {xenizetai). 
Present  middle  indicative  retained  in  indirect  question. 
See  on  verse  6  for  the  verb. 

19.  Thought  {dienthumoumenou) .  Genitive  absolute  of 
present  middle  participle  of  dienthumeomai,  a  double  com- 
pound {dia  and  en-  with  thumos)  and  another  hapax  lego- 
menon  save  in  ecclesiastical  writers,  though  enihumeomai  is 
common  enough  and  Textus  Receptus  so  reads  here.  Peter 
was  revolving  in  his  mind,  through  and  through,  in  and  out, 
to  find  the  meaning  of  the  strange  vision. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  139 

20.  But  (alia).  So  usually,  though  it  is  open  to  question 
whether  alia  is  adversative  here  and  not  rather,  "Now 
then."  Get  thee  down  {katahethi).  Second  aorist  active  im- 
perative, at  once.  Go  (poreuou).  Present  middle  imperative, 
go  on.  Nothing  doubting  {meden  diakrinomenos) .  Another 
compound  of  dia,  old  and  common  verbJorLj^diYlded  mind 
{dia  like  duo,  two).  Note  usual  negative  of  the  present  middle 
participle,  the  subjective  meden.  The  notion  of  wavering 
Qames.  i  :6)  is  common  with  this  verb  in  the  middle  voice. 
In  Acts  11:12  the  aorist  active  {meden  diakrinanta)  Is  used 
perhaps  with  the  idea  of  conduct  towards  others  rather 
than  his  own  internal  doubt  as  here  (Page).  For  I  {hoti 
ego).  The  Holy  Spirit  assumes  responsibility  for  the  mes- 
sengers from  Cornelius  and  thus  connects  their  mission  with 
the  vision  which  was  still  troubling  Peter.  Peter  had  heard 
his  name  called  by  the  man  (verse  19). 

21.  Cause  (aitia).  Or  reason.  Common  in  this  sense. 
See  on  Matt.   19:3. 

22.  Righteous  (dikaios).  In  the  Jewish  sense  as  in  Luke 
1 :6;  2:25.  Well  reported  of  (marturoumenos) .  Present  passive 
participle  as  in  6:3.  Cf.  the  other  centurion  in  Luke  7:4. 
Nation  (ethnous).  Not  laou,  for  the  speakers  are  Gentiles. 
Was  warned  (echrematisthe) .  First  aorist  passive  of  chre^ 
matizo,  old  word  for  doing  business,  then  consulting  an 
oracle,  and  here  of  being  divinely  (word  God  not  expressed) 
warned  as  in  Matt.  2:12,  22;  Luke  2:26;  Heb.  11:7.  Then  to 
be  called  or  receive  a  name  from  one's  business  as  in  Acts 
11:26;  Rom.  7:3. 

23.  Lodged  them  {exenisen).  Active  voice  here  rather  than 
passive  as  in  10:6.  Accompanied  him  {sunelthan  autoi). 
Associative  instrumental  case  after  verb.  The  wisdom  of 
having  these  half  dozen  Jewish  Christians  from  Joppa  with 
Peter  in  the  house  of  Cornelius  in  Caesarea  becomes  manifest 
in  Jerusalem   (11:12). 

24.  Was  waiting  {en  prosdokbn).    Periphrastic  imperfect 


^ 


I40      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

active,  in  eager  expectation  and  hope,  directing  the  mind 
{dokao)  towards  {pros)  anything.  Old  and  common  verb. 
Near  {anagkaious).  Only  instance  in  the  N.T.  of  this  sense 
of  anagkaios  from  anagke,  necessity,  what  one  cannot  do 
without,  necessary  (I  Cor.  12:22),  duty  (Acts  13 :46),  or  blood 
relations  as  here.  The  ancient  Greek  writers  combined 
these  two  words  {suggeneis,  kinsmen,  anagkaious,  necessary 
friends)  as  here.  It  was  a  homogeneous  group  of  Gentiles 
close  to  Cornelius  and  predisposed  to  hear  Peter  favourably. 

25.  That  Peter  entered  {tou  eiselthein  ton  Petron).  This 
is  a  difficult  construction,  for  the  subject  of  egeneto  (it  hap- 
pened) has  to  be  the  articular  genitive  infinitive  tou  eiselthein 
with  the  accusative  of  general  reference  ton  Petron.  Most 
commentators  consider  it  inexplicable.  It  is  probably  an 
extension  of  the  ordinary  articular  infinitive  under  the  in- 
fluence of  the  Hebrew  infinitive  construct  without  regard 
to  the  case,  regarding  it  as  a  fixed  case  form  and  so  using  it  as 
nominative.  Precisely  this  construction  of  tou  and  the  in- 
finitive as  the  subject  of  a  verb  occurs  in  the  LXX  (II  Chron. 
6:7,  etc.).  See  Robertson,  Grammar,  pp.  loSyi.  for  full  dis- 
cussion of  this  obvious  Hebraism.  Somewhat  similar  ex- 
amples appear  in  Acts  20:3;  27:1.  But  the  Codex  Bezae 
avoids  this  awkward  idiom  by  the  genitive  absolute  (proseg- 
gizontos  tou  Petrou)  and  some  additional  details  (one  of  the 
servants  ran  forward  and  announced  that  he  was  come). 
Worshipped  him  (prosekunesen).  "Cornelius  was  not  an 
idolator  and  would  not  have  honoured  Peter  as  a  god" 
(Furneaux).  The  word  probably  means  here  reverence  like 
old  English  usage  (Wycliff)  and  not  actual  worship,  though 
Peter  took  it  that  way  (verse  26).  Jesus  accepted  such 
worship  (Matt.  8:2;  Luke  5:8  by  Peter). 

27.  Js  he  talked  with  him  {sunomilon  autoi).  Present 
active  participle  of  sunomileo,  rare  compound  and  here 
alone  in  the  N.T.,  with  associative  instrumental  case.  The 
uncompounded  verb  is  common  enough  though  in  the  N.T. 


I 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  141 

only  in  Luke  24:14  which  see  and  Acts  20:1 1 ;  24:26.  Findeth 
{heuriskei).  Vivid  historical  present  indicative  active. 
Come  together  {suneleluthotas) .  Second  perfect  active  par- 
ticiple of  sunerchomai.  It  was  an  expectant  group  of  Gen- 
tiles eager  for  Peter's  interpretation  of  the  vision  of  Cor-^ 
nelius. 

28.  How  that  it  is  an  unlawful  thing  [hos  athemiton  estin). 
The  conjunction  hos  is  sometimes  equivalent  to  hoti  (that). 
The  old  form  of  athemitos  was  athemistos  from  themistos 
{themizOy  themis,  law  custom)  and  a  privative.  In  the  N.T. 
only  here  and  I  Peter  4:3  (Peter  both  times).  But  there  is 
no  O.T.  regulation  forbidding  such  social  contact  with 
Gentiles,  though  the  rabbis  had  added  it  and  had  made  it 
binding  by  custom.  There  is  nothing  more  binding  on  the 
average  person  than  social  custom.  On  coming  from  the 
market  an  orthodox  Jew  was  expected  to  immerse  to  avoid 
defilement  (Edersheim,  Jewish  Social  Life,  pp.  26-28;  Tay- 
lor's Sayings  of  the  Jewish  Fathers,  pp.  15,  26,  137,  second 
edition).  See  also  Acts  11:3;  Gal.  2:12.  It  is  that  middle 
wall  of  partition  between  Jew  and  Gentile  (Eph.  2:14)  which 
Jesus  broke  down.  One  of  another  nation  (allophuloi) .  Dative 
case  of  an  old  adjective,  but  only  here  in  the  N.T.  {alios, 
another,  phulon,  race).  Both  Juvenal  (Sat.  XIV.  104,  105) 
and  Tacitus  (History,  V.  5)  speak  of  the  Jewish  exclusiveness 
and  separation  from  Gentiles.  And  yet  unto  {k'amoi).  Dative 
of  the  emphatic  pronoun  (note  position  of  prominence)  with 
kai  (crasis)  meaning  here  "and  yet"  or  adversative  "but" 
as  often  with  kai  which  is  by  no  means  always  merely  the 
connective  "and"  (Robertson,  Grammar,  pp.  ii82f.).  Now 
Peter  takes  back  both  the  adjectives  used  in  his  protest 
to  the.Lord  (verse  14)  "common  and  unclean."  It  is  a  long 
journey  that  Peter  has  made.  He  here  refers  to  "no  one" 
(medena),  not  to  "things,"  but  that  is  great  progress. 

29.  Without  gainsaying  (anantirrhetos).    A  privative  with 
compound  adverb  from  anti  (back,  in  return,  against)  and 


142      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

verbal  rhetos  (from  errhethen^  to  speak).  Late  and  rare  and 
here  only  in  the  N.T.,  but  the  adjective  in  19:36.  Without 
answering  back.  That  is  true  after  the  Holy  Spirit  expressly 
told  Peter  to  go  with  the  messengers  of  Cornelius  (10:19-23). 
Peter's  objections  were  made  to  the  Lord  in  the  vision  which 
he  did  not  understand.  But  that  vision  prepared  him  for  this 
great  step  which  he  had  now  taken.  He  had  stepped  over  the 
line  of  Jewish  custom.  With  what  intent  {tini  logoi).  More 
exactly,  '*for  what  reason"  as  in  Plato,  Gorgias  512  C. 

30.  Four  days  ago  {apo  tetartes  hemeras).  From  the  fourth 
day,  reckoning  backwards  from  this  day,  /  was  keeping  the 
ninth  hour  of  prayer  {emen  ten  enaten  proseuchomenos). 
Periphrastic  middle  imperfect  and  accusative  of  extension 
of  time  (all  the  ninth  hour). 

31.  Is  heard  {eisekousthe) .  Sort  of  timeless  first  aorist 
passive  indicative  as  is  "are  had  in  remembrance"  {emnes- 
thesan.   See  verse  4  "are  gone  up  for  a  memorial"). 

32.  In  the  house  of  Simon  {en  oikidi  Simonos).  See  9:43 
for  para  Simoni  with  same  idea. 

33.  And  thou  hast  well  done  that  thou  art  come  {su  te  kalos 
epoiesas  paragenomenos) .  "And  thou  didst  well  in  coming." 
A  regular  formula  for  expressing  thanks  as  in  Phil.  4:14; 
III  John  6;  II  Peter  i  -.K).  The  participle  completes  the  idea 

I  of  kalos  poied  neatly.  Cornelius  commends  Peter  for  his 
courage  in  breaking  away  from  Jewish  custom  and  takes  no 
offence  at  the  implied  superiority  of  the  Jews  over  the  Gen- 
tiles. Cornelius  and  his  circle  of  kinsmen  and  close  friends 
are  prepared  soil  for  a  new  era  in  the  history  of  Christianity. 
The  Samaritans  were  now  nominal  Jews  and  the  Ethiopian 
eunuch  was  a  single  case,  but  here  Peter  the  chief  apostle, 
not  Philip  the  preaching  deacon  (evangelist),  was  involved. 
It  was  a  crisis.  Cornelius  reveals  an  open  mind  for  the  mes- 
sage of  God  through  Peter.  Commanded  thee  {prostetagmena 
sot).  Perfect  passive  participle  with  the  dative  case  (soi). 
Cornelius   is   a   military   man   and   he  employs   a   military 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  143 

term  {prostasso,  old  word  to  command).  J|e  is  ready  for 
orders  from  the  Lord. 

34.  Opened  his  mouth  {anoixas  to  stoma).  Solemn  formula 
for  beginning  his  address  (8:35;  18:14;  Matt.  5:2;  13:35). 
But  also  good  elocution  for  the  speaker.  /  perceive  (katal- 
ambanomai) .  Aoristic  present  middle  of  katalambano,  to  take 
hold  of,  the  middle  noting  mental  action,  to  lay  hold  with 
the  mind  (Acts  4:13;  10:34;  25:25;  Eph.  3:18).  It  had  been 
a  difficult  thing  for  Peter  to  grasp,  but  now  "of  a  truth" 
(ep*  aletheias)  the  light  has  cleared  away  the  fogs.  It'was 
not  until  Peter  had  crossed  the  threshold  of  the  house  of 
Cornelius  in  the  new  environment  and  standpoint  that  he 
sees  this  new  and  great  truth.  Respecter  of  persons  (proso- 
polemptes).  This  compound  occurs  only  here  and  in  Chry- 
sostom.  It  is  composed  of  prosbpon  face  or  person  {pros  and 
ops,  before  the  eye  or  face)  and  lamhano.  The  abstract  form 
prosopolempsia  occurs  in  James  2:1  (also  Rom.  2:11;  Eph. 
6:9;  Col.  3:25)  and  the  verb  prosdpolempteo  in  James  2:9. 
The  separate  phrase  {lambanein  prosopon)  occurs  in  Luke 
20:21  and  Gal.  2:6.  The  phrase  was  already  in  the  LXX 
(Deut.  10:17;  II  Chron.  19:7;  Psa.  82:6).  Luke  has  simply 
combined  the  two  words  into  one  compound  one.  The  idea 
is  to  pay  regard  to  one's  looks  or  circumstances  rather  than 
to  his  intrinsic  character.  The  Jews  had  come  to  feel  that 
they  were  the  favourites  of  God  and  actually  sons  of  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  because  they  were  descendants  of  Abra- 
ham.   John  the  Baptist  rebuked  them  for  this  fallacy. 

35.  Acceptable  to  him  (dektos  autoi).  Verbal  adjective 
from  dechomai.  Acceptabilis.  That  is  to  say,  a  Gentile 
would  not  have  to  becorrie  a  Jew  in  order  to  become  a  Chris- 
tian. Evidently  Peter  had  not  before  perceived  this  fact. 
On  the  great  Day  of  Pentecost  when  he  spoke  of  the  promise 
"to  all  those  afar  off"  (2:39)  Peter  understood  that  they 
must  first  become  Jews  and  then  Christians.  The  new  idea 
that  now  makes  a  revolution  in  Peter's  outlook  is  precisely 


144      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

this  that  Christ  can  and  will  save  Gentiles  like  this  Cornelius 
group  without  their  becoming  Jews  at  all. 

36.  The  word  which  he  sent  {ton  logon  hon  apesteilen). 
Many  ancient  MSS.  (so  Westcott  and  Hort)  read  merely 
ton  logon  apesteilen  (he  sent  the  word).  This  reading  avoids 
the  anacoluthon  and  inverse  attraction  of  logon  to  the  case 
of  the  relative  hon  (which).  Preaching  good  tidings  of  peace 
through  Jesus  Christ  {euaggelizomenos  eirenen  dia  lesou 
Christou).  Gospelizing  peace  through  Jesus  Christ.  There 
is  no  other  way  to  have  real  peace  between  individuals  and 
God,  between  races  and  nations,  than  by  Jesus  Christ. 
Almost  this  very  language  occurs  in  Eph.  2:17  where  Paul 
states  that  Jesus  on  the  cross  "preached  (gospelized)  peace 
to  you  who  are  afar  off  and  peace  to  you  who  are  near." 
Peter  here  sees  what  Paul  will  see  later  with  great  clearness. 
He  is  Lord  of  all  {houtos  estin  panton  kurios).  A  triumphant 
parenthesis  that  Peter  throws  in  as  the  reason  for  his  new 
truth.  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord  of  all,  both  Jews  and  Gentiles. 

37.  Ye  know  (humeis  oidate).  Peter  reminds  his  Gentile 
audience  that  the  main  facts  concerning  Jesus  and  the 
gospel  were  known  to  them.  Note  emphatic  expression  of 
humeis  (you).  Beginning  {arxamenos).  The  Textus  Re- 
ceptus  has  arxamenon  (accusative),  but  the  nominative  is 
given  by  Aleph  A  B  C  D  E  H  and  is  certainly  correct.  But 
it  makes  a  decided  anacoluthon.  The  accusative  would  agree 
with  rhema  used  in  the  sense  of  message  or  story  as  told  by 
^he  disciples.  The  nominative  does  not  agree  with  any- 
thing in  the  sentence.  The  same  phrase  occurs  in  Luke 
23:5.  Here  is  this  aorist  middle  participle  almost  used  like 
an  adverb.  See  a  similar  loose  use  of  arxamenos  in  the  same 
sense  by  Peter  in  Acts  i  :22.  The  baptism  of  John  is  given  as 
the  terminus  a  quo.  The  story  began  with  a  skip  to  Galilee 
after  the  baptism  just  like  the  Gospel  of  Mark.  This  first 
message  of  Peter  to  the  Gentiles  (10:37-44)  corresponds  in 
broad  outline  with  Mark's  Gospel.   Mark  heard  Peter  preach 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  145 

many  times  and  evidently  planned  his  Gospel  (the  Roman 
Gospel)  on  this  same  model.  There  is  in  it  nothing  about 
the  birth  and  childhcjd  of  Jesus  nor  about  the  intervening 
ministry  supplied  by  John's  Gospel  for  the  period  (a  year) 
between  the  baptism  and  the  Galilean  Ministry.  Peter  here 
presents  an  objective  statement  of  the  life,  death,-  and  resur- 
rection of  Jesus  with  proof  from  the  Scriptures  that  he  is  the 
Messiah.    It  is  a  skilful  presentation. 

38.  Jesus  of  Nazareth  (lesoun  ton  apo  Nazareth).  Jesus  the 
one  from  Nazareth,  the  article  before  the  city  identifying 
him  clearly.  The  accusative  case  is  here  by  prolepsis,  Jesus 
being  expressed  for  emphasis  before  the  verb  "anointed" 
and  the  pronoun  repeated  pleonastically  after  it.  "Jesus 
transfers  the  mind  from  the  gospel-history  to  the  personal 
subject  of  it"  (Hackett).  God  anointed  him  {echrisen,  auton, 
ho  theos).  First  aorist  active  of  the  verb  chrio,  to  anoint, 
from  which  the  verbal  Christos  is  formed  (Acts  2:36).  The 
precise  event  referred  to  by  Peter  could  be  the  Incarnation 
(Luke  i:35f.),  the  Baptism  (Luke  3:22),  the  Ministry  at 
Nazareth  (Luke  4:14).  Why  not  to  the  life  and  work  of 
Jesus  as  a  whole.''  fVent  about  doing  good  {dielthen  euer- 
geton).  Beautiful  description  of  Jesus.  Summary  (consta- 
tive)  aorist  active  of  dierchomai,  to  go  through  (dia)  or  from 
place  to  place.  The  present  active  participle  euergeton  is 
from  the  old  verb  euergeteo  {eu,  well,  ergon,  work)  and  occurs 
only  here  in  the  N.T.  The  substantive  euergetes  (benefactor) 
was  often  applied  to  kings  like  Ptolemy  Euergetes  and  that 
is  the  sense  in  Luke  22:25  the  only  N.T.  example.  But  the 
term  applies  to  Jesus  far  more  than  to  Ptolemy  or  any  earthly 
king  (Cornelius  a  Lapide).  And  healing  {kai  iomenos). 
And  in  particular  healing.  Luke  does  not  exclude  other  dis- 
eases (cf.  Luke  13:11,  16),  but  he  lays  special  emphasis  on 
demoniacal  possession  (cf.  Mark  1:23).  That  were  oppressed 
{tous  katadunasteuomenous) .  Present  passive  articular  par- 
ticiple of  katadunasteub.   A  late  verb  in  LXX  and  papyri. 


146      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

In  the  N.T.  only  here  and  James  2:6  (best  MSS.)-  One  of 
the  compounds  of  kata  made  transitive.  The  reality  of  the 
devil  (the  slanderer,  diabolos)  is  recognized  by  Peter.  For 
God  was  with  him  {hoti  ho  iheos  en  met'  autou).  Surely  this  rea- 
son does  not  reveal  "a  low  Christology"  as  some  charge. 
Peter  had  used  the  same  language  in  Acts  7:9  and  earlier  in 
Luke  1 :28,  66  as  Nicodemus  does  in  John  3 :2. 

39.  And  we  are  witnesses  {kai  hemeis  manures).  Compare 
"ye  yourselves  know"  (verse  37).  Peter  thus  appeals  to 
what  the  audience  know  and  to  what  the  disciples  know. 
He  made  the  same  claim  about  personal  witnesses  of  the 
Resurrectionof  Jesus  at  Pentecost  (2:32).  Here  Peter  affirms 
full  knowledge  of  the  work  of  Jesus  in  Judea  (for  whole 
country  including  Galilee  and  Perea)  and  Jerusalem  (given 
mainly  in  John's  Gospel).  In  the  Greek  hon  (which)  is 
attracted  into  the  genitive  case  to  agree  with  the  antecedent 
panton  (all),  a  common  enough  idiom.  Whom  also  they 
slew  (hon  kai  aneilan).  Second  aorist  active  indicative  of 
anaireb  with  a  as  often  in  Acts  (2:23;  5:30).  But  note  kai 
(also)  in  the  old  MSS.,  not  in  the  Textus  Receptus.  They 
*'also"  slew  him,  went  that  far,  "this  crowning  atrocity" 
(Vincent),  kai  could  here  be  "even."  Hanging  him  on  a 
tree  {kremasantes  epi  xulou).  This  same  expression  used  by 
Peter  in  5:30  which  see  for  discussion. 

40.  Gave  him  to  be  made  manifest  {edbken  auton  emphane 
genesthai).  Peculiar  phrase,  here  only  in  the  N.T.  and  in 
Rom.  10:20  (quoted  from  Isa.  65:1).  Emphane,  predicate 
accusative  after  infinitive  genesthai  agreeing  with  auton 
object  of  eddken. 

41.  Chosen  before  {prokecheirotonemenois).  Perfect  pas- 
sive participle  dative  plural  from  procheirotoneo,  to  choose 
or  designate  by  hand  {cheirotoneo,  cheir,  hand,  and  teino,  to 
stretch,  as  in  Acts  14:23;  II  Cor.  8:19),  beforehand  (pro), 
a  double  compound  as  old  as  Plato,  but  here  alone  in  the 
N.T.     Peter  is  evidently  stating  the  thing  as  it  happened 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  147 

and  not  trying  to  make  a  convincing  story  by  saying  that 
both  friends  and  foes  saw  him  after  his  resurrection.  It  is 
the  "historian's  candour"  (Paley)  in  Luke  here  that  adds 
to  the  credibility  of  the  narrative.  The  sceptical  Jews  would 
not  have  believed  and  Jesus  was  kept  from  open  contact 
with  the  world  of  sin  after  his  Passion.  To  us  who  did  eat 
and  drink  with  him  {hemin  hoitines  sunephagomen  kai  sune- 
piomen  autoi).  The  "who"  {hoitines)  is  first  person  agreeing 
with  "us"  {hemin).  Second  aorist  active  indicative  of  the 
common  verbs  sunesthio  and  sumpino.  Autoi  is  associative 
instrumental  case.  There  are  difficulties  to  us  in  understand- 
ing how  Jesus  could  eat  and  drink  after  the  resurrection  as 
told  here  and  in  Luke  24:41-3,  but  at  any  rate  Peter  makes 
it  clear  that  it  was  no  hallucination  or  ghost,  but  Jesus  him- 
self whom  they  saw  after  he  rose  from  the  dead,  "after  the 
rising  as  to  him"  {meta  to  anastenai  auton,  meta  with  the 
accusative  articular  infinitive  second  aorist  active  and  the 
accusative  auton  of  general  reference).  Furneaux  dares  to 
think  that  the  disciples  misunderstood  Jesus  about  eating 
after  the  resurrection.  But  that  is  to  deny  the  testimony 
merely  because  we  cannot  explain  the  transition  state  of  the 
body  of  Jesus. 

42.  He  charged  {pareggeilen).  First  aorist  active  indica- 
tive as  in  1:4.  There  Jesus  is  the  subject  and  so  probably 
here,  though  Page  insists  that  ho  theos  (God)  is  here  because 
of  verse  40.  To  testify  {diamarturasthai) .  First  aorist  middle 
infinitive.  See  on  2:40.  Ordained  {hbrismenos) .  Perfect 
passive  participle  of  horizo,  old  verb,  to  mark  out,  to  limit, 
to  make  a  horizon.  Judge  {krites).  The  same  point  made  by 
Peter  in  I  Peter.  4:5.  He  does  not  use  the  word  "Messiah" 
to  these  Gentiles  though  he  did  say  "anointed"  {echrisen) 
in  verse  38.  Peter's  claim  for  Jesus  is  that  he  is  the  Judge 
of  Jew  and  Gentile  (living  and  dead). 

43.  Every  one  that  believeth  {panta  ton  pisteuonta).  This 
accusative  active  participle  of  general  reference  with  the 


148      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

infinitive  in  indirect  discourse  is  the  usual  idiom.  Only 
labein  (second  aorist  active  infinitive  of  lambano)  is  not 
indirect  statement  so  much  as  indirect  command  or  arrange- 
ment. The  prophets  bear  witness  to  Jesus  Christ  to  this 
effect.  It  is  God's  plan  and  no  race  distinctions  are  drawn. 
Peter  had  already  said  the  same  thing  at  Pentecost  (2:38), 
but  now  he  sees  himself  that  Gentiles  do  not  have  to  be- 
came Jews,  but  have  only  to  believe  in  Jesus  as  Messiah 
and  Judge  as  foretold  by  the  prophets.  It  was  glorious  news 
to  Cornelius  and  his  group.  Through  his  name  {dia  tou 
onomatos  autou),  not  as  a  title  or  magic  formula  (Acts 
18:13),  but  the  power  of  Christ  himself  represented  by 
his  name. 

44.  While  Peter  yet  spake  {eti  lalountos  tou  Petrou).  Geni- 
tive absolute  of  present  participle,  still  going  on.  The  Holy 
Ghost  fell  (epepesen  to  pneuma  to  hagion).  Second  aorist 
active  indicative  of  epipipto,  old  verb  to  fall  upon,  to  re- 
cline, to  come  upon.  Used  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  8:16;  10:44; 
11:15.  It  appears  that  Peter  was  interrupted  in  his  sermon 
by  this  remarkable  event.  The  Jews  had  received  the  Holy 
Spirit  (2:4),  the  Samaritans  (8:17),  and  now  Gentiles.  But 
on  this  occasion  it  was  before  baptism,  as  was  apparently 
true  in  Paul's  case  (9:i7f.).  In  8:16  and  in  19:5  the  hands 
of  the  apostles  were  also  placed  after  baptism  on  those  who 
received  the  Holy  Spirit.  Here  it  was  unexpected  by  Peter 
and  by  Cornelius  and  was  Indubitable  proof  of  the  conver- 
sion of  these  Gentiles  who  had  accepted  Peter's  message  and 
had  believed  on  Jesus  Christ  as  Saviour. 

45.  They  of  the  circumcision  which  believed  {hoi  ek  peri- 
tomes  pistoi).  The  believing  ones  of  the  circumcision,  more 
exactly.  Were  amazed  (exestesan).  Second  aorist  active 
indicative,  intransitive,  of  existemi.  They  stood  out  of 
themselves.  On  the  Gentiles  also  {kai  epi  ta  ethne).  Or,  even 
upon  the  Gentiles.  Was  poured  out  {ekkechutai).  Present 
perfect  passive  retained  in  indirect  discourse  of  ekched  or 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  149 

ekchuno,  old  verb,  used  metaphorically  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
also  in  2:17  (from  Joel  2:28f.),  33- 

46.  They  heard  {ekouon).  Imperfect  active,  were  hearing, 
kept  on  hearing.  Speak  (lalountdn).  Present  active  partici- 
ple, speaking,  for  they  kept  it  up.  fVith  tongues  (glossais). 
Instrumental  case  as  in  2:4,  11  which  see.  The  fuller  state- 
ment there  makes  it  clear  that  here  it  was  new  and  strange 
tongues  also  as  in  19:6  and  I  Cor.  14:4-19.  This  sudden 
manifestation  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  power  on  uncircumcised 
Gentiles  was  probably  necessary  to  convince  Peter  and  the 
six  brethren  of  the  circumcision  that  God  had  opened  the 
door  wide  to  Gentiles.  It  was  proof  that  a  Gentile  Pente- 
cost had  come  and  Peter  used  it  effectively  in  his  defence  in 
Jerusalem  (Acts  11:15). 

47.  Can  any  man  forbid  the  water?  {Meti  to  hudor  dunatai 
kolusai  tis?).  The  negative  meti  expects  the  answer  No. 
The  evidence  was  indisputable  that  these  Gentiles  were 
converted  and  so  were  entitled  to  be  baptized.  See  the 
similar  idiom  in  Luke  6:39.  Note  the  article  with  "water." 
Here  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit  had  preceded  the  bap- 
tism of  water  (Acts  1:5;  11:16).  "The  greater  had  been 
bestowed;  could  the  lesser  be  withheld.'"'  (Knowling). 
That  these  should  not  he  baptized  (tou  me  baptisthenai  toutous). 
Ablative  case  of  the  articular  first  aorist  passive  infinitive 
of  baptizo  with  the  redundant  negative  after  the  verb  of 
hindering  (kolHsai)  and  the  accusative  of  general  reference 
(toutous).  The  redundant  negative  after  the  verb  of  hinder- 
ing is  not  necessary  though  often  used  in  ancient  Greek  and 
in  the  Koine  (papyri).  Without  it  see  Matt.  19:14;  Acts 
8:36  and  with  it  see  Luke  4:42;  24:16;  Acts  14:18.  Cf. 
Robertson,  Grammar,  pp.  1061,  1094,  Ii7i«  The  triple 
negatives  here  are  a  bit  confusing  to  the  modern  mind  {meti 
in  the  question,  kolHsai,  to  hinder  or  to  cut  off,  me  with 
baptisthenai).  Literally,  Can  any  one  cut  off  the  water  from 
the  being  baptized  as  to  these.''    Meyer:  "The  water  is  in 


ISO      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

this  animated  language  conceived  as  the  element  offering 
itself  for  the  baptism."  As  well  as  we  {hos  kai  hemeis).  The 
argument  was  conclusive.  God  had  spoken.  Note  the  query 
of  the  eunuch  to  Philip  (Acts  8:36). 

48.  Commanded  (prosetaxen).  First  aorist  active  indica- 
tive. Peter  himself  abstained  from  baptizing  on  this  occa- 
sion (cf.  Paul  in  I  Cor.  i  :i4).  Evidently  it  was  done  by  the 
six  Jewish  brethren.  Them  to  be  baptized  {autous  baptisth- 
inai).  Accusative  of  general  reference  with  the  first  aorist 
passive  infinitive.  In  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  {en  toi  onomati 
lesou  Christou).  The  essential  name  in  Christian  baptism  as 
in  2:38  and  19:5.  But  these  passages  give  the  authority  for 
the  act,  not  the  formula  that  was  employed  (Alvah  Hovey 
in  Hackett's  Commentary.  See  also  chapter  on  the  Bap- 
tismal Formula  in  my  The  Christ  of  the  Logia).  "Golden 
days"  {aurei  di^Sf  Bengel)  were  these  for  the  whole  group. 


CHAPTER  XI 

1.  In  Judea  (kata  ten  loudaian).  Throughout  Judea 
(probably  all  Palestine),  distributive  use  of  kata.  The  news 
from  Casearea  spread  like  wildfire  among  the  Jewish  Chris- 
tians. The  case  of  the  Samaritans  was  different,  for  they 
were  half  Jews,  though  disliked.  But  here  were  real  Ro- 
mans even  if  with  Jewish  affinities.  Had  received  (edexanio). 
First  aorist  middle  indicative.  The  English  idiom  requires 
"had"  received,  the  Greek  has  simply  "received." 

2.  They  that  were  of  the  circumcision  {hoi  ek  peritomes). 
Literally,  those  of  circumcision  (on  the  side  of  circumcision, 
of  the  circumcision  party).  The  phrase  In  10:46  is  confined 
to  the  six  brethren  with  Peter  in  Caesarea  (11:12).  That 
can  hardly  be  the  meaning  here  for  it  would  mean  that  they 
were  the  ones  who  brought  the  charge  against  Peter  though 
Hort  takes  this  view.  All  the  disciples  in  Jerusalem  were 
Jews  so  that  it  can  hardly  mean  the  whole  body.  In  Gal. 
2:12  the  phrase  has  the  narrower  sense  of  the  Judaizing  or 
Pharisaic  wing  of  the  disciples  (Acts  15:5)  who  made  cir- 
cumcision necessary  for  all  Gentile  converts.  Probably 
here  by  anticipation  Luke  so  describes  the  beginning  of  that 
great  controversy.  The  objectors  probably  did  not  know  of 
Peter's  vision  at  Joppa,  but  only  of  the  revolutionary  con- 
duct of  Peter  in  Caesarea.  These  extremists  who  spoke 
probably  had  abundant  sympathy  in  their  protest.  The 
apostles  are  mentioned  in  verse  i,  but  are  not  referred  to  in 
verse  2.  Apparently  they  are  in  contrast  with  the  circum- 
cision party  in  the  church.  Contended  (diekrinonto).  Imper- 
fect middle  of  the  common  verb  diakrino,  to  separate.  Here 
to  separate  oneself  apart  {dia)^  to  take  sides  against,  to  make 
a  cleavage  {dia^  two,  in  two)  as  in  Jude  9.    So  Peter  is  at 

151 


152      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

once  put  on  the  defensive  as  the  contention  went  on.  It  is 
plain  that  Peter  was  not  regarded  as  any  kind  of  pope  or 
overlord. 

3.  Thou  wentest  in  (eiselthes).  Direct  form,  but  Westcott 
and  Hort  have  it  eiselthen  (he  went  in),  indirect  form.  So 
with  sunephages  (didst  eat)  and  sunephagen  (did  eat).  The 
direct  is  more  vivid.  Men  uncircumcised  {andras  akrobus- 
tian  echontas).  "Men  having  uncircumcision."  It  is  a  con- 
temptuous expression.  They  did  not  object  to  Peter's 
preaching  to  the  Gentiles,  but  to  his  going  into  the  house  of 
Cornelius  and  eating  with  them,  violating  his  supposed 
obligations  as  a  Jew  (Hackett).  It  was  the  same  complaint 
in  principle  that  the  Pharisees  had  made  against  Jesus  when 
he  ate  with  publicans  and  sinners  (Luke  15:12).  The  Jews 
had  not  merely  the  Mosaic  regulations  about  clean  and  un- 
clean food,  but  also  the  fact  that  at  a  Gentile  table  some  of 
the  meat  may  have  been  an  idol  sacrifice.  And  Peter  himself 
had  similar  scruples  when  the  vision  came  to  him  at  Joppa 
and  when  he  entered  the  house  of  Cornelius  in  Caesarea 
(10:28).    Peter  had  been  led  beyond  the  circumcision  party. 

4.  Began  (arxamenos).  Not  pleonastic  here,  but  graph- 
ically showing  how  Peter  began  at  the  beginning  and  gave 
the  full  story  of  God's  dealings  with  him  in  Joppa  and  Caesa- 
rea. Expounded  (exetitheto) .  Imperfect  middle  of  ektithemiy 
to  set  forth,  old  verb,  but  in  the  N.T.  only  in  Acts  (7:21; 
11:4;  18:26;  28:23),  ^  deliberate  and  detailed  narrative 
**in  order"  (katkexes).  Old  word  for  in  succession.  In  the 
N.T.  only  in  Luke  1:2;  8:1;  Acts  3:24;  11:14;  18:23.  Luke 
evidently  considered  this  defence  of  Peter  important  and  he 
preserves  the  marks  of  authenticity.  It  came  originally  from 
Peter  himself  (verses  5,  6,  15,  16).  "The  case  of  Cornelius 
was  a  test  case  of  primary  importance"  (Page),  "the  first 
great  difficulty  of  the  early  Church."  Part  of  the  story  Luke 
gives  three  times  (10:3-6,  30-32;  Ii:i3f.).  See  the  discus- 
sion chapter  10  for  details  given  here. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  153 

5.  Let  down  {kathiemenen).  Here  agreeing  with  the 
*' sheet"  {othonen,  feminine),  not  with  "vessel"  (skeuos, 
neuter)  as  in  10:11.  Even  unto  me  (achriemou).  Vivid  detail 
added  here  by  Peter. 

6.  When  I  had  fastened  my  eyes  (atenisas).  This  personal 
touch  Peter  adds  from  his  own  experience.  See  on  Luke 
4:20;  Acts  3  4,  12  for  this  striking  verb  atenizOj  to  stretch  the 
eyes  towards,  first  aorist  active  participle  here.  /  considered 
(  katanoeo).  Imperfect  active  of  kataneoo  to  put  the  mind 
down  on,  to  ponder,  I  was  pondering.  And  saw  {kai  eidon). 
Second  aorist  active  indicative,  saw  in  a  flash. 

7.  A  voice  saying  {phones  legouses).  Genitive  case  after 
ekousa  (cf.  9:7  and  accusative  9:4  which  see  for  discussion). 
Participle  legouses  (present  active  of  lego)  agreeing  with 
phones,  a  kind  of  indirect  discourse  use  of  the  participle. 

8.  Came  into  my  mouth  {eiselthen  eis  to  stoma  mou).  In- 
stead of  ephagon  (I  ate)  in  10:14.  Different  phrase  for  the 
same  idea. 

10.  Was  drawn  up  {anespasthe).  Instead  of  anelempthe 
(was  taken  up)  in  10:16.  First  aorist  passive  indicative  of 
anaspao,  old  verb,  but  in  N.T.  only  in  Luke  14:5  and  here. 

12.  Making  no  distinction  {meden  diakrinanta) .  So  West- 
cott  and  Hort  (first  aorist  active  participle)  instead  of 
meden  diakrinomenon  "nothing  doubting"  (present  middle 
participle)  like  10:20.  The  difference  in  voice  shows  the 
distinction  in  meaning.  We  entered  into  the  man's  house 
{eiselthomen  eis  ton  oikon  tou  andros).  Peter  confesses  it, 
but  shows  that  the  other  six  went  in  also.  He  avoids  men- 
tion of  Cornelius's  name  and  office. 

13.  Standing  and  saying  {stathenta  kai  eiponta).  More 
precisely,  "stand  and  say"  (punctiliar  act,  first  aorist  pas- 
sive and  second  aorist  active  participles).  Fetch  Simon 
{metapempsai  Simona).  First  aorist  middle  imperative. 
Third  time  mentioned  (10:5,  22;  11:13).  Perhaps  Peter  is 
anxious  to  make  it  plain  that  he  did  not  go  of  his  own  initia- 


154      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

tive  into  the  house  of  Cornelius.     He  went  under  God's 
direct  orders. 

14.  Whereby  thou  shall  be  saved,  thou  and  all  thy  house  {en 
hois  sothesei  su  kai  pas  ho  oikos  sou).  Future  passive  indic- 
ative of  jozo,  to  save.  Clearly  Cornelius  was  unsaved  in 
spite  of  his  interest  in  Jewish  worship.  Clearly  also  the 
household  of  Cornelius  would  likewise  be  won  to  Christ  by 
the  words  of  Simon  Peter.  This  is  household  conversion 
before  the  household  baptism  (10:48;  11:17). 

15.  As  I  began  to  speak  {en  toi  arxasthai  me  lalein).  En 
with  the  locative  of  the  articular  aorist  infinitive  arxasthai 
(punctiliar  action  simply)  and  the  accusative  of  general 
reference.  The  second  infinitive  lalein  (to  speak)  is  depend- 
ent on  arxasthai,  "In  the  beginning  to  speak  as  to  me." 
Even  as  on  us  at  the  beginning  {hosper  kai  epW  hemds  en 
archei).  Peter  recalls  vividly  the  events  at  Pentecost,  the 
speaking  with  tongues  and  all.  It  is  noteworthy  that  Peter 
does  not  here  repeat  his  sermon.  "He  rests  his  defence,  not 
on  what  he  said,  but  on  what  God  did"  (Furneaux). 

16.  /  remembered  {emnesthen).  First  aorist  passive  indica- 
tive of  the  common  verb  mimnesko,  to  remind.  Peter  recalls 
the  very  words  of  Jesus  as  reported  in  Acts  i  :5.  Peter  now 
understands  this  saying  of  Jesus  as  he  had  not  done  before. 
That  is  a  common  experience  with  us  all  as  new  experiences 
of  grace  open  richer  veins  in  God's  truth  (John  12:16). 
Peter  clearly  sees  that  the  water  baptism  is  merely  the  sym- 
bol or  picture  of  the  spiritual  baptism  in  the  heart. 

17.  The  like  gift  {ten  is  en  dorean).  The  equal  gift,  equal 
in  quality,  rank,  or  measure.  Common  word.  When  we  be- 
lieved {pisteusasin).  First  aorist  active  participle  oi  pisteuo 
in  the  dative  case.  It  agrees  both  with  hemin  (unto  us)  and 
with  autois  (unto  them),  "having  believed  on  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ."  Both  classes  (Gentiles  and  Jews)  trusted  in  Christ, 
and  both  received  the  Holy  Spirit.  Who  was  I  {ego  tis 
emen).    Note  order,  "/,  who  was  I."    "That  I  could  with- 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  155 

stand  God''''  (dunatos  kolusai  ton  theon).  Literally,  "able  to 
withstand  or  hinder  God."  It  is  a  rhetorical  question,  really 
two  questions.  Who  was  I.'*  Was  I  able  to  hinder  God.'*  Peter's 
statement  of  the  facts  made  an  unanswerable  defence.  And 
yet  Peter  (Gal.  2:11)  will  later  in  Antioch  play  the  coward 
before  emissaries  from  Jerusalem  on  this  very  point  of  eating 
with  Gentile  Christians. 

18.  Held  their  peace  Qiesuchasan).  Ingressive  aorist 
active  indicative  of  hesuchazo,  old  verb  to  be  quiet,  to  keep 
quiet.  The  wrangling  (verse  2)  ceased.  The  critics  even 
"glorified  God"  {edoxasan,  ingressive  aorist  again).  Then 
to  the  Gentiles  also  {Ara  kai  tois  ethnesin).  Ergo  as  in  Luke 
11:20,  48  and  like  ara  oun  in  Rom.  5:18.  In  ancient  Greek 
inferential  ara  cannot  come  at  the  beginning  of  a  clause  as 
here.  It  was  reluctant  acquiescence  in  the  undoubted  fact 
that  God  had  "granted  repentance  unto  life"  to  these 
Gentiles  in  Caesarca,  but  the  circumcision  party  undoubtedly 
looked  on  it  as  an  exceptional  case  and  not  to  be  regarded  as 
a  precedent  to  follow  with  other  Gentiles.  Peter  will  see  in 
this  incident  (Acts  15:8)  the  same  principle  for  which  Paul 
contends  at  the  Jerusalem  Conference.  Furneaux  suggests 
that  this  conduct  of  Peter  in  Caesarea,  though  grudgingly 
acquiesced  in  after  his  skilful  defence,  decreased  his  in- 
fluence in  Jerusalem  where  he  had  been  leader  and  helped 
open  the  way  for  the  leadership  of  James  the  Lord's  brother. 

19.  They  therefore  that  were  scattered  abroad  {hoi  men  oun 
diasparentes).  Precisely  the  same  words  used  in  8:4  about 
those  scattered  by  Saul  (which  see)  and  a  direct  reference  to  it 
is  made  by  the  next  words,  "upon  the  tribulation  that  arose 
about  Stephen"  {apo  tes  thlipseos  tes  genomenes  epi  Sieph- 
anoi).  As  a  result  of  (apo),  in  the  case  of  (epi)  Stephen. 
From  that  event  Luke  followed  Saul  through  his  conversion 
and  back  to  Jerusalem  and  to  Tarsus.  Then  he  showed  the 
activity  of  Peter  outside  of  Jerusalem  as  a  result  of  the 
cessation  of  the  persecution  from  the  conversion  of  Saul  with 


156      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

the  Gentile  Pentecost  in  Caesarea  and  the  outcome  in  Jeru- 
salem. Now  Luke  starts  over  again  from  the  same  persecu- 
tion by  Saul  and  runs  a  new  line  of  events  up  to  Antioch 
parallel  to  the  other,  probably  partly  following.  Except  to 
Jews  only  {ei  me  monon  loudaiois).  Clearly  these  disciples 
did  not  know  anything  about  the  events  in  Caesarea  and 
at  first  their  flight  preceded  that  time.  But  it  was  a  wonder- 
ful episode,  the  eager  and  loyal  preaching  of  the  fleeing 
disciples.  The  culmination  in  Antioch  was  probably  after 
the  report  of  Peter  about  Caesarea.  This  Antioch  by  the 
Orontes  was  founded  300  B.C.  by  Seleucus  Nicator  and  was 
^_ne  of  five  cities  so  named  by  the  Seleucides.  It  became  the 
metropolis  of  Syria  though  the  Arabs  held  Damascus  first. 
Antioch  ranked  next  to  Rome  and  Alexandria  in  size,  wealth, 
power,  and  vice.  There  were  many  Jews  in  the  cosmopolitan 
population  of  half  a  million.  It  was  destined  to  supplant 
Jerusalem  as  the  centre  of  Christian  activity. 

20.  Spake  (elaloun).  Inchoative  imperfect  active,  began 
to  speak.  For  them  it  was  an  experiment.  Unto  the  Greeks 
also  {kai  pros  tous  Hellenas).  This  Is  undoubtedly  the  cor- 
rect reading  in  spite  of  Hellenists  {Hellenistas)  or  Grecian 
Jews  in  B  E  H  L  P.  Hellenas  is  read  by  A  and  D  and  a  cor- 
rector of  Aleph.  The  presence  of  "also"  or  "even"  (kai) 
in  Aleph  A  B  makes  no  sense  unless  "Greeks"  is  correct. 
Hellenists  or  Grecian  Jews  as  Christians  were  common 
enough  as  is  seen  in  Acts  2  and  6.  Saul  also  had  preached  to 
the  Hellenists  in  Jerusalem  (9:29).  Hellenists  were  merely 
one  kind  of  Jews  in  contrast  with  those  who  spoke  Aramaic 
(Acts  6).  It  is  true  that  the  case  of  Cornelius  was  first  in 
importance,  but  it  is  not  clear  that  It  was  before  the  work  in 
Antioch.  Probably  the  report  of  the  work  among  the  Greeks 
in  Antioch  reached  Jerusalem  after  Peter's  defence  In  1 1 : 
1-18.  That  explains  the  calm  tone  about  it  and  also  why 
Barnabas  and  not  Peter  was  sent  to  investigate.  Peter  and 
John  (Acts  8)  had  condoned  Philip's  work  in  Samaria  and 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  157 

Peter  was  the  agent  in  the  work  among  the  Romans  in 
Cacsarea.  His  position  was  now  well-known  and  his  services 
discounted  for  this  new  crisis.  These  Greeks  in  Antioch 
were  apparently  in  part  pure  heathen  and  not  "God-fearers" 
like  Cornelius.  A  man  of  wisdom  was  called  for.  These 
preachers  were  themselves  Hellenists  (verse  19)  and  open 
to  the  lessons  from  their  environment  without  a  vision  such 
as  Peter  had  at  Joppa.  "It  was  a  departure  of  startling 
boldness"  (Furneaux)  by  laymen  outside  of  the  circle  of 
official  leaders. 

21 .  The  hand  of  the  Lord  was  zvith  them  {en  cheir  kuriou  met' 
auton).  This  O.T.  phrase  (Ex.  9:3;  Isa.  59:1)  is  used  by  Luke 
(1:66;  Acts  4:28,  30;  13:11).  It  was  proof  of  God's  approval 
of  their  course  in  preaching  the  Lord  Jesus  to  Greeks. 
Turned  unto  the  Lord  {epestrepsen  epi  ton  kurion).  First 
aorist  active  indicative  of  epistrepho,  common  verb  to  turn. 
The  usual  expression  for  Gentiles  turning  to  the  true  God 
(14:15;  15:3,  19;  26:18,  20;  I  Thess.  1:9).  Here  "Lord" 
refers  to  "the  Lord  Jesus"  as  in  verse  20,  though  "the 
hand  of  the  Lord"  is  the  hand  of  Jehovah,  clearly  showing  I 
that  the  early  disciples  put  Jesus  on  a  par  with  Jehovah.  His 
deity  was  not  a  late  development  read  back  into  the  early' 
history. 

22.  Came  to  the  ears  {ekousthe  eis  ta  ota).  First  aorist  pas- 
sive indicative  of  akoud,  was  heard  in  the  ears.  Of  the  church 
which  was  in  Jerusalem  {tes  ekklesias  tes  en  lerousalem). 
Not  yet  was  the  term  "church"  applied  to  the  group  of 
disciples  in  Antioch  as  it  is  in  11 :26  and  13:1.  They  sent  forth 
[exapesteilan).  First  aorist  active  indicative  of  the  double 
compound  verb  ex-apo-stello,  to  send  out  and  away.  The 
choice  of  Barnabas  was  eminently  wise.  He  already  had  a 
position  of  leadership  in  Jerusalem  because  of  his  generosity 
(4:36f.)  and  his  championship  of  Saul  after  his  conversion 
(9:27).  He  was  originally  from  Cyprus  and  probably  had 
personal  friends  among  some  of  the  leaders  in  this  new  move- 


IS8      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

ment.  He  was  to  investigate  the  work  of  the  travelling 
preachers  (verse  19)  all  the  way  to  Antioch  (heds  Anti- 
ocheias). 

23.  The  grace  of  God,  was  glad  {ten  charin  ten  tou  theou 
echare).  Note  repetition  of  the  article,  "the  grace  that  of 
God."  The  verb  (second  aorist  passive  indicative  of  chairo) 
has  the  same  root  as  charis.  See  the  same  suavis  parono- 
masia in  Luke  1:28.  "Grace  brings  gladness"  (Page).  "A 
smaller  man  would  have  raised  difficulties  as  to  circumcision 
or  baptism"  (Furneaux).  He  exhorted  {pare kale i).  Imperfect 
active,  picturing  the  continuous  encouragen^ent  from  Barna- 
bas.^^^2?A_*wr^ojr  of  heart  {tei  prothesei  tes  kardias).  Placing 
before  (from  pro-tithemi),  old  word  for  set  plan  as  in  Acts 
27:13;  Rom.  8:28.  The  glow_of  the  first  enthusiasm  might 
pass  a^  often  ha£2ens_after  a  revival.  Barnabas  had  a  special 
gift  (4:36)  for  work  like  this.  Cleave  unto  the  Lord  {pros- 
menein  [en]  toi  kuridi).  Dative  case  (locative  if  en  is  genuine) 
of  kurios  (here  Jesus  again)  after  prosemenein  to  keep  on^ 
j'emalning  loyal  to  (present  active  infinitive).  Persistence 
was  needed  in  such  a  pagan  city. 

24.  For  {hoti).  Because.  This  is  the  explanation  of  the 
conduct  of  Barnabas.  The  facts  were  opposed  to  the  natural 
prejudices  of  a  Jew  like  Barnabas,  but  he  rose  above  such 
racial  narrowness.  He  was  a  really  good  man  ,iagathos). 
See  Rom.  5:7  for  distinction  between  agathos  a.nd ^dikaios, 
righteous,  where  agathos  ranks  higher  than  dikaios.  Besides, 
Barnabas  was  full  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (like  Peter)  and  of  faith 

--aftd-Si3jyjlling  to  follow  the  leading  of  God^s  SpirTTalYd^Take 
_SQme_risks^  This  is  a  noble  tribute  paid  by  Luke.  One  won- 
ders if  Barnabas  was  still  living  when  he  wrote  this.  Cer- 
tainly he  was  not  prejudiced  against  Barnabas  though  he 
will  follow  the  fortunes  of  Paul  after  the  separation  (15:36- 
41).  Was  added  unto  the  Lord  {prosetethe  toi  kuridi).  First 
aorist  passive  indicative  of  prostithemi,  common  verb  to  add 
to.    These  people  were  added  to  the  Lord  Jesus  before  they 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  159 

were  added  to  the  church.   If  that  were  always  true,  what  a 
difference  it  would  make  in  our  churches. 

25.  To  seek  for  Saul  {anazetesai  Saulon).  First  aorist 
(effective)  active  infinitive  of  purpose.  Anazeteo  is  a  com- 
mon verb  since  Plato,  but  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Luke 
2^4,  45,  to  seek  up  and  down  {ana),  back  and  forth,  to 
hunt  up,  to  make  a  thorough  search  till  success  comes.  It 
is  plain  from  Gal.  1:21  that  Saul  had  not  been  idle  in  Cilicia. 
Tarsus  was  not  very  far  from  Antioch.  Barnabas  probably 
knew  that  Saul  was  a  vessel  of  choice  (Acts  9:15)  by  Christ 
for  the  work  among  the  Gentiles.  He  knew,  of  course,  of 
Saul's  work  with  the  Hellenists  in  Jerusalem  (9:29)  and 
echoes  of  his  work  in  Cilicia  and  Syria  had  probably  come  to 
him.  So  to  Tarsus  he  goes  when  he  saw  the  need  for  help. 
"He  had  none  of  the  littleness  which  cannot  bear  the  pres- 
ence of  a  possible  rival"  (Furneaux).  Barnabas  knew  his 
own  limitations  and  knew  where  the  man  of  destiny  for  this 
crisis  was,  the  man  who  already  had  the  seal  of  God  upon 
him.  The  hour  and  the  man  met  when  Barnabas  brought 
Saul  to  Antioch.  The  door  was  open  and  the  man  was  ready, 
far  more  ready  than  when  Jesus  called  him  on  the  road  to 
Damascus.  The  years  in  Cilicia  and  Syria  were  not  wasted 
for  they  had  not  been  idle.  If  we  only  knew  the  facts,  it  is 
probable  that  Saul  also  had  been  preaching  to  Hellenes  as 
well  as  to  Hellenists.  Jesus  had  definitely  called  him  to  work 
among  the  Gentiles  (9:15).  In  his  own  way  he  had  come  to 
the  same  place  that  Peter  reached  in  Caesarea  and  that 
Barnabas  now  holds  in  Antioch.  God  always  has  a  man  pre- 
pared for  a  great  emergency  in  the  kingdom.  The  call  of 
Barnabas  was  simply  the  repetition  of  the  call  of  Christ. 
So  Saul  came. 

26.  Even  for  a  whole  year  (kai  eniauton  holon).  Accusa- 
tive of  extent  of  time,  probably  the  year  a.d.  44,  the  year 
preceding  the  visit  to  Jerusalem  (11:30),  the  year  of  the 
famine.    The  preceding  years  with  Tarsus  as  headquarters 


l6o      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

covered  a.d.  37  (39)  to  44.  They  were  gathered  together  with 
the  church  {sunachthenai  en  tei  ekklesidi).  First  aorist  passive 
infinitive  of  sunago,  old  verb,  probably  here  to  meet  together 
as  in  Matt.  28:12.  In  Acts  14:27  the  verb  is  used  of  gathering 
together  the  church,  but  here  en  tei  ekklesidi  excludes  that 
idea.  Barnabas  met  together  "in  the  church"  (note  first  use 
of  the  word  for  the  disciples  at  Antioch).  This  peculiar 
phrase  accents  the  leadership  and  co-operation  of  Barnabas 
and  Saul  in  teaching  (didaxaij  first  aorist  active  infinitive) 
much  people.  Both  infinitives  are  in  the  nominative  case,  the 
subject  of  egeneto  (it  came  to  pass).  And  that  the  disciples 
were  called  Christians  first  in  Antioch  {chrematisai  te  prbtos 
en  Antiocheidi  tous  mathetas  Christianous) .  This  first  active 
infinitive  chrematisai  is  also  a  subject  of  egeneto  and  is  added 
as  a  separate  item  by  the  use  of  te  rather  than  kai.  For  the 
word  itself  in  the  sense  of  divine  command  see  on  Matt.  2:12, 
22;  Luke  2:26;  Acts  10:22.  Here  and  in  Rom.  7:3  it  means 
to  be  called  or  named  (assuming  a  name  from  one's  business, 
chrema,  from  chraomai,  to  use  or  to  do  business).  Polybius 
uses  it  in  this  sense  as  here.  Tous  mathetas  (the  disciples)  is 
in  the  accusative  of  general  reference  with  the  infinitive. 
Christianous  (Christians)  is  simply  predicate  accusative.  This 
word  is  made  after  the  pattern  of  Herodianus  (Matt.  22:16, 
Heroidianoij  followers  of  Herod),  Caesarianus,  a  follower  of 
Caesar  (Deissmann,  Light  from  the  Ancient  East,  p.  377,  gives 
papyri  examples  of  the  genitive  Kaisaros  meaning  also  "be- 
longing to  Caesar"  like  the  common  adjective  Caesarianus). 
It  is  made  thus  like  a  Latin  adjective,  though  it  is  a  Greek 
word,  and  it  refers  to  the  Hebrew  belief  in  a  Messiah  (Page). 
The  name  was  evidently  given  to  the  followers  of  Christ  by 
the  Gentiles  to  distinguish  them  from  the  Jews  since  they 
were  Greeks,  not  Grecian  Jews.  The  Jews  would  not  call 
them  Christians  because  of  their  own  use  of  Christos  the 
Messiah.  The  Jews  termed  them  Galileans  or  Nazarenes. 
The  followers  of  Christ  called  themselves  disciples  (learners). 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  l6l 

believers,  brethren,  saints,  those  of  the  Way.  The  three  uses 
of  Christian  in  the  N.T.  are  from  the  heathen  standpoint 
(here),  Acts  26:28  (a  term  of  contempt  in  the  mouth  of 
Agrippa),  and  I  Peter  4:16  (persecution  from  the  Roman 
government).  It  is  a  clear  distinction  from  both  Jews  and 
Gentiles  and  it  is  not  strange  that  it  came  into  use  first  here 
in  Antioch  when  the  large  Greek  church  gave  occasion  for  it. 
Later  Ignatius  was  bishop  in  Antioch  and  was  given  to  the 
lions  in  Rome,  and  John  Chrysostom  preached  here  his 
wonderful  sermons. 

27.  Prophets  (prophetai).  Christian  prophets  these  were 
(cf.  13:1)  who  came  from  Jerusalem  (the  headquarters, 
8:15).  Judas  and  Silas  are  called  prophets  (14:4;  15:32). 
They  were  not  just  fore-tellers,  but  forth- tellers.  The  prophet 
had  inspiration  and  was  superior  to  the  speaker  with  tongues 
(I  Cor.  14:3).  John  was  a  prophet  (Luke  7:26).  We  need 
prophets  in  the  ministry  today. 

28.  Signified  (esemainen).  Imperfect  active  in  Westcott 
and  Hort,  but  aorist  active  esemdnen  in  the  margin.  The  verb 
is  an  old  one  from  sema  (semeion)  a  sign  (cf.  the  symbolic 
sign  in  2i;ii).  Here  Agabus  (also  in  21:10)  does  predict  a 
famine  through  the  Holy  Spirit.  Should  be  (mellein  esesthai). 
Mello  occurs  either  with  the  present  infinitive  (16:27),  the 
aorist  infinitive  (12:6),  or  the  future  as  here  and  24:15; 
27:10.  Over  all  the  world  (eph'  holen  ten  oikoumenen).  Over 
all  the  inhabited  earth  {gen,  understood).  Probably  a  com- 
mon hyperbole  for  the  Roman  empire  as  in  Luke  2:1.  Jose- 
phus  {Ant.  VIII.  13,  4)  appears  to  restrict  it  to  Palestine. 
In  the  days  of  Claudius  {epi  Klaudiou).  He  was  Roman 
Emperor  a.d.  41-44.  The  Roman  writers  (Suetonius,  Dio 
Cassius,  Tacitus)  all  tell  of  dearths  {assiduae  sterilitates) 
during  the  brief  reign  of  Claudius  who  was  preceded  by 
Caligula  and  followed  by  Nero. 

29.  Every  man  according  to  his  ability  {kathos  euporeito 
tis).  Imperfect  middle  of  euporeo,  to  be  well  off  (from  eu- 


l62      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

poros),  old  verb,  but  here  alone  in  the  N.T.,  "as  any  one 
was  well  off."  The  sentence  is  a  bit  tangled  in  the  Greek 
from  Luke's  rush  of  ideas.  Literally,  "Of  the  disciples,  as 
any  one  was  able  (or  well  off),  they  determined  (horisarif 
marked  off  the  horizon)  each  of  them  to  send  relief  {eis 
diakonian,  for  ministry)  to  the  brethren  who  dwelt  in  Ju- 
daea." The  worst  of  the  famine  came  a.d.  45.  The  warning 
by  Agabus  stirred  the  brethren  in  Antioch  to  send  the  col- 
lection on  ahead. 

30.  Sending  {aposteilantes).  First  aorist  active  participle 
of  apostello,  coincident  action  with  epoiesan  (did).  To  the 
elders  {pros  tons  preshuterous).  The  first  use  of  that  term  for 
the  Christian  preachers.  In  20:17  ^^<^  ^8  "elders"  and 
"bishops"  are  used  interchangeably  as  in  Titus  1:5,  7.  The 
term  probably  arose  gradually  and  holds  a  position  in  the 
church  similar  to  the  same  term  in  the  synagogue.  The 
apostles  were  apparently  absent  from  Jerusalem  at  this 
time  and  they  were  no  longer  concerned  with  serving  tables. 
In  21  :i8  Paul  presented  the  later  collection  also  to  the  elders. 
Since  Peter  and  James  (till  his  death)  were  in  Jerusalem 
during  the  persecution  In  chapter  12  it  is  probable  that  the 
visit  of  Barnabas  and  Saul  to  Jerusalem  came  really  after 
that  persecution  for  Peter  left  Jerusalem  (12:17).  The  elders 
here  mentioned  may  include  the  preachers  in  Judea  also 
outside  of  Jerusalem  (26:20). 


CHAPTER  XII 

I.  About  that  time  {kaf  ekeinon  ton  kairon).  Same  phrase 
in  Rom.  9:9.  That  is,  the  early  part  of  a.d.  44  since  that  is 
the  date  of  Herod's  death.  As  already  suggested,  Barnabas 
and  Saul  came  down  from  Antioch  to  Jerusalem  after  the 
persecution  by  Herod  at  the  end  of  44  or  the  beginning  of 
45.  Herod  the  king  {Her aides  ho  basileus).  Accurate  title  at 
this  particular  time.  Herod  Agrippa  I,  grandson  of  Herod 
the  Great,  was  King  of  Palestine  a.d.  42  to  44;  only  for 
these  three  years  was  a  Herod  king  over  Palestine  since  the 
death  of  Herod  the  Great  and  never  afterwards.  Archelaus 
never  actually  became  king  though  he  had  the  popular  title 
at  first  (Matt.  2:22).  Put  forth  his  hands  {epebalen  tas  chei- 
ras).  Second  aorist  active  indicative  of  epiballo,  old  verb, 
to  cast  upon  or  against.  The  same  idiom  with  tas  cheiras 
(the  hands,  common  Greek  idiom  with  article  rather  than 
possessive  pronoun)  in  4:3  and  5:18.  To  afflict  (kakosai). 
First  aorist  active  infinitive  of  kakoo,  old  word  to  do  harm 
or  evil  to  (kakos),  already  in  7:6,  19.  Outside  of  Acts  in  the 
N.T.  only  I  Peter  5:13.  Infinitive  of  purpose.  Probably 
the  first  who  were  afflicted  were  scourged  or  imprisoned, 
not  put  to  death.  It  had  been  eight  years  or  more  since  the 
persecution  over  the  death  of  Stephen  ceased  with  the 
conversion  of  Saul.  But  the  disciples  were  not  popular  in 
Jerusalem  with  either  Sadducees  or  Pharisees.  The  over- 
tures to  the  Gentiles  in  Caesarea  and  Antioch  may  have 
stirred  up  the  Pharisees  afresh  (cf.  6:14).  Herod  Agrippa 
I  was  an  Idumean  through  his  grandfather  Herod  the  Great 
and  a  grandson  of  Mariamne  the  Maccabean  princess.  He 
was  a  favourite  of  Caligula  the  Roman  Emperor  and  was  anx- 
ious to  placate  his  Jewish  subjects  while  retaining  the  favour 

163 


164      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

of  the  Romans.  So  he  built  theatres  and  held  games  for  the 
Romans  and  Greeks  and  slew  the  Christians  to  please  the 
Jews.  Josephus  {Ant.  XIX.  7,  3)  calls  him  a  pleasant  vain 
man  scrupulously  observing  Jewish  rites.  Here  we  have  for 
the  first  time  political  power  (after  Pilate)  used  against  the 
disciples. 

2.  James  the  brother  of  John  {lakobon  ton  adelphon  Iba- 
7iou).  He  had  been  called  by  Jesus  a  son  of  thunder  along 
with  his  brother  John.  Jesus  had  predicted  a  bloody  death 
for  both  of  them  (Mark  io:38flf.  =  Matt.  20:23).  James  is 
the  first  of  the  apostles  to  die  and  John  probably  the  last. 
He  is  not  James  the  Lord's  brother  (Gal.  i  :I9).  We  do  not 
know  why  Luke  tells  so  little  about  the  death  of  James  and 
so  much  about  the  death  of  Stephen  nor  do  we  know  why 
Herod  selected  him  as  a  victim.  Eusebius  (H.E.  ii.  9)  quotes 
Clement  of  Alexandria  as  saying  that  a  Jew  made  accusa- 
tions against  James  and  was  converted  and  beheaded  at 
the  same  time  with  him.  Killed  with  the  sword  (aneilen 
machairei).  The  verb  is  a  favourite  one  with  Luke  (Acts  2:33; 
5 -339  36;  7:28;  9:23-29;  10:39,  etc.).  Instrumental  case  and 
Ionic  form  of  machaira.  The  Jews  considered  beheading 
a  shameful  death  as  in  the  case  of  the  Baptist  (Matt.  14:10). 

3.  That  it  pleased  the  Jews  {hoti  areston  estin  tois  loudaiois). 
Indirect  assertion  with  the  present  tense  estin  retained. 
Areston  is  the  verbal  adjective  from  ares k 5  followed  by  the 
dative  as  in  John  8:29.  Proceeded  to  seize  (prosetheto  sulla- 
bein).  A  patent  Hebraism  in  Luke  20:1  if.  already,  and 
nowhere  else  in  the  N.T.  It  occurs  in  the  LXX  (Gen.  4:2; 
8:12;  18:29,  etc.).  Second  aorist  middle  indicative  of  prosii- 
themi  and  the  second  aorist  active  infimtive  of  sullambanb. 
Literally,  he  added  to  seize,  he  seized  Peter  in  addition  to 
James.  The  days  of  unleavened  bread  {hemerai  ton  azumon). 
By  this  parenthesis  Luke  locates  the  time  of  the  year  when 
Peter  was  arrested,  the  passover.  It  was  a  fine  occasion 
for  Agrippa  to  increase  his  favour  among  the  crowds  of  Jews 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  165 

there  by  extra  zeal  against  the  Christians.  It  is  possible 
that  Luke  obtained  his  information  about  this  incident 
from  John  Mark  for  at  his  Mother's  house  the  disciples 
gathered  (12:12). 

4.  When  he  had  taken  him  (piasas).  See  on  3:7  for  same 
form.  He  put  him  in  prison  {etheto  eis  phulaken).  Second 
aorist  middle  indicative  of  tithemi,  common  verb.  This  is  the 
third  imprisonment  of  Peter  (4:3;  5:18).  To  four  quaternions 
of  soldiers  (tessarsin  tetradiois  stratioton).  Four  soldiers  in 
each  quaternion  (ietradion  from  tetras,  four),  two  on  the  in- 
side with  the  prisoner  (chained  to  him)  and  two  on  the  out- 
side, in  shifts  of  six  hours  each,  sixteen  soldiers  in  all,  the 
usual  Roman  custom.  Probably  Agrippa  had  heard  of  Peter's 
previous  escape  (5:19)  and  so  took  no  chances  for  conniv- 
ance of  the  jailors,  ^fter  the  passover  (meta  to  pascha).  The 
passover  feast  of  eight  days.  "The  stricter  Jews  regarded 
it  as  a  profanation  to  put  a  person  to  death  during  a  re- 
ligious festival"  (Hackett).  So  Agrippa  is  more  scrupulous 
than  the  Sanhedrin  was  about  Jesus.  To  bring  him  forth 
{anagagein  auton).  Second  aorist  active  infinitive  of  anago, 
to  lead  up,  old  verb,  used  literally  here.  Peter  was  in  the 
inner  prison  or  lower  ward  and  so  would  be  led  up  to  the 
judgment  seat  where  Herod  Agrippa  would  sit  (cf.  John 
19:13).  To  the  people  {toi  laoi).  Ethical  dative,  in  the  pres- 
ence of  and  for  the  pleasure  of  the  Jewish  people. 

5.  Therefore  {men  oun).  Because  of  the  preceding  situa- 
tion. Was  kept  (etereito).  Imperfect  passive,  continuously 
guarded,  waiting  for  the  feast  to  be  over.  But  prayer  was 
made  earnestly  {proseuche  de  en  ektenos  ginomene).  Prob- 
ably de  here  is  not  adversative  (but),  merely  parallel  {and) 
as  Page  argues.  It  was  a  crisis  for  the  Jerusalem  church. 
James  had  been  slain  and  Peter  was  to  be  the  next  victim. 
Hence  "earnestly"  (late  adverb  from  ektenes,  strained,  from 
ekteinb,  to  stretch.  In  the  N.T.  only  here,  Luke  22:44; 
I  Peter  i  :22)  prayer  was  going  up  {ginomene,  present  middle 


l66     WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

participle,  periphrastic  imperfect  with  en).  It  looked  like 
a  desperate  case  for  Peter.  Hence  the  disciples  prayed  the 
more  earnestly. 

6.  JVas  about  to  bring  him  forth  {emellen  prosagagein  or 
proagagein).  The  MSS.  vary,  but  not  anagagein  of  verse  4. 
The  same  night  (tei  nukti  ekeinei).  Locative  case,  on  that 
(very)  night.  Was  sleeping  {en  koimomenos).  Periphrastic 
middle  imperfect.  Bound  with  two  chains  {dedemenos  haluse- 
sin  dusin).  Perfect  passive  participle  of  deo,  to  bind,  followed 
by  instrumental  case.  One  chain  was  fastened  to  each 
soldier  (one  on  each  side  of  Peter).  Kept  (eteroun).  Im- 
perfect active,  were  keeping.  Two  guards  outside  before 
the  door  and  two  inside,  according  to  Roman  rule.  Did 
Peter  recall  the  prophecy  of  Jesus  that  he  should  be  put  to 
death  in  his  old  age  (John  21:18).''  Jesus  had  not  said,  as 
Furneaux  does,  that  he  would  die  by  crucifixion. 

7.  Stood  by  him  (epeste).  Ingressive  second  aorist  active 
indicative  of  ephistemi,  intransitive.  This  very  form  occurs 
in  Luke  2:9  of  the  sudden  appearance  of  the  angel  of  the 
Lord  to  the  shepherds.  Page  notes  that  this  second  aorist 
of  ephistemi  occurs  seven  times  in  the  Gospel  of  Luke,  eight 
times  in  the  Acts,  and  nowhere  else  in  the  N.T.  Note  also 
the  same  form  apeste  (departed  from,  from  aphistemi^  stood 
oflF  from)  of  the  disappearance  of  the  angel  in  verse  10. 
In  the  cell  {en  toi  oikemati).  Literally,  a  dwelling  place  or 
habitation  (from  oikeo,  to  dwell,  oikos,  house),  but  here  not 
the  prison  as  a  whole  as  in  Thucydides,  but  the  room  in  the 
prison  (cell)  where  Peter  was  chained  to  the  two  guards. 
Old  word,  but  only  here  in  the  N.T.  He  smote  Peter  on  the 
side  {pataxas  ten  pleuran  tou  Petrou).  More  exactly,  "smote 
the  side  of  Peter."  Strongly  enough  to  wake  Peter  up  who 
was  sound  asleep  and  yet  not  rouse  the  two  guards.  It 
was  probably  between  3  a.m.  and  6  a.m.,  hours  when  changes 
in  the  guards  were  made.  Rise  up  {anasta).  Short  form 
{Koine)    of   anastethi,    second    aorist    active    imperative   of 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  167 

anistemif  intransitive.  So  also  Acts  9:11  (Westcott  and  Hort 
text);  Eph.  5:14.  Fell  off  (exepesan).  Second  aorist  active 
with  a  ending  like  first  aorist  of  expipto,  old  verb.  This 
miracle  was  necessary  if  Peter  was  to  escape  without  rousing 
the  two  guards. 

8.  Gird  thyself  (zosai).  Direct  middle  first  aorist  (ingres- 
sive)  imperative  (Robertson,  Grammar^  pp.  8o6f.)  from 
zonnumi  (zonnuo).  Old  verb,  but  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and 
John  21:18  (twice  to  Peter)  where  the  active  voice  and  the 
reflexive  pronoun  occur  in  the  first  example.  The  girdle 
was  worn  round  the  chiton  or  undergarment.  Bind  on  (hupo- 
desai).  Indirect  middle  (by  yourself  or  for  yourself)  first 
aorist  imperative  of  hupodeOj  to  bind  under,  old  verb,  only 
three  times  in  the  N.T.  [Mark  6:9;  Acts  12:8;  Eph.  6:15 
(middle)].  Sandals  (sandalia).  Persian  word  common  from 
Herodotus  on,  a  sole  made  of  wood  or  leather  covering  the 
bottom  of  the  foot  and  bound  on  with  thongs.  In  the  N.T. 
only  here  and  Mark  6:9.  In  the  LXX  used  indiscriminately 
with  hupodema.  Cast  about  thee  (peribalou).  Second  aorist 
middle  (indirect)  imperative  of  periballo,  old  and  common 
verb  to  throw  around,  especially  clothing  around  the  body 
as  here.  The  himation  (outer  garment)  was  put  over  the 
chiton.  It  was  not  a  hurried  flight.  Follow  me  {akolouthei 
mot).  Present  (linear)  active  imperative,  keep  on  following 
me   (associative  instrumental  case). 

9.  Wist  not  {ouk  eidei).  Past  perfect  of  oida  used  as  Im- 
perfect, did  not  know.  Followed  (ekolouthei).  Imperfect 
active,  kept  on  following  as  the  angel  had  directed  (verse 
8).  That  it  was  true  (hoti  alethes  estin).  Indirect  assertion 
and  so  present  tense  retained.  Note  "true"  (alethes)  In  the 
sense  of  reality  or  actuality.  Which  was  done  {to  ginomenon). 
Present  middle  participle,  that  which  was  happening. 
Thought  he  saw  a  vision  {edokei  horama  blepein).  Imperfect 
active,  kept  on  thinking,  puzzled  as  he  was.  Blepein  Is  the 
infinitive  in  indirect  assertion  without  the  pronoun   (he) 


l68      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

expressed  which  could  be  either  nominative  in  apposition 
with  the  subject  as  in  Rom,  i  :22  or  accusative  of  gen- 
eral reference  as  in  Acts  5:36;  8:9  (Robertson,  Grammar, 
pp.  1036-40).  Peter  had  had  a  vision  in  Joppa  (10:10)  which 
Luke  describes  as  an  "ecstasy,"  but  here  is  objective  fact, 
at  least  Luke  thought  so  and  makes  that  distinction.  Peter 
will  soon  know  whether  he  is  still  in  the  cell  or  not  as  we  find 
out  that  a  dream  is  only  a  dream  when  we  wake  up. 

10.  fVhen  they  were  past  (dielthontes).  Second  aorist  active 
participle  of  dierchomai,  transitive  with  dia  in  composition. 
The  first  and  the  second  ward  {prbten  phulaken  kai  deuteran). 
It  is  not  clear  to  what  this  language  refers.  Some  take  it  to 
mean  single  soldiers,  using  phulaken  in  the  sense  of  a  guard 
(one  before  the  door,  one  at  the  iron  gate).  But  it  seems 
hardly  likely  that  the  two  soldiers  with  whom  Peter  had  been 
stationed  are  meant.  Probably  the  "first  ward"  means  the 
two  soldiers  of  the  quaternion  stationed  by  the  door  and 
the  second  ward  some  other  soldiers,  not  part  of  the  sixteen, 
further  on  in  the  prison  by  the  iron  gate.  However  under- 
stood, the  difficulties  of  escape  are  made  plain.  Unto  the  iron 
gate  that  leadeth  into  the  city  {epi  ten  pulen  ten  siderdn  ten 
pherousan  eis  ten  polin).  Note  the  triple  use  of  the  article 
(the  gate  the  iron  one  the  one  leading  into  the  city).  For 
this  resumptive  use  of  the  article  see  Robertson,  Grammar, 
pp.  762,  764.  This  iron  gate  may  have  opened  from  a  court 
out  into  the  street  and  efi"ectually  barred  escape.  Opened  to 
them  (enoige  autois).  Second  aorist  passive  indicative  of 
anoigb,  the  usual  later  form  though  enoichthe  (first  aorist 
passive)  occurs  also,  was  opened.  Of  its  own  accord  {auto- 
mate).  Old  compound  adjective  {autos,  self,  obsolete  mao,  to 
desire  eagerly,  feminine  form  though  masculine  automates 
also  used  as  feminine).  In  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Mark 
4:28.  It  was  a  strange  experience  for  Peter.  The  Codex  Bezae 
adds  here  "went  down  the  seven  steps"  (katebesav  tous 
hepta   bathmous),    an   interesting   detail    that   adds    to   the 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  169 

picture.  One  street  (rhumen  mian).  The  angel  saw  Peter 
through  one  of  the  narrow  streets  and  then  left  him.  We  have 
no  means  of  knowing  precisely  the  location  of  the  prison 
in  the  city.   On  "departed"  (apeste)  see  on  verse  7. 

11.  Was  come  to  himself  {en  heautoi  genomenos).  Second 
aorist  middle  participle  of  ginomai  with  en  and  the  locative 
case,  "becoming  at  himself."  In  Luke  15:17  we  have  eis 
heauton  elthon  (coming  to  himself,  as  if  he  had  been  on  a  trip 
away  from  himself).  Now  I  know  of  a  truth  {nun  oida  alethos). 
There  was  no  further  confusion  of  mind  that  it  was  an  ecstasy 
as  in  10:10.  But  he  was  in  peril  for  the  soldiers  would  soon 
learn  of  his  escape,  when  the  change  of  guards  came  at  6  a.m. 
Delivered  me  {exeilato  me).  Second  aorist  middle  indicative 
of  exaireo.  The  Lord  rescued  me  of  himself  by  his  angel. 
Expectation  {prosdokias).  Old  word  from  prosdokao,  to  look 
for.  In  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Luke  21 126.  James  had  been 
put  to  death  and  the  Jewish  people  were  eagerly  waiting 
for  the  execution  of  Peter  like  hungry  wolves. 

12.  When  he  had  considered  {sunidon).  Second  aorist  ac- 
tive participle  of  suneidon  (for  the  defective  verb  sunorad), 
to  see  together,  to  grasp  as  a  whole,  old  verb,  but  in  the  N.T. 
only  here  and  14:6,  save  the  perfect  indicative  sunoida  (I 
Gor.  4:4)  and  participle  (Acts  5 :2).  It  is  the  word  from  which 
suneidesis  (conscience)  comes  (Rom.  2:15).  Peter's  mind 
worked  rapidly  and  he  decided  what  to  do.  He  took  in  his 
situation  clearly.  To  the  house  of  Mary  {epi  ten  oikian  tes 
Marias).  Another  Mary  (the  others  were  Mary  the  mother 
of  Jesus,  Mary  of  Bethany,  Mary  Magdalene,  Mary  wife 
of  Cleopas,  Mary  the  mother  of  James  and  Joses).  She  may 
have  been  a  widow  and  was  possessed  of  some  means  since 
her  house  was  large  enough  to  hold  the  large  group  of  dis- 
ciples there.  Barnabas,  cousin  of  John  Mark  her  son  (Col. 
4:10),  was  also  a  man  of  property  or  had  been  (Acts  4:36^). 
It  is  probable  that  the  disciples  had  been  in  the  habit  of 
meeting  in  her  house,  a  fact  known  to  Peter  and  he  was 


I70     WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

evidently  fond  of  John  Mark  whom  he  afterwards  calls 
*'my  son"  (I  Peter  5:13)  and  whom  he  had  met  here.  The 
upper  room  of  Acts  1:13  may  have  been  in  Mary's  house 
and  Mark  may  have  been  the  man  bearing  a  pitcher  of  water 
(Luke  22:10)  and  the  young  man  who  fled  in  the  Garden  of 
Gethsemane  (Mark  14 15  if.).  There  was  a  gate  and  portress 
here  as  in  the  house  of  the  highpriest  (John  18:16).  Peter 
knew  where  to  go  and  even  at  this  early  hour  hoped  to  find 
some  of  the  disciples.  Mary  is  one  of  the  many  mothers  who 
have  become  famous  by  reason  of  their  sons,  though  she 
was  undoubtedly  a  woman  of  high  character  herself.  Were 
gathered  together  and  were  praying  {esan  sunethroismenoi  kai 
proseuchomenoi).  Note  difference  in  the  tenses,  one  peri- 
phrastic past  perfect  passive  {sunathroizo  old  verb,  in  the 
N.T.  here  only  and  19:25  and  the  uncompounded  throizo 
in  Luke  24:33)  and  the  periphrastic  imperfect.  The  praying 
apparently  had  been  going  on  all  night  and  a  large  number 
(many,  hikanoi)  of  the  disciples  were  there.  One  recalls 
the  time  when  they  had  gathered  to  pray  (4:31)  after  Peter 
had  told  the  disciples  of  the  threats  of  the  Sanhedrin  (4:23). 
God  had  rescued  Peter  then.  Would  he  let  him  be  put  to 
death  now  as  James  had  been? 

13.  When  he  knocked  at  the  door  of  the  gate  (krousantos 
autou  ten  thuran  tou  pulonos).  Genitive  absolute  with  aorist 
active  participle  of  kroud,  common  verb  to  knock  or  knock 
at.  So  from  the  outside  (Luke  13 :25).  Pulon  here  is  the  gate- 
way or  passageway  from  the  door  (thura)  that  leads  to  the 
house.  Inverse  14  it  is  still  the  passageway  without  the  use  of 
thura  (door,  so  for  both  door  and  passageway).  To  answer 
{hupakousai).  To  listen  under  before  opening.  First  aorist 
active  infinitive  of  hupakouo,  common  verb  to  obey,  to 
hearken.  J  maid  (paidiske).  Portress  as  in  John  18:17.  A 
diminutive  of  paisy  a  female  slave  (so  on  an  ostracon  of 
second  century  a.d.,  Deissmann,  Light  from  the  Ancient 
Easty  p.  200).   Rhoda.  A  rose.  Women  can  have  such  beauti- 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  1 71 

ful  names  like  Dorcas  (Gazelle),  Euodia  (Sweet  Aroma), 
Syntyche  (Good  Luck).  Mark  or  Peter  could  tell  Luke  her 
name. 

14.  When  she  knew  (epignousa).  Second  aorist  (ingresslve) 
active  participle  of  epiginosko,  to  know  fully  or  in  addition 
(epi),  to  recognize.  She  knew  Peter  and  his  voice  from  his 
frequent  visits  there.  For  joy  {apo  tes  chards).  From  her  joy 
(ablative  case),  life-like  picture  of  the  maid  who  left  Peter 
standing  outside  with  the  door  to  the  passageway  unopened. 
Note  the  aorist  tenses  for  quick  action  {ouk  enoixen)^  eis- 
dramousa  (from  eistrecho,  defective  verb,  only  here  in  the 
N.T.),  apeggeilen.  Stood  {hesianai).  Second  perfect  active 
infinitive  of  Aii^^wz", -intransitive,  in  indirect  assertion  with 
ton  Petron  (Peter)  accusative  of  general  reference.  The  slave 
girl  acted  as  if  she  were  a  member  of  the  family  (Furneaux), 
but  she  left  Peter  in  peril. 

15.  Thou  art  mad  (mainei).  Present  middle  indicative 
second  person  singular.  Old  verb,  only  in  the  middle  voice. 
Festus  used  the  same  word  to  Paul  (26:24).  The  maid  was 
undoubtedly  excited,  but  it  was  a  curious  rebuff  from  those 
who  had  been  praying  all  night  for  Peter's  release.  In  their 
defence  it  may  be  said  that  Stephen  and  James  had  been 
put  to  death  and  many  others  by  Saul's  persecution.  She 
confidently  affirmed  {diischurizeto).  Imperfect  middle  of 
diischurizomaij  an  old  word  of  vigorous  and  confident  asser- 
tion, originally  to  lean  upon.  Only  here  in  the  N.T.  The  girl 
stuck  to  her  statement.  It  is  his  angel  {Ho  aggelos  estin  autou). 
This  was  the  second  alternative  of  the  disciples.  It  was  a 
popular  Jewish  belief  that  each  man  had  a  guardian  angel. 
Luke  takes  no  position  about  it.  No  scripture  teaches  it. 

16.  Continued  knocking  {epemenen  krouon).  Imperfect 
active  and  present  participle.  Now  all  heard  the  knocking. 
When  they  had  opened  (anoixantes).  First  aorist  active 
participle  of  anoigo  or  -numi.  The  whole  group  rushed  out 
to  the  courtyard  this  time  to  make  sure.    They  were  amazed 


172      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

(exestesan) .   The  frequent  second  aorist  active  (intransitive) 
indicative  of  exist enii. 

17.  There  were  probably  loud  exclamations  of  astonish- 
ment and  joy.  Beckoning  with  the  hand  {kataseisas  tei  cheiri). 
First  aorist  active  participle  of  kataseio,  old  verb  to  signal 
or  shake  down  with  the  hand  (instrumental  case  cheiri). 
In  the  N.T.  only  in  Acts  12:17;  13:16;  19:33;  21:40.  The 
speaker  indicates  by  a  downward  movement  of  the  hand 
his  desire  for  silence  (to  hold  their  peace,  sigdin,  present 
active  infinitive,  to  keep  silent).  Peter  was  anxious  for  every 
precaution  and  he  wanted  their  instant  attention.  Declared 
{diegesato).  F-irst  aorist  middle  of  diegeomai,  old  verb  to 
carry  through  a  narrative,  give  a  full  story.  See  also  Acts 
9:27  of  Barnabas  in  his  defence  of  Saul.  Peter  told  them  the 
wonderful  story.  Unto  James  and  the  brethren  {lakoboi  kai 
tois  adelphois).  Dative  case  after  apaggeilate  (first  aorist 
active  imperative).  Evidently  "James  and  the  brethren" 
were  not  at  this  meeting,  probably  meeting  elsewhere.  There 
was  no  place  where  all  the  thousands  of  disciples  in  Jeru- 
salem could  meet.  This  gathering  in  the  house  of  Mary  may 
have  been  of  women  only  or  a  meeting  of  the  Hellenists,  It  is 
plain  that  this  James  the  Lord's  brother,  is  now  the  leading 
presbyter  or  elder  in  Jerusalem  though  there  were  a  number 
(11:30;  21:18).  Paul  even  terms  him  apostle  (Gal.  1:19), 
though  certainly  not  one  of  the  twelve.  The  twelve  apostles 
probably  were  engaged  elsewhere  in  mission  work  save  James 
now  dead  (Acts  12:2)  and  Peter.  The  leadership  of  James  is 
here  recognized  by  Peter  and  is  due,  partly  to  the  absence  of 
the  twelve,  but  mainly  to  his  own  force  of  character.  He  will 
preside  over  the  Jerusalem  Conference  (Acts  15:13),  To 
another  place  {eis  heteron  topon).  Probably  Luke  did  not 
know  the  place  and  certainly  It  was  prudent  for  Peter  to 
conceal  it  from  Herod  Agrippa.  Probably  Peter  left  the 
city.  He  is  back  in  Jerusalem  at  the  Conference  a  few  years 
later  (Acts   15:7)   and  after  the  death  of  Herod  Agrippa. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  173 

Whether  Peter  went  to  Rome  during  these  years  we  do  not 
know.  He  was  recognized  later  as  the  apostle  to  the  cir- 
cumcision (Gal.  2:7;  I  Peter  i:i)  and  apparently  was  in 
Rome  with  John  Mark  when  he  wrote  the  First  Epistle 
(I  Peter  5:13),  unless  it  is  the  real  Babylon.  But,  even  if 
Peter  went  to  Rome  during  this  early  period,  there  is  no  evi- 
dence that  he  founded  the  church  there.  If  he  had  done  so, 
in  the  light  of  H  Cor.  10:16  it  would  be  strange  that  Paul 
had  not  mentioned  it  in  writing  to  Rome,  for  he  was  anxious 
not  to  build  on  another  man's  foundation  (Rom.  15:20). 
Paul  felt  sure  that  he  himself  had  a  work  to  do  in  Rome. 
Unfortunately  Luke  has  not  followed  the  ministry  of  Peter 
after  this  period  as  he  does  Paul  (appearing  again  only  in 
chapter  15).  If  Peter  really  left  Jerusalem  at  this  time  in- 
stead of  hiding  in  the  city,  he  probably  did  some  mission 
work  as  Paul  says  that  he  did  (I  Cor.  9:5). 

18.  As  soon  as  it  was  day  {Genomenes  hemeras).  Genitive 
absolute,  day  having  come.  No  small  stir  (tarachos  ouk 
oligos).  Litotes  {ouk  oligos),  occurs  eight  times  in  the  Acts 
as  in  15:2,  and  nowhere  else  in  the  N.T.  Tarachos  (stir)  is 
an  old  word  from  tarasso,  to  agitate.  In  the  N.T  only  here 
and  19:23.  Probably  all  sixteen  soldiers  were  agitated  over 
this  remarkable  escape.  They  were  responsible  for  the  pris- 
oner with  their  lives  (cf.  Acts  16:27;  27:42).  Furneaux  sug- 
gests that  Manaen,  the  king's  foster-brother  and  a  Chris- 
tian (13:1),  was  the  "angel"  who  rescued  Peter  from  the 
prison.  That  is  not  the  way  that  Peter  looked  at  it.  fVhat 
was  become  of  Peter  {ti  ara  ho  Petros  egeneto).  An  indirect 
question  with  the  aorist  indicative  retained.  Ara  adds  a 
syllogism  (therefore)  to  the  problem  as  in  Luke  1:66.  The 
use  of  the  neuter  ti  (as  in  Acts  13:25)  is  different  from  tis, 
though  nominative  like  Petros,  literally,  "what  then  Peter 
had  become,"  "what  had  happened  to  Peter"  (in  one  id- 
iom). See  the  same  idiom  in  John  21:21  {houtos  de  ti).  But 
this  one  what  (verb  genesetai  not  used). 


174      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

19.  He  examined  (anakrinas).  First  aorist  active  partici- 
ple of  anakrino,  old  verb  to  sift  up  and  down,  to  question 
thoroughly,  in  a  forensic  sense  (Luke  23:14;  Acts  4:9;  12:19; 
28:18).  That  they  should  he  put  to  death  (apachthenai).  First 
aorist  passive  infinitive  (indirect  command)  of  apago,  old 
verb  to  lead  away,  especially  to  execution  as  in  Matt,  27: 
31.  Here  it  is  used  absolutely.  This  was  the  ordinary  Ro- 
man routine  and  not  a  proof  of  special  cruelty  on  the  part 
of  Herod  Agrippa.  Tarried  (dietriben).  Imperfect  active. 
Herod  Agrippa  made  his  home  in  Jerusalem,  but  he  went  to 
Caesarea  to  the  public  games  in  honour  of  Emperor  Claudius. 

20.  Was  highly  displeased  {en  thumomachon).  Periphras- 
tic imperfect  active  of  thumomacheo,  late  compound  of 
thumos  (passionate  heat)  and  machomai,  to  fight.  Only  here 
in  the  N.T.,  to  fight  desperately,  to  have  a  hot  quarrel. 
Whether  it  was  open  war  with  the  Phoenicians  or  just 
violent  hostility  we  do  not  know,  save  that  Phoenicia  be- 
longed to  Syria  and  Herod  Agrippa  had  no  authority  there. 
The  quarrel  may  have  been  over  commercial  matters.  They 
came  with  one  accord  (homothumadon  paresan).  The  repre- 
sentatives of  Tyre  and  SIdon.  See  on  i  :i4  for  homothumadon. 
Tyre  was  a  colony  of  SIdon  and  had  become  one  of  the  chief 
commercial  cities  of  the  world  by  reason  of  the  Phoenician 
ships.  The  king's  chamberlain  {ton  epi  tou  koitonos  tou  basi- 
leos).  The  one  over  the  bedchamber  {koitonos^  late  word 
from  koite,  bed,  here  only  in  the  N.T.).  Made  their  friend 
(peisantes).  First  aorist  active  participle  of  peitho,  to  per- 
suade. Having  persuaded  (probably  with  bribes  as  in  Matt. 
28:14).  They  asked  for  peace  {eitounto  eirenen).  Imperfect 
middle  of  aiteo^  kept  on  asking  for  peace.  Because  their 
country  was  fed  {dia  to  trephesthai  auton  ten  choran).  Causal 
sentence  with  dia  and  the  articular  Infinitive  (present  pas- 
sive of  trephd,  to  nourish  or  feed)  and  the  accusative  of  gen- 
eral reference,  "because  of  the  being  fed  as  to  their  coun- 
try." Tyre  and  SIdon  as  large  commercial  cities  on  the  coast 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  175 

received  large  supplies  of  grain  and  fruits  from  Palestine. 
Herod  had  cut  off  the  supplies  and  that  brought  the  two 
cities  to  action. 

21.  Upon  a  set  day  {taktei  hemerdi).  Locative  case  and 
the  verbal  adjective  of  tasso,  to  arrange,  appoint,  old  word, 
here  only  in  the  N.T.  Josephus  {Ant.  XVIL  6,  8;  XIX.  8,  2) 
gives  a  full  account  of  the  occasion  and  the  death  of  Herod 
Agrippa.  It  was  the  second  day  of  the  festival  in  honour  of 
the  Emperor  Claudius,  possibly  his  birthday  rather  than 
the  Quinquennalia.  The  two  accounts  of  Luke  and  Josephus 
supplement  each  other  with  no  contradiction.  Josephus 
does  not  mention  the  name  of  Blastus.  Arrayed  himself  in 
royal  apparel  {endusamenos  estheta  basiliken).  First  aorist 
middle  (indirect)  participle  of  enduno  or  enduo,  common 
verb  to  put  on.  Literally,  having  put  royal  apparel  on  him- 
self (a  robe  of  silver  tissue,  Josephus  says).  The  rays  of  the 
sun  shone  on  this  brilliant  apparel  and  the  vast  crowd  in 
the  open  amphitheatre  became  excited  as  Herod  began  to 
speak.  Made  an  oration  (edemegorei).  Imperfect  active  of 
demegoreb,  old  verb  from  demegoros  (haranguer  of  the  peo- 
ple), and  that  from  demos  (people)  and  agoreuo,  to  harangue 
or  address  the  people.   Only  here  in  the  N.T.  He  kept  it  up. 

22.  Shouted  (epephonei).  Imperfect  active,  kept  on  shout- 
ing, calling  out  to  him.  Old  verb,  but  only  four  times  in  the 
N.T.  and  all  by  Luke.  The  heathen  crowd  (demos)  repeated 
their  flattering  adulation  to  gain  Herod's  favour.  The  voice 
of  a  god  {theou  phone).  In  the  pagan  sense  of  emperor  wor- 
ship, not  as  the  Supreme  Being.  But  it  was  pleasing  to 
Herod  Agrippa's  vanity. 

23.  Smote  him  (epataxen  auton).  Effective  aorist  active  in- 
dicative of  patasso,  old  verb,  used  already  in  verse  7  of  gentle 
smiting  of  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  here  of  a  severe  stroke  of 
affliction.  Like  Nebuchadnezzar  (Dan.  4:30)  pride  went 
before  a  fall.  He  was  struck  down  in  the  very  zenith  of  his 
glory.     Because  {anth^  hon).    Anti  with  the  genitive  of  the 


176      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

relative  pronoun,  "in  return  for  which  things."  He  accepted 
the  impious  flattery  (Hackett)  instead  of  giving  God  the 
glory.  He  was  a  nominal  Jew,  He  was  eaten  of  worms  {geno- 
menos  skolekobrotos).  Ingressive  aorist  middle  participle, 
"becoming  worm-eaten."  The  compound  verbal  adjective 
(skolex,  worm,  brotos,  eaten,  from  bibrosko)  is  a  late  word 
(II  Mace.  9:9)  of  the  death  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  used 
also  of  a  tree  (Theophrastus),  here  only  in  the  N.T.  The 
word  skblex  was  used  of  intestinal  worms  and  Herodotus  (IV. 
205)  describes  Pheretima,  Queen  of  Cyrene,  as  having 
swarms  of  worms  which  ate  her  flesh  while  still  alive.  Jose- 
phus  {Ant.  XIX.  8,  2)  says  that  Herod  Agrippa  lingered 
for  five  days  and  says  that  the  rotting  of  his  flesh  produced 
worms,  an  item  in  harmony  with  the  narrative  in  Luke. 
Josephus  gives  further  details,  one  a  superstitious  sight  of  an 
owl  sitting  on  one  of  the  ropes  of  the  awning  of  the  theatre 
while  the  people  flattered  him,  an  omen  of  his  death  to  him. 
Luke  puts  it  simply  that  God  smote  him.  Gave  up  the  ghost 
{exepsuxen).  Eff"ective  aorist  active  of  ekpsucho,  to  breathe 
out,  late  verb,  medical  term  in  Hippocrates,  in  the  N.T. 
only  in  Acts  5:5,  10;  12:23.  Herod  was  carried  out  of  the 
theatre  a  dying  man  and  lingered  only  five  days. 

24.  Grew  and  multiplied  (euxanen  kai  eplethuneto).  Imper- 
fect active  and  passive.  Cf.  6:1.  The  reaction  from  the 
death  of  James  and  the  imprisonment  of  Peter. 

25.  From  Jerusalem  {ex  lerousalem).  Probably  correct 
text,  though  D  has  apo.  Westcott  and  Hort  follow  Aieph  B 
in  reading  eis  {to)  Jerusalem,  an  impossible  reading  contra- 
dicted by  ii:29f.  and  13:1.  The  ministration  {diakonian) 
referred  to  is  that  in  ii:29f.  which  may  have  taken  place, 
in  point  of  time,  after  the  death  of  Herod.  Taking  with  them 
{sunparalabontes).  Taking  along  {para)  with  {sun)  them, 
John  Mark  from  Jerusalem  (12:12)  to  Antioch  (13:1).  The 
aorist  participle  does  not  express  subsequent  action  as  Rack- 
ham  here  argues  (Robertson,  Grammar,  pp.  861-863). 


CHAPTER  XIII 

1.  In  the  church  that  was  there  (kata  ten  ousan  ekklesian). 
Possibly  distributed  throughout  the  church  (note  "in  the 
church"  11:26).  Now  a  strong  organization  there.  Luke 
here  begins  the  second  part  of  Acts  with  Antioch  as  the  cen- 
tre of  operations,  no  longer  Jerusalem.  Paul  is  now  the  cen- 
tral figure  instead  of  Peter.  Jerusalem  had  hesitated  too 
long  to  carry  out  the  command  of  Jesus  to  take  the  gospel 
to  the  whole  world.  That  glory  will  now  belong  to  Antioch. 
Prophets  and  teachers  (prophetai  kai  didaskaloi).  All  prophets 
were  teachers,  but  not  all  teachers  were  prophets  who  were 
for-speakers  of  God,  sometimes  fore-speakers  like  Agabus 
in  1 1 :28.  The  double  use  of  te  here  makes  three  prophets 
(Barnabas,  Symeon,  Lucius)  and  two  teachers  (Manaen 
and  Saul).  Barnabas  heads  the  list  (11:22)  and  Saul  comes 
last.  Symeon  Niger  may  be  the  Simon  of  Cyrene  who 
carried  the  Saviour's  cross.  Lucius  of  Cyrene  was  probably 
one  of  the  original  evangelists  (11:20).  The  name  is  one 
of  the  forms  of  Luke,  but  it  is  certainly  not  Luke  the  Physi- 
cian. Manaen  shows  how  the  gospel  was  reaching  some  of 
the  higher  classes  (home  of  Herod  Antipas).  Foster-brother 
(suntrophos).  Old  word  for  nourished  with  or  brought 
up  with  one  collactaneus  (Vulgate).  These  are  clearly  the  out- 
standing men  in  the  great  Greek  church  in  Antioch. 

2,  As  they  ministered  to  the  Lord  {leitourgounton  auton  tot 
kurioi).  Genitive  absolute  of  leitourgeo,  old  verb,  used  of 
the  Attic  orators  who  served  the  state  at  their  own  cost 
{leos  or  laos,  people,  and  ergon,  work  or  service).  Common  in 
the  LXX  of  the  priests  who  served  in  the  tabernacle  (Ex. 
28:31,  39)  like  leitourgia  (Luke  1:23)  which  see.  So  in  Heb. 
10:11.    In  Rom.  15:27  of  aiding  others  in  poverty.   Here  of 

177 


178      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

worship  (prayer,  exhortation,  fasting).     The  word  liturgy 
grows  out  of  this  use.  And  fasted  (kai  nesteuontbn).  Genitive 
absolute  also.    Christian  Jews  were  keeping  up  the  Jewish 
fast  (Luke  18:12).    Note  fasting  also  in  the  choice  of  elders 
for  the  Mission  Churches  (Acts   14:23).     Fasting  was  not 
obligatory  on  the  Christians,  but  they  were  facing  a  great 
emergency  in  giving  the  gospel  to  the  Gentile  world.  Separate 
me  {aphorisate  de  mot).     First  aorist  active  imperative  of 
aphorizo,  old  verb  to  mark  off  boundaries  or  horizon,  used 
by  Paul  of  his  call  (Rom.  i:i;  Gal.  1:15).  The  Greek  has  de^ 
a   shortened   form  of  ede  and  like  Latin  jam  and  German 
dock,  now  therefore.   It  ought  to  be  preserved  in  the  transla- 
tion.   Cf.  Luke  2:15;  Acts  15:36;  I  Cor.  6:20.    Moi  is  the 
ethical  dative.  As  in  verse  i  Barnabas  is  named  before  Saul. 
Both  had  been  called  to  ministry  long  ago,  but  now  this 
call  is  to  the  special  campaign  among  the  Gentiles.     Both 
had  been  active  and  useful  in  such  work.    Whereunto  {ho). 
Here  eis  has  to  be  repeated  from  eis  to  ergon  just  before,  "for 
which"  as  Jesus  sent  the  twelve  and  the  seventy  in  pairs, 
so  here.    Paul  nearly  always  had  one  or  more  companions. 
3.  When  they  had  fasted  {nesteus antes).     Either  finishing 
the  same  fast  in  verse  2  or  another  one  (Hackett),  but  clearly 
a  voluntary  fast.    Laid  their  hands  upon  them  (epithentes  tas 
cheiras  autois).  Second  aorist  active  participle  of  epitithemi. 
Not  ordination  to  the  ministry,  but  a  solemn  consecration 
to  the  great  missionary  task  to  which  the  Holy  Spirit  had 
called  them.    Whether  the  whole  church  took  part  in  this 
ceremony  is  not  clear,  though  in  15:40  "the  brethren"  did 
commend  Paul  and  Silas.    Perhaps  some  of  them  here  acted 
for  the  whole  church,  all  of  whom  approved  the  enterprise. 
But  Paul  makes  it  plain  in  Phil.  4:15  that  the  church  in 
Antioch  did  not  make  financial  contribution  to  the  cam- 
paign, but  only  goodwill.  But  that  was  more  than  the  church 
at  Jerusalem  would  have  done  as  a  whole  since  Peter  had 
been   arraigned   there  for  his   activities   in  Caesarea   (Acts 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  1 79 

11:1-18).  Clearly  Barnabas  and  Saul  had  to  finance  the 
tour  themselves.  It  was  Phillppi  that  first  gave  money  to 
Paul's  campaigns.  There  were  still  heathen  enough  in 
Antioch,  but  the  church  approved  the  going  of  Barnabas 
and  Saul,  their  very  best. 

4.  So  they  {autoi  men  oun).  They  themselves  indeed 
therefore.  No  contrast  is  necessary,  though  there  is  a  slight 
one  in  verses  5  and  6.  Luke  again  refers  to  the  Holy  Spirit 
as  the  source  of  their  authority  for  this  campaign  rather 
than  the  church  at  Antioch.  Sent  forth  {ekpemphthente s) . 
Old  verb  from  ekpempo  and  first  aorlst  passive  participle, 
but  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Acts  17:10.  Sailed  {apepleu- 
san).  Effective  aorist  active  indicative  of  apopleo,  old  verb 
to  sail  away,  depart  from.  In  the  N.T.  only  here  and  14:26; 
20:15;  27:1.  Barnabas  was  from  Cyprus  where  there  were 
many  Jews. 

5.  Proclaimed  {kateggellon).  Imperfect  active  of  kataggelWi 
inchoative,  began  to  proclaim.  This  was  Paul's  rule  of  pro- 
cedure, "to  the  Jew  first"  (Rom.  1:16;  Acts  13:46;  17:2; 
18:4,  19;  19:8).  They  had  also  {eichon  de  kai).  Imperfect  ac- 
tive, descriptive.  As  their  attendant  (hupereten).  Literally, 
"under-rower"  {hupo,  eretes)  In  the  trireme.  Probably  here 
minister  {chazzan)  or  assistant  in  the  synagogue  as  in  Luke 
4:20.  Cf.  Matt.  5:25.  It  is  not  clear  what  John  Mark  did, 
though  he  was  evidently  selected  by  Barnabas  as  his  cousin. 
He  may  have  helped  in  the  baptizing.  There  were  probably 
others  also  in  the  company  (verse  13).  The  "also"  may  mean 
that  Mark  did  some  preaching.  Barnabas  was  probably  the 
leader  In  the  work  in  these  Jewish  synagogues. 

6.  Unto  Paphos  (achri  Paphou).  The  new  Paphos  at  the 
other  end  of  the  island,  reached  by  a  fine  Roman  road,  some 
eight  miles  north  of  the  old  Paphos  famous  for  the  worship 
of  Venus.  A  certain  sorcerer,  a  false  prophet,  a  Jew  {andra 
tina  magon  pseudopropheten  loudaion).  Literally,  "a  certain 
man"  {andra  tina)  with  various  descriptive  epithets.     The 


l8o      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

word  magon  does  not  necessarily  mean  "sorcerer,"  but 
only  a  magus  (Matt.  2:1,  7,  10  which  see).  The  bad  sense 
occurs  in  Acts  8:9,  11  (Simon  Magus)  and  is  made  plain 
here  by  "false  prophet."  In  verse  8  here  Barjesus  (Son  of 
Jesus)  is  called  "Elymas  the  sorcerer  (or  Magian),"  prob- 
ably his  professional  title,  as  Luke  interprets  the  Arabic 
or  Aramaic  word  Elymas.  These  Jewish  mountebanks  were 
numerous  and  had  great  influence  with  the  uneducated. 
In  Acts  19:13  the  seven  sons  of  Sceva,  Jewish  exorcists, 
tried  to  imitate  Paul.  If  one  is  surprised  that  a  man  like 
SergiuG  Paulus  should  fall  under  the  influence  of  this  fraud, 
he  should  recall  what  Juvenal  says  of  the  Emperor  Tiberius 
"sitting  on  the  rock  of  Capri  with  his  flock  of  Chaldaeans 
around  him." 

7.  With  the  proconsul  Sergius  Paulus  (sun  toi  anthupatoi 
Sergioi  Pauloi).  Luke  used  to  be  sharply  criticized  for 
applying  this  term  to  Sergius  Paulus  on  the  ground  that 
Cyprus  was  a  province  under  the  appointment  of  the  em- 
peror with  the  title  of  propraetor  and  not  under  the  control 
of  the  senate  with  the  title  of  proconsul.  That  was  true  B.C. 
30,  but  five  years  later  it  was  changed  to  proconsul  by 
Augustus  and  put  under  the  control  of  the  Senate.  Two 
inscriptions  have  been  found  with  the  date  a.d.  51  and  52 
with  the  names  of  proconsuls  of  Cyprus  and  one  is  in  the 
Cesnola  Collection,  an  inscription  found  at  Soli  with  the 
name  of  Paulus  as  Proconsul,  undoubtedly  this  very  man, 
though  no  date  occurs.  A  man  of  understanding  {andri 
sunetbi).  All  the  more  amazing  that  he  should  be  a  victim 
of  Barjesus.  He  had  given  up  idolatry  at  any  rate  and  was 
eager  to  hear  Barnabas  and  Saul. 

8.  Withstood  them  {anthistatoautois).  Imperfect  middle  of 
anthistemi,  to  stand  against  (face  to  face).  Dative  case 
{autois).  He  persisted  in  his  opposition  and  was  unwilling  to 
lose  his  great  prize.  There  may  have  been  a  public  discus- 
sion between  Elymas  and  Saul.     To  turn  aside  (diastrepsai). 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  l8l 

First  aorist  active  infinitive  of  diastrepho,  old  verb  to  turn 
or  twist  in  two,  to  distort,  to  pervert  (cf.  Matt.  17:17;  Luke 
23:2). 

9.  But  Saul,  who  is  also  called  Paul  {Saulos  de^  ho  kai 
Paulos).  By  this  remarkably  brief  phrase  Luke  presents  this 
epoch  in  the  life  of  Saul  Paul.  The  "also"  {kai)  does  not 
mean  that  the  name  Paul  was  given  now  for  the  first  time, 
rather  than  he  had  always  had  it.  As  a  Jew  and  a  Roman 
citizen,  he  undoubtedly  had  both  names  all  the  time  (cf. 
John  Mark,  Symeon  Niger,  Barsabbas  Justus).  Jerome  held 
that  the  name  of  Sergius  Paulus  was  adopted  by  Saul  be- 
cause of  his  conversion  at  this  time,  but  this  is  a  wholly  un- 
likely explanation,  "an  element  of  vulgarity  impossible  to 
St.  Paul"  (Farrar).  Augustine  thought  that  the  meaning  of 
the  Latin  paulus  (little)  would  incline  Saul  to  adopt,  "but 
as  a  proper  name  the  word  rather  suggested  the  glories  of  the 
Aemilian  family,  and  even  to  us  recalls  the  name  of  another 
Paulus,  who  was  'lavish  of  his  noble  life'  "  (Page).  Among 
the  Jews  the  name  Saul  was  naturally  used  up  to  this  point, 
but  from  now  on  Luke  employs  Paul  save  when  there  is  a 
reference  to  his  previous  life  (Acts  22:7;  26:14).  His  real 
career  is  work  among  the  Gentiles  and  Paul  is  the  name  used 
by  them.  There  is  a  striking  similarity  in  sound  between  the 
Hebrew  Saul  and  the  Roman  Paul.  Paul  was  proud  of  his 
tribe  of  Benjamin  and  so  of  King  Saul  (Phil.  3:5).  Filled 
with  the  Holy  Spirit  (plestheis  pneumatos  hagiou).  First 
aorist  (ingressive)  passive  participle  of  pimplemi  with  the 
genitive  case.  A  special  influx  of  power  to  meet  this  emer- 
gency. Here  was  a  cultured  heathen,  typical  of  the  best  in 
Roman  life,  who  called  forth  all  the  powers  of  Paul  plus  the 
special  help  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  expose  the  wickedness  of 
Elymas  Barjesus.  If  one  wonders  why  the  Holy  Spirit 
filled  Paul  for  this  emergency  rather  than  Barnabas,  when 
Barnabas  was  named  first  in  13:2,  he  can  recall  the  sov- 
ereignty of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  his  choice  of  agents  (I  Cor. 


1 82      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

12:4-11)  and  also  the  special  call  of  Paul  by  Christ  (Acts 
9:15;  26:i7f.).  Fastened  his  eyes  (atenisas).  As  already  in 
Luke  4:20;  22:56;  Acts  3:4,  12;  6:15;  10:4. 

10.  Of  all  guile  {pantos  dolou).  From  delo,  to  catch  with 
bait,  old  word,  already  seen  in  Matt.  26:4;  Mark  7:22; 
14:1.  Paul  denounces  Elymas  as  a  trickster.  J II  villainy 
{pases  rhdidiourgias).  Late  compound  from  rhdidiourgos 
{rhdidios,  easy,  facile,  ergon,  deed,  one  who  does  a  thing 
adroitly  and  with  ease).  So  levity  in  Xenophon  and  un- 
scrupulousness  in  Polybius,  Plutarch,  and  the  papyri.  Only 
here  in  the  N.T.,  though  the  kindred  word  rhdidiourgema 
occurs  in  Acts  18:14.  With  deadly  accuracy  Paul  pictured 
this  slick  rascal.  Thou  son  of  the  devil  {huie  diabolou).  Damn- 
ing phrase  like  that  used  by  Jesus  of  the  Pharisees  in  John 
8:44,  a  slanderer  like  the  diabolos.  This  use  of  son  {huios) 
for  characteristic  occurs  in  Acts  3:25;  4:36,  a  common 
Hebrew  idiom,  and  may  be  used  purposely  by  Paul  in  con- 
trast with  the  name  Barjesus  (son  of  Jesus)  that  Elymas 
bore  (13:6).  Enemy  of  all  righteousness  {echthre  pases  dikai- 
osunes).  Personal  enemy  to  all  justice,  sums  up  all  the  rest. 
Note  triple  use  of  "all"  {pantos, pases,  pi/ ^j), total  depravity 
in  every  sense.  Wilt  thou  not  cease?  {ou  pausei).  An  impa- 
tient rhetorical  question,  almost  volitive  in  force  (Robertson, 

Grammar,  p.  874).  Note  ou,  not  me.  To  pervert  {diastrephon). 
Present  active  participle  describing  the  actual  work  of 
Elymas  as  a  perverter  or  distorter  (see  verse  8).  More 
exactly.  Wilt  thou  not  cease  perverting.''  The  right  ways  of 
the  Lord  {tas  hodous  ton  kuriou  tas  eutheias).  The  ways  of  the 
Lord  the  straight  ones  as  opposed  to  the  crooked  ways  of 
men  (Isa.  40:4;  42:16;  Luke  3:5).  The  task  of  John  the 
Baptist  as  of  all  prophets  and  preachers  is  to  make  crooked 
paths  straight  and  to  get  men  to  walk  in  them.  This  false 
prophet  was  making  even  the  Lord's  straight  ways  crooked. 
Elymas  has  many  successors. 

11.  Upon  thee  {epi  se).   The  use  of  epi  with  the  accusative 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  183 

is  rich  and  varied,  the  precise  shade  of  meaning  depending 
on  the  content.  The  "hand  of  the  Lord"  might  be  kindly 
(Acts  11:21)  or  hostile  (Heb.  10:31),  but  when  God's  hand 
touches  one's  life  (Job  19:21)  it  may  be  in  judgment  as  here 
with  Elymas.  He  has  not  humbled  himself  under  the  mighty 
hand  of  God  (I  Peter  5:6).  Not  seeing  {me  blepbn).  Repeat- 
ing with  negative  participle  the  negative  idea  in  "blind" 
(tuphlos).  "It  was  a  judicial  infliction;  blindness  for  blind- 
ness, darkness  without  for  wilful  darkness  within"  (Fur- 
neaux).  He  was  an  example  of  the  blind  leading  the  blind 
that  was  to  cease  and  Sergius  Paulus  was  to  be  led  into  the 
light.  The  blindness  was  to  be  "for  a  season"  {achri  kairou, 
Luke  4:13),  if  it  should  please  God  to  restore  his  sight.  Paul 
apparently  recalls  his  own  blindness  as  he  entered  Damas- 
cus. A  mist  (achlus).  Especially  a  dimness  of  the  eyes,  old 
poetic  word  and  late  prose,  in  LXX,  only  here  in  N.T.  Galen 
uses  it  of  the  opacity  of  the  eye  caused  by  a  wound.  He  went 
about  seeking  some  one  to  lead  him  by  the  hand  (periagon 
ezetei  cheiragogous).  A  rather  free  rendering.  Literally, 
"going  about  {periagon,  present  active  participle  of  periago) 
he  was  seeking  {ezetei,  imperfect  active  of  zeteb)  guides 
{cheiragogous,  from  cheir,  hand,  and  agogos,  guide,  from 
ago,  one  who  leads  by  the  hand)."  The  very  verb  cheira- 
gogeb,  to  lead  by  the  hand,  Luke  uses  of  Paul  in  9:8,  as  he 
entered  Damascus. 

12.  Believed  {episteusen).  Ingressive  aorist  active  indica- 
tive. Renan  considers  it  impossible  that  a  Roman  pro- 
consul could  be  converted  by  a  miracle.  But  it  was  the 
teaching  about  the  Lord  {tou  kuriou,  objective  genitive) 
by  which  he  was  astonished  {ekplessomenos,  present  passive 
participle  of  ekplessb,  see  on  Matt.  7:28)  or  struck  out  as 
well  as  by  the  miracle.  The  blindness  came  "immediately" 
{parachrema)  upon  the  judgment  pronounced  by  Paul. 
It  is  possible  that  Sergius  Paulus  was  converted  to  Christ 
without  openly  identifying  himself  with  the  Christians  as 


1 84      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

his  baptism  is  not  mentioned  as  in  the  case  of  Cornelius. 
But,  even  if  he  was  baptized,  he  need  not  have  been  deposed 
from  his  proconsulship  as  Furneaux  and  Rackham  argue 
because  his  office  called  for  "official  patronage  of  idolatrous 
worship."  But  that  could  have  been  merely  perfunctory 
as  it  probably  was  already.  He  had  been  a  disciple  of  the 
Jewish  magician,  Elymas  Barjesus,  without  losing  his  posi- 
tion. Imperial  persecution  against  Christianity  had  not 
yet  begun.  Furneaux  even  suggests  that  the  conversion  of 
a  proconsul  to  Christianity  at  this  stage  would  have  called 
for  mention  by  the  Roman  and  Greek  historians.  There 
is  the  name  Sergia  Paullina  in  a  Christian  cemetery 
in  Rome  which  shows  that  one  of  his  family  was  a  Chris- 
tian later.  One  will  believe  what  he  wills  about  Sergius 
Paulus,  but  I  do  not  see  that  Luke  leaves  him  in  the  cate- 
gory of  Simon  Magus  who  "believed"  (8:13)  for  revenue 
only. 

13.  Paul  and  his  company  .{hoi  peri  Paulon).  Neat  Greek 
idiom  as  in  Plato,  Cratylus  440  C  hoi  peri  Herakleiton.  On 
this  idiom  see  Gildersleeve,  Syntax,  p.  264.  It  means  a  man 
and  his  followers,  "those  around  Paul."  Now  Paul  ranks 
first  always  in  Acts  save  in  14:2;  15:12,  25  for  special  reasons. 
Heretofore  Saul  (Paul)  held  a  secondary  position  (9:27; 
11:30;  I3:if.).  "In  nothing  is  the  greatness  of  Barnabas 
more  manifest  than  in  his  recognition  of  the  superiority 
of  Paul  and  acceptance  of  a  secondary  position  for  himself" 
(Furneaux).  Set  sail  (anachthentes).  First  aorist  passive 
participle  of  anago.  Thirteen  times  in  the  Acts  and  Luke 
8 :22  which  see.  They  sailed  up  to  sea  and  came  down  {katago, 
katahainb)  to  land.  So  it  looks.  Departed  from  them  (apo- 
choresas  ap^  auton).  First  aorist  active  participle  of  apo- 
choreo,  old  verb  to  withdraw,  go  away  from.  In  the  N.T. 
only  here  and  Matt.  7:23;  Luke  9:39.  He  is  called  John 
there  as  in  verse  5  and  Mark  in  15:39,  though  John  Mark 
in  12:12,  25.    This  may  be  accidental  or  on  purpose  (Deiss- 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  185 

mann,  Bible  Studies,  p.  317).  Luke  is  silent  on  John's  reasons 
for  leaving  Paul  and  Barnabas.  He  was  the  cousin  of  Barna- 
bas and  may  not  have  relished  the  change  in  leadership. 
There  may  have  been  change  in  plans  also  now  that  Paul 
is  in  command.  Barnabas  had  chosen  Cyprus  and  Paul 
has  led  them  to  Perga  in  Pamphylia  and  means  to  go  on  into 
the  highlands  to  Antioch  in  Pisidia.  There  were  perils  of 
many  sorts  around  them  and  ahead  (II  Cor.  11 :26),  perils  to 
which  John  Mark  was  unwilling  to  be  exposed.  Paul  will 
specifically  charge  him  at  Antioch  with  desertion  of  his 
post  (Acts  15:39).  It  is  possible,  as  Ramsay  suggests,  that 
the  mosquitoes  at  Perga  gave  John  malaria.  If  so,  they  bit 
Paul  and  Barnabas  also.  He  may  not  have  liked  Paul's 
aggressive  attitude  towards  the  heathen.  At  any  rate  he 
went  home  to  Jerusalem  instead  of  to  Antioch,  zu  seiner 
Mutter  (Holtzmann).  It  was  a  serious  breach  in  the  work, 
but  Paul  and  Barnabas  stuck  to  the  work. 

14.  Passing  through  {dielthontes).  It  is  not  clear  why  Paul 
and  Barnabas  left  Perga  so  soon  nor  why  they  went  to  Anti- 
och in  Pisidia.  Ramsay  suggests  malaria  that  spurred  them  on 
to  the  hills  after  the  desertion  of  John  Mark.  They  preached 
at  Perga  on  the  return  (14:25)  and  apparently  hurried  away 
now.  Farrar  thinks  that  the  hot  weather  had  driven  the 
population  to  the  hills.  At  any  rate  it  is  not  difficult  to 
imagine  the  perils  of  this  climb  over  the  rough  mountain 
way  from  Perga  to  Pisidian  Antioch  to  which  Paul  appar- 
ently refers  in  II  Cor.  11 :26.  Sat  down  (ekathisan).  Ingressive 
aorist  active  indicative,  took  their  seats  as  visiting  Jews, 
possibly  in  the  seats  of  the  rabbis  (J.  Lightfoot).  Whether 
they  expected  to  be  called  on  or  not,  they  were  given  the 
opportunity  as  prominent  visitors.  The  Pisidian  Antioch  was 
really  in  Phrygia,  but  towards  Pisidia  to  distinguish  it  from 
Antioch  on  the  Maeander  (Ramsay,  Church  in  the  Roman 
Empire,  p.  25).  It  was  a  colony  like  Philippi  and  so  a  free 
city.    If  Paul  is  referring  to  South  Galatia  and  not  North 


1 86      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Galatia  in  Gal.  4:13  when  he  says  that  his  preaching  in 
Galatia  at  first  was  due  to  illness,  then  it  was  probably  here 
at  Pisidian  Antioch.  What  it  was  we  have  no  means  of  know- 
ing, though  it  was  a  temptation  in  his  flesh  to  them  so 
severe  that  they  were  willing  to  pluck  out  their  eyes  for  him 
(Gal.  4:i4f.).  Opthalmia,  malaria,  epilepsy  have  all  been 
suggested  as  this  stake  in  the  flesh  (II  Cor.  12:7).  But  Paul 
was  able  to  preach  with  power  whatever  his  actual  physical 
condition  was. 

15.  After  the  reading  of  the  law  and  the  prophets  (meta  ten 
anagnosin  tou  nomou  kai  ton  propheton).  The  law  was  first 
read  in  the  synagogues  till  B.C.  163  when  Antiochus  Epiph- 
ones  prohibited  it.  Then  the  reading  of  the  prophets  was 
substituted  for  it.  The  Maccabees  restored  both.  There 
was  a  reading  from  the  law  and  one  from  the  prophets  in 
Hebrew  which  was  interpreted  into  the  Aramaic  or  the 
Greek  Koine  for  the  people.  The  reading  was  followed  by 
the  sermon  as  when  Jesus  was  invited  to  read  and  to  preach  in 
Nazareth  (Luke  4:i6f.).  For  the  service  in  the  synagogue  see 
Schuerer,  History  of  the  Jewish  People,  Div.  II,  Vol.  II, 
pp.  79ff ,  It  was  the  duty  of  the  rulers  of  the  synagogue  (arch- 
isunagogoi)  to  select  the  readers  and  the  speakers  for  the 
service  (Mark  5:22,  35-38;  Luke  8:49;  13:14;  Acts  13:15; 
18:8,  17).  Any  rabbi  or  distinguished  stranger  could  be 
called  on  to  speak.  //  ye  have  any  word  of  exhortation  for  the 
people  {ei  tis  estin  en  humin  logos  parakleseos  pros  ton  laon). 
Literally,  if  there  is  among  you  any  word  of  exhortation  for 
the  people.  It  is  a  condition  of  the  first  class  and  assumed  to 
be  true,  a  polite  invitation.  On  "exhortation"  {paraklesis) 
see  9:3 1.  It  may  be  a  technical  phrase  used  in  the  synagogue 
(Heb.  13:22;  I  Tim.  4:13). 

16.  Paul  stood  up  (anastas  Paulos).  The  Jewish  custom 
was  to  sit  while  speaking  (Luke  4:20),  but  the  Greek  and 
Roman  was  to  stand  (Acts  17:22).  It  is  possible  as  Lewin 
{Life  of  St.  Paul,  Vol.  I,  p.    141)  suggests  that  here  Paul 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  187 

stepped  upon  the  platform  and  then  took  his  seat  as  he  began 
to  speak  or  he  may  have  followed  the  Greek  and  Roman 
custom.  Paul  is  the  leader  now  and  the  more  gifted  speaker 
(Acts  14:12),  so  that  he  responds  to  the  courteous  invitation 
of  the  rulers.  Beckoning  {kataseisas).  First  aorist  active 
participle  of  kataseio,  old  verb  to  shake  down,  a  dramatic 
gesture  for  quiet  and  order  like  Peter  in  12:17  ^^id  Paul  on 
the  steps  of  the  tower  of  Antonia  (21 :4o).  And  ye  that  fear 
God  (kai  hoi  phoboumenoi  ton  theon).  Evidently  large  num- 
bers of  these  Gentiles  like  Cornelius  in  Caesarea  were  pres- 
ent. They  offered  Paul  a  great  opportunity  for  reaching  the 
purely  pagan  Gentiles.  This  (verses  16-41)  is  the  first  full 
report  of  a  sermon  of  Paul's  that  Luke  has  preserved  for  us. 
He  is  now  a  practised  preacher  of  the  gospel  that  he  began 
proclaiming  at  Damascus,  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  is  the 
Messiah  of  promise  and  the  Saviour  of  the  whole  world 
both  Jew  and  Gentile  if  they  will  only  believe  on  him  and 
be  saved.  It  is  possible  that  Paul  here  based  his  sermon  on 
the  passages  of  the  law  and  the  prophets  that  had  just  been 
read.  He  uses  two  words  from  the  LXX,  one  in  verse  19 
from  Deut.  1:31  etrophophoresen  (as  a  nursing-father  bare 
he  them),  the  reading  of  many  old  MSS.  and  the  one  pre- 
ferred by  the  American  Committee,  the  other  in  verse  17 
from  Isaiah  1:2  hupsosen  (exalted).  At  any  rate  it  is  clear 
that  Paul  spoke  in  Greek  so  that  all  could  understand  his 
sermon.  He  may  have  written  out  notes  of  this  sermon  after- 
wards for  Luke.  The  keynotes  of  Paul's  theology  as  found 
in  his  Epistles  appear  in  this  sermon.  It  is  interesting  to 
observe  the  steady  growth  of  Paul's  Christology  as  he  faced 
the  great  problems  of  his  day.  Here  we  see  Paul's  gospel 
for  the  Jews  and  the  God-fearers  (Gentiles  friendly  to  the 
Jews). 

17.  Chose  (exelexato).  First  aorist  middle  (indirect), se- 
lected for  himself.  Israel  was  the  chosen  people.  Exalted 
(hupsosen).     From  hupsoo,  late  verb  from  hupsos  so  often 


1 88      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

used  of  Christ.  When  they  sojourned  {en  tei  paroikidi).  In 
the  sojourn.  Late  word  from  paroikos  (sojourner,  dweller, 
Acts  7:6)  common  in  LXX.  In  N.T.  only  here  and  I  Peter 
1:17.  With  a  high  arm  {meta  brachionos  hupselou).  Vivid 
picture  from  the  LXX  (Ex.  6:1,  6;  Deut.  5:15;  Psa.  136:12). 

18.  Suffered  he  their  manners  (etropophoresen).  First 
aorist  active  indicative  of  tropophoreo,  late  word  from  tropoSy 
manner,  and  phero,  reading  of  Aleph  B  D  and  accepted  by 
Westcott  and  Hort.  But  A  C  Sahidic  Bohairic  read  etro- 
phophoresen  from  trophophoreo  (irophos,  a  nurse,  and  phero,) 
late  word  (II  Mace.  7:27),  probably  correct  word  here  and 
Deut.  1:31. 

19.  When  he  had  destroyed  (kathelon).  Second  aorist  active 
participle  of  kathaireo,  to  tear  down,  old  verb.  He  gave  them 
for  an  inheritance  (katekleronomesen).  First  aorist  active 
indicative  of  the  double  compound  verb  kata-klero-nomeo, 
late  verb  in  LXX  (Numb.  34:18;  Deut.  3:28;  Josh.  14:1) 
and  only  here  in  the  N.T.,  to  distribute  by  lot,  to  distribute 
as  an  inheritance.  This  is  the  correct  reading  and  not  ka- 
teklerodotesen  from  kataklerodoteo  of  the  Textus  Receptus. 
These  two  verbs  were  confused  in  the  MSS.  of  the  LXX  as 
well  as  here.  For  about  four  hundred  and  fifty  years  {hos 
etesin  tetrakosiois  kai  pentekonta).  Associative  instrumental 
case  with  an  expression  of  time  as  in  8:11;  Luke  8:29  (Rob- 
ertson, Grammar,  p.  527).  The  oldest  MSS-  (Aleph  ABC 
Vg  Sah  Boh)  place  these  figures  before  "after  these  things" 
and  so  in  verse  19.  This  is  the  true  reading  and  is  in  agree- 
ment with  the  notation  in  I  Kings  6:1.  The  difficulty  found 
in  the  Textus  Receptus  (King  James  Version)  thus  disap- 
pears with  the  true  text.  The  four  hundred  and  fifty  years 
runs  therefore  from  the  birth  of  Isaac  to  the  actual  con- 
quest of  Canaan  and  does  not  cover  the  period  of  the  Judges. 
See  on  Acts  7:6. 

20.  And  after  these  things  {kai  meta  tauta).  That  is,  the 
time  of  the  Judges  then  began.     Cf.  Judges  2:16.     Until 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  189 

Samuel  the  prophet  (heos  Samouel  prophetou).  The  terminus 
ad  quern.  He  was  the  last  of  the  judges  and  the  first  of  the 
prophets  who  selected  the  first  king  (Saul)  under  God's 
guidance.  Note  the  absence  of  the  Greek  article  with  pro- 
phetou. 

21.  They  asked  (eitesanto).  First  aorist  indirect  middle 
indicative,  they  asked  for  themselves.  They  were  tired  of  a 
theocracy.  Cf.  I  Sam.  8:5;  10:1.  Paul  mentions  with  pride 
that  Benjamin  was  the  tribe  of  Saul  (his  name  also),  but  he 
does  not  allude  to  Saul's  sin  (Eurneaux).  For  the  space  of 
forty  years  {ete  tesserakonta).  Accusative  of  extent  of  time. 
Not  in  the  O.T.,  but  in  Josephus,  Ant.  VI.  14,  9. 

22.  When  he  had  removed  him  {metastesas  auton).  First 
aorist  active  participle  of  methistemi,  old  verb  to  transfer, 
to  transpose  (note  force  of  meta).  This  verb  occurs  in  Luke 
16:4  by  the  unjust  steward  about  his  removal  from  office. 
Cf.  I  Sam.  15:16.  To  be  {eis).  As  or  for,  Greek  idiom  like 
the  Hebrew  le,  common  in  the  LXX.  A  man  after  my  heart 
{andra  kata  ten  kardian  mou).  The  words  quoted  by  Paul 
as  a  direct  saying  of  God  are  a  combination  of  Psa.  89:20, 
21  and  I  Sam.  13:14  (the  word  of  the  Lord  to  Samuel  about 
David).  Knowling  thinks  that  this  free  and  rather  loose  quo- 
tation of  the  substance  argues  for  the  genuineness  of  the 
report  of  Paul's  sermon.  Hackett  observes  that  the  commen- 
dation of  David  is  not  absolute,  but,  as  compared  with  the 
disobedient  Saul,  he  was  a  man  who  did  God's  will  in  spite 
of  the  gross  sin  of  which  he  repented  (Psa.  51).  Note  "wills" 
(thelemata),  plural,  of  God. 

23.  Of  this  man's  seed  {toutou  apo  tou  spermatos).  Em- 
phatic position  of  toutou.  Of  this  one  from  the  (his)  seed. 
According  to  promise  (kaf  epaggelian) .  This  phrase  in  Gal. 
3:29;  H  Tim.  1:1.  See  the  promise  in  H  Sam.  7:2;  Psa. 
132:11;  Isa.  1 1:1,  10;  Jer.  23:5^;  Zech.  3:8.  In  Zech.  3:8 
the  verb  ago  is  used  of  the  sending  of  the  Messiah  as  here. 
A  Saviour  Jesus  (Sotera  lesoun).  Jesus  Is  in  apposition  with 


I90      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Saviour  (accusative  case)  and  comes  at  the  end  of  the  sen- 
tence in  contrast  with  "this  man"  (David)  at  the  beginning. 
Paul  goes  no  further  than  David  because  he  suggests  to  him 
Jesus,  descendant  in  the  flesh  from  David.  By  "Israel" 
here  Paul  means  the  Jewish  people,  though  he  will  later 
enlarge  this  promise  to  include  the  spiritual  Israel  both 
Gentile  and  Jew  (Rom.  g:6i.). 

24.  When  John  had  first  preached  {prokeruxantos  loanou). 
Literally,  John  heralding  beforehand,  as  a  herald  before  the 
king  (Luke  3:3).  Genitive  absolute  of  first  aorist  active 
participle  of  prokerussOy  old  verb  to  herald  beforehand,  here 
alone  in  the  N.T.,  though  Textus  Receptus  has  it  also  in 
Acts  3 :20.  Before  his  coming  {pro  prosdpou  tes  eisodou  au- 
tou).  Literally,  before  the  face  of  his  entering  in  (here  act 
of  entrance  as  I  Thess.  1 19,  not  the  gate  as  in  Heb.  10:19). 
See  Mai.  3:1  quoted  in  Matt.  11:10  (  =  Luke  7:27)  for  this 
Hebrew  phrase  and  also  Luke  i  :76.  The  baptism  of  repent- 
ance {baptisma  metanoias).  Baptism  marked  by,  charac- 
terized by  (genitive  case,  case  of  kind  or  species)  repentance 
(change  of  mind  and  life).  The  very  phrase  used  of  John's 
preaching  in  Mark  1:4  =  Luke  3:3.  It  is  clear  therefore  that 
Paul  understood  John's  ministry  and  message  as  did  Peter 
(Acts  2:38;  10:37). 

25.  As  John  was  fulfilling  his  course  {hos  eplerou  loanes 
ton  dromon).  Imperfect  active  of  pleroo,  describing  his  vivid 
ministry  without  defining  the  precise  period  when  John 
asked  the  question.  Paul  uses  this  word  dromos  (course) 
of  his  own  race  (Acts  20:24;  II  Tim.  4:7).  What  suppose  ye 
that  I  am?  {Ti  erne  huponoeite  einai?)  Note  ti  (neuter),  not 
tina  (masculine),  what  not  who^  character,  not  identity. 
It  is  indirect  discourse  (the  infinitive  einai  and  the  accusa- 
tive of  general  reference).  Huponoed  (hupo,  noed)  is  to 
think  secretly,  to  suspect,  to  conjecture.  /  am  not  he  {auk 
eimi  ego).  These  precise  words  are  not  given  in  the  Gospels, 
but  the  idea  is  the  same  as  the  disclaimers  by  the  Baptist 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  191 

in  John  1:19-27  (cf.  also  Matt.  3:ii=Mark  i:7  =  Luke 
3:16).  Paul  had  a  true  grasp  of  the  message  of  the  Baptist. 
He  uses  the  very  form  lusai  (first  aorist  active  infinitive  of 
luo)  found  in  Mark  1:7  and  Luke  3:16  and  the  word  for 
shoes  {hupodema,  singular)  in  all  three.  His  quotation  is 
remarkably  true  to  the  words  in  the  Synoptic  Gospels.  How 
did  Paul  get  hold  of  the  words  of  the  Baptist  so  clearly? 

26.  To  us  {hemin).  Both  Jews  and  Gentiles,  both  classes 
in  Paul's  audience,  dative  of  advantage.  Is  sent  forth  {ex- 
apestale).  Second  aorist  passive  indicative  of  the  double 
compound  verb  exapostello,  common  verb  to  send  out  (ex) 
and  forth  (apo).  It  is  a  climacteric  or  culminative  aorist 
tense.  It  has  come  to  us  in  one  day,  this  glorious  promise. 
The  word  of  this  salvation  {ho  logos  tes  sbterias  tautes).  The 
message  of  Jesus  as  Saviour  (verse  23),  long  ago  promised 
and  now  come  to  us  as  Saviour. 

27.  Because  they  knew  him  not  (touton  agnoesantes).  First 
aorist  active  participle  (causal)  of  agnoeo,  old  verb,  not  to 
know.  Peter  gives  "ignorance"  (agnoia)  as  the  excuse  of  the 
Jews  in  the  death  of  Christ  (3:17)  and  Paul  does  the  same 
about  his  conduct  before  his  conversion  (I  Tim.  1:13). 
This  ignorance  mitigated  the  degree  of  their  guilt,  but  it  did 
not  remove  it,  for  it  was  willing  ignorance  and  prejudice. 
The  voices  of  the  prophets  which  are  read  [tas  phonas  ton 
propheton  tas  anaginoskomenas) .  Object  also  of  agnoesantes^ 
though  it  could  be  the  object  of  eplerosan  (fulfilled)  if  kai 
is  taken  as  "also".  The  "voices"  were  heard  as  they  were 
read  aloud  each  Sabbath  in  the  synagogue.  In  their  ignorant 
condemnation  they  fulfilled  the  prophecies  about  the  suffer- 
ing Messiah. 

28.  Though  they  found  no  cause  of  death  (medemian  aitian 
thanatou  heurontes).  Second  aorist  active  with  usual  nega- 
tive of  the  participle.  As  a  matter  of  fact  the  Sanhedrin  did 
charge  Jesus  with  blasphemy,  but  could  not  prove  it  (Matt. 
26:65;  27:24;  Luke  23 :22).  At  this  time  no  Gospel  had  prob- 


192      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

ably  been  written,  but  Paul  knew  that  Jesus  was  innocent. 
He  uses  this  same  idiom  about  his  own  innocence  (Acts  28: 
18).  That  he  should  be  slain  {anairethenai  auton) .  First  aorist 
passive  infinitive,  the  accusative  case,  the  direct  object  of 
Htesanto  (first  aorist  middle  indicative,  asked  as  a  favour  to 
themselves). 

29.  From  the  tree  {apo  tou  xulou).  Not  here  strictly  a 
tree,  but  wood  as  already  in  5:30;  10:29  and  later  in  Gal. 
3:13.  Strictly  speaking,  it  was  Joseph  of  Arimathea  and 
Nicodemus  who  took  the  body  of  Jesus  down  from  the  cross, 
though  the  Jews  had  asked  Pilate  to  have  the  bones  of  Jesus 
broken  that  his  body  should  not  remain  on  the  cross  during 
the  Sabbath  (John  19:31).  Paul  does  not  distinguish  the 
details  here.  Laid  (ethekan).  First  (kappa)  aorist  active  in- 
dicative third  plural  of  tithemi  in  place  of  ethesan  the  usual 
second  aorist  active  plural  form.  Tomb  (mnemeion).  Memo- 
rial, common  in  the  Gospels. 

30.  But  God  raised  him  from  the  dead  {ho  de  theos  egeiren 
ek  nekron).  This  crucial  fact  Paul  puts  sharply  as  he  always 
did. 

31.  Was  seen  for  many  days  {ophthe  epi  hemeras  pleious). 
The  common  verb  (first  aorist  passive  indicative  of  horao^ 
to  see)  for  the  appearance  of  the  Risen  Christ,  the  one  used 
by  Paul  of  his  own  vision  of  Christ  (I  Cor.  15:8),  which  is 
not  reported  by  Luke  here.  For  more  days  (than  a  few), 
the  language  means,  forty  in  all  (l  :3).  Of  them  that  came  up 
with  him  (tois  sunanabdsin  autoi).  Dative  (after  ophthe) 
articular  participle  (second  aorist  active  of  sunanabaino) 
with  associative  instrumental  case  (autoi),  the  very  men 
who  knew  him  best  and  who  could  not  be  easily  deceived 
about  the  reality  of  his  resurrection.  But  this  fact  rules  Paul 
out  on  this  point,  for  he  had  not  fellowshipped  with  Jesus 
from  Galilee  to  Jerusalem.  Who  are  now  his  witnesses  (hoiti- 
nes  nun  eisin  martures  autou).  The  very  point  that  Peter  used 
to  clinch  his  argument  with  such  powerful  effect  (2:32;  3:15). 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  193 

32.  We  bring  you  good  tidings  of  the  promise  (hemeis  humds 
euaggelizometha  ten  epaggelian).  Two  accusatives  here  (per- 
son and  thing),  old  Greek  did  not  use  accusative  of  the 
person  with  this  verb  as  in  16:10;  Luke  3  :i8.  Note  "we  you" 
together.  Here  the  heart  of  Paul's  message  on  this  occasion. 

33.  Hath  fulfilled  (ekpepleroken).  Hath  filled  out  (ek). 
Unto  our  children  (tois  teknois  hemon).  The  MSS.  vary 
greatly  here  about  hemon  (our),  some  have  auton,  some 
auton  hemin.  Westcott  and  Hort  consider  these  readings 
"a  primitive  error"  for  hemin  (to  us)  taken  with  anastesas 
lesoun  (having  for  us  raised  up  Jesus).  This  raising  up  (from 
anistemi,  set  up)  as  in  3:22;  7:37  refers  not  to  resurrection 
(verse  34),  but  to  the  sending  of  Jesus  (two  raisings  up). 
In  the  second  psalm  {en  toi  psalmoi  tbi  deuteroi),  Psa.  2:7. 
D  has  protoi  because  the  first  psalm  was  often  counted  as 
merely  introductory. 

34.  Now  no  more  to  return  to  corruption  {meketi  mellonta 
hupostrephein  eis  diaphthoran).  No  longer  about  to  return 
as  Lazarus  did.  Jesus  did  not  die  again  and  so  is  the  first 
fruits  of  the  resurrection  (I  Cor.  15:23;  Rom.  6:9).  He  hath 
spoken  (eireken).  Present  perfect  active  indicative,  common 
way  of  referring  to  the  permanent  utterances  of  God  which 
are  on  record  in  the  Scriptures.  The  holy  and  sure  blessings  of 
David  {ta  hosia  Daueid  ta  pista).  See  H  Sam.  7:13.  Literally, 
"the  holy  things  of  David  the  trustworthy  things."  He 
explains  "the  holy  things"  at  once. 

35.  Because  (dioti).  Compound  conjunction  {dia,  hoti) 
like  our  "because  that."  The  reason  for  the  previous  state- 
ment about  "the  holy  things."  Thou  wilt  not  give  thy  holy  one 
to  see  corruption  (ou  doseis  ton  hosion  sou  idein  diaphthoran). 
Quotation  from  Psa.  16:10  to  show  that  Jesus  did  not  see 
corruption  in  his  body,  a  flat  contradiction  for  those  who 
deny  the  bodily  resurrection  of  Jesus. 

36.  His  own  generation  {ididi  genedi).  Either  locative 
case,  "in  his  own  generation"  or  dative  object  of  huperetesas 


194      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

(served).  The  counsel  of  God  {tei  tou  theou  boulei).  So  here, 
either  the  dative,  the  object  of  huperetesas  if  genedi  is  loca- 
tive, or  the  instrumental  case  "by  the  counsel  of  God" 
which  again  may  be  construed  either  with  huperetesas  (hav- 
ing served)  or  after  ekoimethe  (fell  on  sleep).  Either  of  the 
three  ways  is  grammatical  and  makes  good  sense.  Koimao- 
mai  for  death  we  have  already  had  (Acts  7:60).  So  Jesus 
(John  ii:ii)  and  Paul  (I  Cor.  15:6,  51).  Was  laid  {prose- 
tethe).  Was  added  unto  (first  aorist  passive  indicative  of 
prostithemi).  See  the  verb  in  2:47;  5:14.  This  figure  for  death 
probably  arose  from  the  custom  of  burying  families  together 
(Gen.  15:15;  Judg.  2:10).  Saw  corruption  {eiden  diaph- 
thoran).  As  Jesus  did  not  (Acts  2:31)  as  he  shows  in  verse  37. 

38.  Through  this  man  (dia  toutou).  This  very  man  whom 
the  Jews  had  crucified  and  whom  God  had  raised  from  the 
dead.  Remission  of  sins  {aphesis  hamartion)  is  proclaimed 
(kataggelletai)  to  you.  This  is  the  keynote  of  Paul's  message 
as  it  had  been  that  of  Peter  at  Pentecost  (2:38;  5:31;  10:43). 
Cf.  26:18.  This  glorious  message  Paul  now  presses  home  in 
his  exhortation. 

39.  y4nd  by  him  every  one  that  helieveth  is  justified  from  all 
things^  from  which  ye  could  not  be  justified  by  the  law  of  Moses 
(kai  apo  pantbn  hon  ouk  edunethete  en  nomoi  Mouseos 
dikaiothenai  en  toutoi  pas  ho  pisteuon  dikaioutai).  This  is 
a  characteristic  Greek  sentence  with  the  principal  clause 
at  the  end  and  Pauline  to  the  core.  A  literal  rendering  as  to 
the  order  would  be:  "And  from  all  the  things  from  {apo 
not  repeated  in  the  Greek,  but  understood,  the  ablative  case 
being  repeated)  which  ye  were  not  able  to  be  justified  in  this 
one  every  one  who  believes  is  justified."  The  climax  is  at  the 
close  and  gives  us  the  heart  of  Paul's  teaching  about  Christ. 
"We  have  here  the  germ  of  all  that  is  most  characteristic  in 
Paul's  later  teaching.  It  is  the  argument  of  the  Epistle  to 
Galatians  and  Romans  in  a  sentence"  (Furneaux).  The 
failure  of  the  Mosaic  law  to  bring  the  kind  of  righteousness 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  195 

that  God  demands  is  stated.  This  is  made  possible  in  and 
by  (en)  Christ  alone.  Paul's  favourite  words  occur  here, 
pisteud,  believe,  with  which  pistis^  faith,  is  allied,  dikaiod,  to 
set  right  with  God  on  the  basis  of  faith.  In  Rom.  6:7  Paul 
uses  apo  also  after  dikaiod.  These  are  key  words  {pisteud 
and  dikaiod)  in  Paul's  theology  and  call  for  prolonged  and 
careful  study  if  one  is  to  grasp  the  Pauline  teaching.  Dikaioo 
primarily  means  to  make  righteous,  to  declare  righteous 
like  axioo,  to  deem  worthy  (axios).  But  in  the  end  Paul  holds 
that  real  righteousness  will  come  (Rom.  6-8)  to  those  whom 
God  treats  as  righteous  (Rom.  3-5)  though  both  Gentile  and 
Jew  fall  short  without  Christ  (Rom.  1-3).  This  is  the  doc- 
trine of  grace  that  will  prove  a  stumbling  block  to  the  Jews 
with  their  ceremonial  works  and  foolishness  to  the  Greeks 
with  their  abstract  philosophical  ethics  (I  Cor.  1:23-25). 
It  is  a  new  and  strange  doctrine  to  the  people  of  Antioch. 

40.  Beware  therefore  (blepete  oun).  The  warning  is  perti- 
nent. Perhaps  Paul  noticed  anger  on  the  faces  of  some  of  the 
rabbis.  Lest  there  come  upon  you  {me  epelthei).  Second  aorist 
active  subjunctive  with  the  negative  final  conjunction  me. 
In  the  prophets  {en  tots  prophetais).  The  quotation  is  from 
the  LXX  text  of  Hab.  1:5.  The  plural  here  refers  to  the 
prophetic  collection  (Luke  24:44;  Acts  24:14).  "The  Jews 
of  Habakkukjs  day  had  refused  to  believe  in  the  impending 
invasion  by  the  Chaldeans,  and  yet  it  had  come"  (Fur- 
neaux). 

41.  Ye  despisers  {hoi  kataphronetai) .  Not  in  the  Hebrew, 
but  in  the  LXX.  It  is  pertinent  for  Paul's  purpose.  Perish 
{aphanisthete) .  Or  vanish  away.  First  aorist  passive  imper- 
ative. Added  by  the  LXX  to  the  Hebrew.  //  one  declare 
it  unto  you  {ean  tis  ekdiegetai  humin).  Condition  of  third 
class  with  present  middle  subjunctive,  if  one  keep  on  out- 
lining (double  compound,  ek-di-egeomai)  it  unto  you.  Paul 
has  hurled  a  thunderbolt  at  the  close. 

42.  And  as  they  went  out  {Exionton  de  auton).    Genitive 


196      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

absolute  with  present  active  participle  of  exeimi,  to  go  out, 
old  verb,  in  the  N.T.  only  in  Acts  12:42;  17:15;  20:7;  27:43. 
As  they  (Paul  and  Barnabas)  were  going  out  with  all  the  ex- 
citement and  hubbub  created  by  the  sermon.  They  besought 
(parekaloun).  Imperfect  active,  inchoative,  began  to  beseech. 
The  Textus  Receptus  inserts  wrongly  ta  ethne  (the  Gentiles) 
as  if  the  Jews  were  opposed  to  Paul  from  the  first  as  some 
doubtless  were.  But  both  Jews  and  Gentiles  asked  for  the 
repetition  of  the  sermon  {lalethenai^  first  aorist  passive  infin- 
itive object  of  parekaloun  with  accusative  of  general  refer- 
ence). The  next  Sabbath  (eis  to  metaxu  sabbaton).  Late  use 
(Josephus,  Plutarch,  etc.)  of  metaxu  (meta  and  xun  =  sun) 
in  sense  of  after  or  next  instead  of  between  (sense  of  meta 
prevailing).    Note  use  of  eis  for  "on"  or  "by." 

43.  When  the  synagogue  broke  up  {lutheises  tes  sunagbges). 
Genitive  absolute  of  first  aorist  passive  participle  of  luo. 
Apparently  Paul  and  Barnabas  had  gone  out  before  the  syn- 
agogue was  formally  dismissed.  Of  the  devout  proselytes 
{ton  sebomenbn  proselutbn).  Of  the  worshipping  proselytes 
described  in  verses  16  and  25  as  "those  who  fear  God"  (cf. 
16:14)  employed  usually  of  the  uncircumcised  Gentiles  who 
yet  attended  the  synagogue  worship,  but  the  word  proselutoi 
{pros,  elutos  verbal  from  erchomai,  a  new-comer)  means 
usually  those  who  had  become  circumcised  (proselytes  of 
righteousness).  Yet  the  rabbis  used  it  also  of  proselytes  of 
the  gate  who  had  not  yet  become  circumcised,  probably  the 
idea  here.  In  the  N.T.  the  word  occurs  only  in  Matt.  23:15; 
Acts  2:11  (10);  6:5;  13:43.  Many  (both  Jews  and  prose- 
lytes) followed  (ekolouthesan,  ingressive  aorist  active  indica- 
tive of  akoloutheb)  Paul  and  Barnabas  to  hear  more  with- 
out waiting  till  the  next  Sabbath.  So  we  are  to  picture  Paul 
and  Barnabas  speaking  {proslalountes,  late  compound,  in 
N.T.  only  here  and  28:20)  to  eager  groups.  Urged  {epeithon). 
Imperfect  active  of  peithb,  either  descriptive  (were  persuad- 
ing) or  conative  (were  trying  to  persuade).    Paul  had  great 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  197 

powers  of  persuasion  (18:4;  19:8,  26;  26:28;  28:23;  ^I  Cor. 
5:11;  Gal.  1:10).  These  Jews  "were  beginning  to  under- 
stand for  the  first  time  the  true  meaning  of  their  national 
history"  (Furneaux),  "the  grace  of  God"  to  them. 

44.  The  next  Sabbath  {toi  erchomenoi  sabbatoi).  Locative 
case,  on  the  coming  {erchomenoi,  present  middle  participle  of 
erchomai)  Sabbath.  So  the  best  MSB.,  though  some  have  echo- 
menoi  (present  middle  participle  of  echo  in  sense  of  near, 
bordering,  following  as  in  Luke  13:33;  Acts  29:15)".  Almost 
(schedon).  Old  word,  but  in  N.T.  only  here,  Acts  19:26;  Heb. 
9:22.  fFas  gathered  together  (sunechthe) .  First  aorist  (effec- 
tive) passive  indicative  of  sunago,  old  and  common  verb. 
The  "whole  city"  could  hardly  all  gather  in  the  synagogue. 
Perhaps  Paul  spoke  in  the  synagogue  and  Barnabas  to  the 
overflow  outside  (see  verse  46).  It  was  an  eager  and  earnest 
gathering  "to  hear  (akousai,  first  aorist  active  infinitive  of 
purpose)  the  word  of  God  "  and  a  great  opportunity  for  Paul 
and  Barnabas.  The  Codex  Bezae  has  it  "to  hear  Paul." 
It  was  the  new  preacher  (Paul)  that  drew  the  big  crowd. 
It  was  a  crowd  such  as  will  later  hang  on  the  words  of  John 
Wesley  and  George  Whitfield  when  they  preach  Jesus  Christ. 

45.  The  Jews  {hoi  loudaioi).  Certainly  not  the  proselytes 
of  verse  43.  Probably  many  of  the  Jews  that  were  then 
favourably  disposed  to  Paul's  message  had  reacted  against 
him  under  the  influence  of  the  rabbis  during  the  week  and 
evidently  on  this  Sabbath  very  many  Gentiles  ("almost  the 
whole  city,"  "the  multitudes"  tous  ochlous)  had  gathered, 
to  the  disgust  of  the  stricter  Jews.  Nothing  is  specifically 
stated  here  about  the  rabbis,  but  they  were  beyond  doubt 
the  instigators  of,  and  the  ringleaders  in,  the  opposition  as 
in  Thessalonica  (17:5).  No  such  crowds  {ochlous)  came  to 
the  synagogue  when  they  were  the  speakers.  With  jealousy 
(zelou).  Genitive  case  of  zelos  (from  zeo,  to  boil)  after  eples- 
thesan  (effective  first  aorist  passive  indicative  of  pimplemi). 
Envy  and  jealousy  arise  between  people  of  the  same  calling 


198      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

(doctors  towards  doctors,  lawyers  towards  lawyers,  preachers 
towards  preachers).  So  these  rabbis  boiled  with  jealousy 
when  they  saw  the  crowds  gathered  to  hear  Paul  and  Bar- 
nabas. Contradicted  {antelegon).  Imperfect  active  of  antilego, 
old  verb  to  speak  against,  to  say  a  word  in  opposition  to 
(anti,  face  to  face).  It  was  interruption  of  the  service  and 
open  opposition  in  the  public  meeting.  Paul  and  Barnabas 
were  guests  by  courtesy  and,  of  course,  could  not  proceed 
further,  when  denied  that  privilege.  Blasphemed  {hlasphe- 
mountes).  Blaspheming.  So  the  correct  text  without  the 
addition  antilegontes  (repeated  from  antelegon  above).  Com- 
mon verb  in  the  Gospels  for  saying  injurious  and  harmful 
things.  Doubtless  these  rabbis  indulged  in  unkind  personal- 
ities and  made  it  plain  that  Paul  and  Barnabas  were  going 
beyond  the  limitations  of  pure  Judaism  in  their  contacts 
with  Gentiles. 

46.  Spake  out  boldly  {parresiasamenoi).  First  aorist  mid- 
dle participle  of  parresiazomai,  to  use  freedom  in  speaking, 
to  assume  boldness.  Both  Paul  and  Barnabas  accepted  the 
challenge  of  the  rabbis.  They  would  leave  their  synagogue, 
but  not  without  a  word  of  explanation.  It  was  necessary  to 
you  first  {Humin  en  anagkaion  proton).  They  had  done  their 
duty  and  had  followed  the  command  of  Jesus  (1:8).  They 
use  the  very  language  of  Peter  in  3:26  {humin  proton)  "to 
you  first."  This  position  Paul  as  the  apostle  to  the  Gentiles 
will  always  hold,  the  Jew  first  in  privilege  and  penalty  (Rom. 
1:16;  2:9  and  10).  Ye  thrust  it  from  you  {apotheisthe  auton). 
Present  middle  (indirect,  from  yourselves)  indicative  of 
apdtheo,  to  push  from.  Vigorous  verb  seen  already  in  Acts 
7:27,  39  which  see.  Judge  yourselves  unworthy  (ouk  axious 
krinete  heautous).  Present  active  indicative  of  the  common 
verb  krinOj  to  judge  or  decide  with  the  reflexive  pronoun 
expressed.  Literally,  Do  not  judge  yourselves  worthy.  By 
their  action  and  their  words  they  had  taken  a  violent  and 
definite  stand.    Lo,  we  turn  to  the  Gentiles  {idou  strephometha 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  199 

eis  ta  ethne).  It  is  a  crisis  {idou^  lo):  "Lo,  we  turn  ourselves 
to  the  Gentiles."  Probably  also  aoristic  present,  we  now 
turn  (Robertson,  Grammar,  pp.  864-70).  Strephometha  is 
probably  the  direct  middle  (Robertson,  Grammar,  pp.  806- 
08)  though  the  aorist  passive  estraphen  is  so  used  also  (7:39). 
It  is  a  dramatic  moment  as  Paul  and  Barnabas  turn  from 
the  Jews  to  the  Gentiles,  a  prophecy  of  the  future  history  of 
Christianity.  In  Rom.  9  to  1 1  Paul  will  discuss  at  length  the 
rejection  of  Christ  by  the  Jews  and  the  calling  of  the  Gen- 
tiles to  be  the  real  (the  spiritual)  Israel. 

47.  For  so  hath  the  Lord  commanded  us  (houtos  gar  ente- 
taltai  hemin  ho  kurios).  Perfect  middle  indicative  of  entello, 
poetic  (Pindar)  and  late  verb  to  enjoin  (1:2).  The  command 
of  the  Lord  Paul  finds  in  Isa.  49:6  quoted  by  Simeon  also 
(Luke  2:32).  The  conviction  of  Paul's  mind  was  now  made 
clear  by  the  fact  of  the  rejection  by  the  Jews.  He  could  now 
see  more  clearly  the  words  of  the  prophet  about  the  Gen- 
tiles: The  Messiah  is  declared  by  God  in  Isaiah  to  be  "a 
light  to  the  Gentiles"  (ethndn,  objective  genitive),  "a  light 
for  revelation  to  the  Gentiles"  {phos  eis  apokalupsin  ethnon, 
Luke  2:32).  So  Paul  is  carrying  out  the  will  of  God  in  turn- 
ing to  the  Gentiles.  He  will  still  appeal  to  the  Jews  else- 
where as  they  allow  him  to  do  so,  but  not  here.  That  thou 
shouldest  be  (tou  einai  se).  Genitive  articular  infinitive  of 
purpose  with  the  accusative  of  general  reference.  This  is 
all  according  to  God's  fixed  purpose  {tetheika,  perfect  active 
indicative  of  tithemi).  Unto  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth 
{he OS  eschatou  tes  ges).  Unto  the  last  portion  (genitive 
neuter,  not  feminine)  of  the  earth.  It  is  a  long  time  from 
Paul  to  now,  not  to  say  from  Isaiah  to  now,  and  not  yet 
has  the  gospel  been  carried  to  half  of  the  people  of  earth. 
God's  people  are  slow  in  carrying  out  God's  plans  for  salva- 
tion. 

48.  As  the  Gentiles  heard  this  they  were  glad  {akouonta  ta 
ethne  echairon).    Present  active  participle  of  akoud  and  im- 


200      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

perfect  active  of  chairo,  linear  action  descriptive  of  the  joy 
of  the  Gentiles.  Glorified  the  word  of  God  {edoxazon  ton  logon 
tou  theou).  Imperfect  active  again.  The  joy  of  the  Gentiles 
increased  the  fury  of  the  Jews.  "The  synagogue  became  a 
scene  of  excitement  which  must  have  been  something  like 
the  original  speaking  with  tongues"  (Rackham).  The  joy 
of  the  Gentiles  was  to  see  how  they  could  receive  the  higher 
blessing  of  Judaism  without  circumcision  and  other  repel- 
lent features  of  Jewish  ceremonialism.  It  was  the  gospel  of 
grace  and  liberty  from  legalism  that  Paul  had  proclaimed. 
Whether  Gal.  4:13  describes  this  incident  or  not  (the  South 
Galatian  theory),  it  illustrates  it  when  Gentiles  received 
Paul  as  if  he  were  Christ  Jesus  himself.  It  was  triumph  with 
the  Gentiles,  but  defeat  with  the  Jews.  As  many  as  were 
ordained  to  eternal  life  {hosoi  esan  tetagmenoi  eis  zoen  aio- 
nion).  Periphrastic  past  perfect  passive  indicative  of  tassb, 
a  military  term  to  place  in  orderly  arrangement.  The  word 
"ordain"  is  not  the  best  translation  here.  "Appointed,"  as 
Hackett  shows,  is  better.  The  Jews  here  had  voluntarily 
rejected  the  word  of  God.  On  the  other  side  were  those 
Gentiles  who  gladly  accepted  what  the  Jews  had  rejected, 
not  all  the  Gentiles.  Why  these  Gentiles  here  ranged  them- 
selves on  God's  side  as  opposed  to  the  Jews  Luke  does  not 
tell  us.  This  verse  does  not  solve  the  vexed  problem  of 
divine  sovereignty  and  human  free  agency.  There  is  no 
evidence  that  Luke  had  in  mind  an  absolutum  decretum  of 
personal  salvation.  Paul  had  shown  that  God's  plan  ex- 
tended to  and  included  Gentiles.  Certainly  the  Spirit  of 
God  does  move  upon  the  human  heart  to  which  some  re- 
spond, as  here,  while  others  push  him  away.  Believed  (epis- 
teusan).  Summary  or  constative  first  aorist  active  indicative 
of  pisteuo.  The  subject  of  this  verb  is  the  relative  clause. 
By  no  manner  of  legerdemain  can  it  be  made  to  mean 
"those  who  believe  were  appointed."  It  was  saving  faith 
that  was  exercised  only  by  those  who  were  appointed  unto 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  20I 

eternal  life,  who  were  ranged  on  I'h^  sjrlp  of  pternal  life,  who 
were  thus  revealed  as  the  subjects  of  God's  grace  by  the 
stand  that  they  took  on  this  day  for  the  Lord.  It  was  a 
great  day  for  the  kingdom  of  God. 

49.  Was  spread  abroad  (diephereto) .  Imperfect  passive  of 
diaphero,  to  carry  in  different  directions  {dia).  By  the  recent 
converts  as  well  as  by  Paul  and  Barnabas.  This  would  seem 
to  indicate  a  stay  of  some  months  with  active  work  among 
the  Gentiles  that  bore  rich  fruit.  Throughout  all  the  region 
{dV  holes  tes  choras).  Antioch  in  Pisidia  as  a  Roman  colony 
would  be  the  natural  centre  of  a  Roman  Regio,  an  important 
element  in  Roman  imperial  administration.  There  were 
probably  other  Regiones  in  South  Galatia  (Ramsay,  St.  Paul 
the  Traveller  and  Roman  Citizen,  pp.  102-12). 

50.  Urged  on  (parotrunan).  First  aorist  (effective)  active 
of  par-otruno,  old  verb,  but  here  alone  in  the  N.T.,  to  incite, 
to  stir  up.  The  Jews  were  apparently  not  numerous  in  this 
city  as  they  had  only  one  synagogue,  but  they  had  influence 
with  people  of  prominence,  like  "the  devout  women  of 
honourable  estate"  {tas  sebomenas  gunaikas  tas  eusche- 
monas),  the  female  proselytes  of  high  station,  a  late  use  of 
an  old  word  used  about  Joseph  of  Arimathea  (Mark  15:43). 
The  rabbis  went  after  these  Gentile  women  who  had  em- 
braced Judaism  (cf.  Acts  17:4  in  Thessalonica)  as  Paul 
had  made  an  appeal  to  them.  The  prominence  of  women  in 
public  life  here  at  Antioch  is  quite  in  accord  with  what  we 
know  of  conditions  in  the  cities  of  Asia  Minor.  "Thus 
women  were  appointed  under  the  empire  as  magistrates,  as 
presidents  of  the  games,  and  even  the  Jews  elected  a  woman 
as  Archisynagogos,  at  least  in  one  instance  at  Smyrna" 
(Knowling).  In  Damascus  Josephus  (War  II.  20,  21)  says 
that  a  majority  of  the  married  women  were  proselytes. 
Strabo  (VIII.  2)  and  Juvenal  (VI.  542)  speak  of  the  addic- 
tion of  women  to  the  Jewish  religion.  The  chief  men  of  the 
city  {tous  protons  tes   poleos).     Probably  city  officials  (the 


202      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Duumviri,  the  Praetors,  the  First  Ten  in  the  Greek  Cities 
of  the  east)  or  other  "foremost"  men,  not  officials.  The 
rabbis  were  shrewd  enough  to  reach  these  men  (not  prose- 
lytes) through  the  women  who  were  proselytes  of  distinction. 
Stirred  up  a  persecution  {epegeiran  diogmon).  First  aorist 
active  indicative  of  epegeiro,  old  verb,  but  in  the  N.T.  only 
here  and  14:2.  Paul  seems  to  allude  to  this  persecution  in 
II  Tim.  3:11  "persecutions,  sufferings,  what  things  befell 
me  at  Antioch,  at  Iconium,  at  Lystra,  what  persecutions  I 
endured."  Here  Paul  had  perils  from  his  own  countrymen 
and  perils  from  the  Gentiles  after  the  perils  of  rivers  and 
perils  of  robbers  on  the  way  from  Perga  (II  Cor.  11:26). 
He  was  thrice  beaten  with  rods  {tris  erhahdisthen,  II  Cor. 
11:25)  by  Roman  lictors  in  some  Roman  colony.  If  that 
was  here,  then  Paul  and  Barnabas  were  publicly  scourged 
by  the  lictors  before  they  left.  Probably  the  Jews  succeeded 
in  making  the  Roman  officials  look  on  Paul  and  Barnabas 
as  disturbers  of  the  public  peace.  So  "they  cast  them  out 
of  their  borders"  {exebalon  autous  apo  ton  horion  auton). 
Second  aorist  active  indicative  of  ekballo,  forcible  expulsion 
plainly  as  public  nuisances.  Just  a  few  days  before  they 
were  the  heroes  of  the  city  and  now! 

51.  But  they  shook  off  the  dust  of  their  feet  against  them  {Hoi 
de  ektinaxamenoi  ton  koniorton  ton  podbn  ep*  autous).  First 
aorist  middle  (indirect)  participle  of  ektinasso,  to  shake  out  or 
off.  Homer  uses  it  for  knocking  out  teeth.  In  the  papyri.  The 
middle  aorist  participle  occurs  again  in  18:6  and  the  active 
imperative  with  the  dust  of  the  feet  in  Mark  6:11  (Luke 
10:1 1  has  apomassometha).  and  Matt.  10:14  (command  of 
Jesus).  It  is  a  dramatic  gesture  that  forbids  further  inter- 
course. "As  a  protest  against  the  injustice  which  cast  them 
out.  The  sandal  was  taken  off  and  the  dust  shaken  out  as  a 
symbolic  token  that  the  very  soil  of  the  country  was  defiling" 
(Fumeaux).  Unto  Iconium  (eis  Ikonion).  About  45  miles 
southeast  from  Antioch  in  Pisidia,  at  the  foot  of  the  Taurus 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  203 

mountains.  At  various  times  it  was  reckoned  also  in  Pisidia 
or  Phrygia  as  well  as  Lycaonia,  Phrygian  in  population  and 
distinguished  by  Luke  (Acts  14:6)  from  Lystra  and  Derbe, 
cities  of  Lycaonia.  As  compared  with  Antioch  (a  Roman 
colony)  it  was  a  native  Phrygian  town.  When  the  province 
of  Galatia  was  divided,  Iconium  became  the  capital  of  Ly- 
caonia and  eclipsed  Antioch  in  Pisidia.  Strictly  speaking  at 
this  time  Lystra  and  Derbe  were  cities  of  Lycaonia-Galatica 
while  Iconium  was  in  Phrygia-Galatica  (all  three  in  the 
Roman  Province  of  Galatia).  It  was  at  the  meeting  place  of 
several  Roman  roads  and  on  the  highway  from  east  to  west. 
It  is  still  a  large  town  Konieh  with  30,000  population. 

52.  And  the  disciples  {hoi  te  or  hoi  de  mathetai).  The  Gen- 
tile Christians  in  Antioch  in  Pisidia.  Persecution  had  pre- 
cisely the  opposite  effect  to  the  intention  of  the  Jews  for  they 
"were  filled  with  joy  and  the  Holy  Spirit"  {eplerounto 
char  as  kai  pneumatos  hagiou).  Imperfect  passive,  they  kept 
on  being  filled.  It  had  been  so  before  (Acts  4:31;  8:4;  9:31; 
12:24).  The  blood  of  the  martyrs  is  still  the  seed  of  the 
church. 


CHAPTER  XIV 

1.  They  entered  together  {kata  to  auto  eiselthein).  Like 
epi  to  auto  in  3:1.  The  infinitive  eiselthein  is  the  subject  of 
egeneto.  So  spake  that  (lalesai  houtos  hoste).  Infinitive  again 
parallel  to  eiselthein.  With  the  result  that,  actual  result  here 
stated  with  hoste  and  the  aorist  infinitive  pisteusai  (Robert- 
son, Grammar,  pp.  999f.)  rather  than  hoste  and  the  indicative 
like  John  3:16.    It  was  a  tremendous  first  meeting. 

2.  That  were  disobedient  (hoi  apeithes antes).  First  aorist 
active  articular  participle,  not  the  present  apeithountes  as  the 
Textus  Receptus  has  it.  But  the  meaning  is  probably  the 
Jews  that  disbelieved,  rather  than  that  disobeyed.  Strictly 
apeitheo  does  mean  to  disobey  and  apisteo  to  disbelieve,  but 
that  distinction  is  not  observed  in  John  3 136  nor  in  Acts  19:9 
and  28:24.  The  word  apeitheo  means  to  be  apeithes,  to  be  un- 
willing to  be  persuaded  or  to  withhold  belief  and  then  also 
to  withhold  obedience.  The  two  meanings  run  into  one  an- 
other. To  disbelieve  the  word  of  God  is  to  disobey  God. 
Made  them  evil  affected  (ekakosan).  First  aorist  active  in- 
dicative of  kakoo,  old  verb  from  kakos,  to  do  evil  to,  to  ill- 
treat,  then  in  later  Greek  as  here  to  embitter,  to  exasperate 
as  in  Psa.  105:32  and  in  Josephus.  In  this  sense  only  here  in 
the  N.T.  Evidently  Paul  preached  the  same  message  as  in 
Antioch  for  it  won  both  Jews  and  Gentiles,  and  displeased 
the  rabbis.  Codex  Bezae  adds  here  that  "the  chiefs  of  the 
synagogue  and  the  rulers"  brought  persecution  upon  Paul 
and  Barnabas  just  as  was  argued  about  Antioch.  Outside  the 
synagogue  the  Jews  would  poison  the  minds  of  the  Gentiles 
against  Paul  and  Barnabas.  "The  story  of  Thecla  suggests 
a  means,  and  perhaps  the  apostles  were  brought  before  the 
magistrates  on  some  charge  of  interference  with  family  life. 

104 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  205 

The  magistrates  however  must  have  seen  at  once  that  there 
was  no  legal  case  against  them;  and  by  a  sentence  of  acquit- 
tal or  in  some  other  way  the  Lord  gave  peace"  (Rackham). 
As  we  have  it,  the  story  of  Paul  and  Thecla  undoubtedly 
has  apocryphal  features,  though  Thecla  may  very  well  be  an 
historical  character  here  at  Iconium  where  the  story  is  lo- 
cated. Certainly  the  picture  of  Paul  herein  drawn  cannot 
be  considered  authentic  though  a  true  tradition  may  under- 
lie it:  "bald,  bowlegged,  strongly  built,  small  in  stature,  with 
large  eyes  and  meeting  eyebrows  and  longish  nose;  full  of 
grace;  sometimes  looking  like  a  man,  sometimes  having  the 
face  of  an  angel." 

3.  Long  time  therefore  {hikanon  men  oun  chronon).  Accusa- 
tive of  duration  of  time  (possibly  six  months)  and  note 
men  oun.  There  is  an  antithesis  in  eschisthe  de  (verse  4)  and 
in  verse  5  (egeneto  de).  After  the  persecution  and  vindica- 
tion there  was  a  season  of  great  opportunity  which  Paul  and 
Barnabas  used  to  the  full,  "speaking  boldly"  (parresiazo- 
menoi  as  in  13:46  at  Antioch  in  Pisidia,  "in  the  Lord"  {epi 
toi  kurioi),  upon  the  basis  of  the  Lord  Jesus  as  in  4:i7f. 
And  the  Lord  Jesus  "bore  witness  to  the  word  of  his  grace" 
as  he  always  does,  "granting  signs  and  wonders  to  be  done 
by  their  hands"  {didonti  semeia  kai  terata  ginesthai  dia  ton 
cheiron  anion).  Present  participle  (didonti)  and  present 
infinitive  (ginesthai)  repetition  of  both  signs  and  wonders 
(note  both  words)  just  as  had  happened  with  Peter  and  John 
and  the  other  apostles  (2:43;  4:29^ ;  5:12;  cf.  Heb.  2:4).  The 
time  of  peace  could  not  last  forever  with  such  a  work  of 
grace  as  this.  A  second  explosion  of  persecution  was  bound 
to  come  and  some  of  the  MSS.  actually  have  ek  deuterou 
(a  second  time). 

4.  But  the  multitude  of  the  city  was  divided  (eschisthe  de 
to  plethos  tes  polebs).  First  aorist  passive  indicative  of 
schizo,  old  verb  to  split,  to  make  a  schism  or  factions  as  Sad- 
ducees  and  Pharisees  (23:7).    This  division  was  within  the 


2o6      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Gentile  populace.  Part  held  {hoi  men  esan)^  literally  "some 
were  with  the  Jews"  {sun  tois  loudaiois),  part  with  the 
apostles  {hoi  de  sun  tois  apostolois).  Common  demonstrative 
of  contrast  {hoi  men^  hoi  de,  Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  694). 
The  Jewish  leaders  made  some  impression  on  the  Gentiles  as 
at  Antioch  in  Pisidia  and  later  at  Thessalonica  {i'j:/\.{.).  This 
is  the  first  time  in  the  Acts  that  Paul  and  Barnabas  are 
termed  "apostles"  (see  also  verse  14).  Elsewhere  in  the 
Acts  the  word  is  restricted  to  the  twelve.  Certainly  Luke 
does  not  here  employ  it  in  that  technical  sense.  To  have 
followed  Jesus  in  his  ministry  and  to  have  seen  the  Risen 
Christ  was  essential  to  the  technical  use  (i:22f.).  Whether 
Barnabas  had  seen  the  Risen  Christ  we  do  not  know,  but 
certainly  Paul  had  (I  Cor.  9:if.;  15:8).  Paul  claimed  to  be 
an  apostle  on  a  par  with  the  twelve  (Gal.  1:1,  16-18).  The 
word  originally  means  simply  one  sent  (John  13:16)  like 
messengers  of  the  churches  with  the  collection  (II  Cor.  8:23). 
The  Jews  used  it  of  those  sent  from  Jerusalem  to  collect  the 
temple  tribute.  Paul  applies  the  word  to  James  the  Lord's 
brother  (Gal.  1:19),  to  Epaphroditus  (Phil.  2:25)  as  the 
messenger  of  the  church  in  Philippi,  to  Silvanus  and  Timothy 
(I  Thess.  2:6;  Acts  18:5),  apparently  to  Apollos  (I  Cor. 
4:9),  and  to  Andronicus  and  Junias  (Rom.  i6:6f.).  He  even 
calls  the  Judaizers  "false  apostles"  (II  Cor.  11:13). 

5.  An  onset  {horme).  A  rush  or  impulse  as  in  James  3:4. 
Old  word,  but  only  twice  in  the  N.T.  (here  and  James).  It 
probably  denotes  not  an  actual  attack  so  much  as  the  open 
start,  the  co-operation  of  both  Jews  and  Gentiles  (the  dis- 
affected portion),  "with  their  rulers"  {sun  tois  archousin 
autdn)y  that  is  the  rulers  of  the  Jewish  synagogue  (13:27). 
The  city  officials  would  hardly  join  in  a  mob  like  this,  though 
Hackett  and  Rackham  think  that  the  city  magistrates  were 
also  involved  as  in  Antioch  in  Pisidia  (13:50).  To  entreat 
them  shamefully  {hubrisai).  First  aorist  active  infinitive  of 
hubrizd,  old  verb  to  insult  insolently.  See  on  Matt.   22:6; 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  207 

Luke  18:32.  To  stone  {lithobolesai).  First  aorist  active  in- 
finitive of  lithoboleo,  late  verb  from  lithobolos  (lithos,  stone, 
ballo,  to  throw)  to  pelt  with  stones,  the  verb  used  of  the 
stoning  of  Stephen  (7:58).  See  on  Matt.  21:35.  The  plan 
to  stone  them  shows  that  the  Jews  were  in  the  lead  and 
followed  by  the  Gentile  rabble.  "Legal  proceedings  having 
failed  the  only  resource  left  for  the  Jews  was  illegal  violence" 
(Rackham). 

6.  They  became  aware  of  it  (sunidontes) .  Second  aorist 
(ingressive)  active  participle  of  sunorao  (suneidon),  old  word 
to  see  together,  to  become  conscious  of  as  already  in  12:12. 
In  the  N.T.  only  by  Luke  and  Paul.  Fled  (katephugon). 
Second  aorist  (effective)  active  indicative  of  katapheugo,  old 
verb,  but  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Heb.  6:18.  Paul  and 
Barnabas  had  no  idea  of  remaining  to  be  stoned  (lynched)  by 
this  mob.  It  is  a  wise  preacher  who  always  knows  when  to 
stand  his  ground  and  when  to  leave  for  the  glory  of  God. 
Paul  and  Barnabas  were  following  the  directions  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  given  to  the  twelve  on  their  special  tour  of  Galilee 
(Matt.  10:23).  Lystra  and  Derbe,  cities  of  Lycaonia  (still 
part  of  the  Province  of  Galatia,  though  in  another  Regio)^ 
not  far  from  the  base  of  the  Black  Mountain.  Professor 
Sterrett  has  apparently  identified  Lystra  by  an  inscription 
about  six  hours  (18  miles)  south-southwest  from  Iconium 
near  the  village  Khatyn  Serai  and  Derbe  probably  near  the 
village  Losta  or  Zosta  though  its  location  is  really  not  known. 
Lystra  had  been  made  a  colony  in  B.C.  6  and  Derbe  was  the 
frontier  city  of  the  Roman  empire  in  the  southeast.  These 
are  the  only  cities  mentioned,  but  they  were  of  importance 
and  show  that  Paul  kept  to  his  plan  of  going  to  centres  of 
influence.  The  new  imperial  road  from  Antioch  and  Iconium 
reached  these  cities.  The  region  round  about  {ten  perichoron) 
was  "a  high  table  land,  ill-watered,  bleak,  but  suited  for 
sheep  pasture"  (Page). 

7.  And  there  they  preached  the  gospel  {k'akei  euaggelizomenoi 


208      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

esan).  Periphrastic  imperfect  middle.  We  are  to  think  of 
extensive  evangelistic  work  perhaps  with  the  assistance  of 
disciples  from  Antioch  and  Iconium  since  Paul  and  Barnabas 
could  not  speak  Lycaonian.   K'akei  is  crasis  for  kai  ekei. 

8.  At  Lystra  {en  Lustrois).  Neuter  plural  as  in  16:2;  II 
Tim.  3:11  while  feminine  singular  in  14:6,  21;  i6:i.  There 
was  apparently  no  synagogue  in  Lystra  and  so  not  many 
Jews.  Paul  and  Barnabas  had  to  do  open-air  preaching  and 
probably  had  difficulty  in  being  understood  by  the  natives 
though  both  Greek  and  Latin  inscriptions  were  discovered 
here  by  Professor  Sterrett  in  1885.  The  incident  narrated 
here  (verses  8-18)  shows  how  they  got  a  real  hearing  among 
these  rude  heathen.  There  sat  (ekatheto).  Imperfect  middle 
of  kathemai.  Was  sitting.  This  case  is  very  much  like 
that  in  3:1-11,  healed  by  Peter.  Possibly  outside  the  gate 
(verse  13)  or  some  public  place.  Impotent  in  his  feet  {aduna- 
tos  tois  posin).  Old  verbal,  but  only  here  in  the  N.T.  in  this 
sense  except  figuratively  in  Rom.  15:1.  Elsewhere  it  means 
"impossible"  (Matt.  19:26).  Locative  case.  Common  in 
medical  writers  in  the  sense  of  "impotent."  So  Tobit  2:10; 
5:9.  Had  walked  (periepatesen).  So  best  MSS.,  first  aorist 
active  indicative  "walked,"  not  periepepatekei,  "had 
walked"  (past  perfect  active). 

9.  The  same  (houtos).  Just  "this  one."  Heard  (ekouen). 
Imperfect  active,  was  listening  to  Paul  speaking  {lalountos). 
Either  at  the  gate  or  in  the  market  place  (17:17)  Paul  was 
preaching  to  such  as  would  listen  or  could  understand  his 
Greek  {Koine).  Ramsay  {St.  Paul  the  Traveller ^  pp.  114,  116) 
thinks  that  the  cripple  was  a  proselyte.  At  any  rate  he  may 
have  heard  of  the  miracles  wrought  at  Iconium  (verse  3)  and 
Paul  may  have  spoken  of  the  work  of  healing  wrought  by 
Jesus.  This  man  was  "no  mendicant  pretender,"  for  his 
history  was  known  from  his  birth.  Fastening  his  eyes  upon 
him  {atenisas  autoi).  Just  as  in  13:9  of  Paul  and  1:10  which 
see.  Paul  saw  a  new  hope  in  the  man's  eyes  and  face.  He  had 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  209 

faith  (echei  pistin).  Present  active  indicative  retained  in 
indirect  discourse.  To  be  made  whole  (tou  sothenai).  Genitive 
of  articular  first  aorist  passive  infinitive  (purpose  and  result 
combined)  of  J020,  to  make  sound  and  also  to  save.  Here 
clearly  to  make  whole  or  well  as  in  Luke  7:50  (cf.  Acts  3  :i6; 

4:10)- 

10.  Upright  (orthos).  Predicate  adjective.  In  this  sense 
Galen  and  Hippocrates  frequently  use  orthos  (erect,  straight). 
Paul  spoke  in  a  loud  (megalei)  voice  so  that  all  could  hear  and 
know.  He  leaped  up  and  walked  {helato  kaiperiepatei).  Rather, 
He  leaped  up  with  a  single  bound  and  began  to  walk.  The 
second  aorist  middle  indicative  (with  first  aorist  vowel  a)  of 
hallomai  (late  verb,  in  papyri)  and  inchoative  imperfect 
active  of  peripateo,  common  verb  to  walk  around.  This 
graphic  picture  is  concealed  by  the  usual  English  rendering. 
It  is  possible  that  Luke  obtained  the  vivid  report  of  this 
incident  from  Timothy  who  may  have  witnessed  it  and  who 
was  probably  converted  during  Paul's  stay  here  (16:3). 
His  father  was  a  prominent  Greek  and  his  mother  Eunice, 
possibly  a  widow,  may  have  lived  here  with  her  mother 
Lois  (II  Tim.  1:5). 

11.  Lifted  up  their  voice  (eperan  ten  phonen  auton). 
First  aorist  active  of  epairo.  In  their  excitement  they 
elevated  their  voices.  In  the  speech  of  Lycaonia  (Lukaonisti). 
Adverb  from  verb  lukaonizo,  to  use  the  language  of  Lycaonia 
found  here  alone,  but  formed  regularly  like  Ebraisti  (John 
5:2),  Hellenisti  (Acts  21:37),  Romaisti  (John  19:20).  Paul 
was  speaking  in  Greek,  of  course,  but  the  excitement  of  the 
crowd  over  the  miracle  made  them  cry  out  in  their  native 
tongue  which  Paul  and  Barnabas  did  not  understand.  Hence 
it  was  not  till  preparations  for  offering  sacrifice  to  them  had 
begun  that  Paul  understood  the  new  role  in  which  he  and 
Barnabas  were  held.  In  the  likeness  of  men  (homoiothentes 
anthropois).  First  aorist  passive  participle  of  homoioj  to 
liken,  with  the  associative  instrumental  case.  In  this  primitive 


2IO      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

state  the  people  hold  to  the  old  Graeco-Roman  mythology. 
The  story  of  Baucis  and  Philemon  tells  how  Jupiter  (Zeus) 
and  Mercury  (Hermes)  visited  in  human  form  the  neighbour- 
ing region  of  Phrygia  (Ovid,  Meta.  VIII.  626).  Jupiter  (Zeus) 
had  a  temple  in  Lystra. 

12.  They  called  {ekaloun).  Inchoative  imperfect  began  to 
call.  Barnabas,  Jupiter  {ton  Barnaban  Dia).  Because  Barna- 
bas was  the  older  and  the  more  imposing  in  appearance. 
Paul  admits  that  he  was  not  impressive  in  looks  (II  Cor. 
10:10).  And  Paul,  Mercury  {ton  de  Paulon  Hermen).  Mercury 
{Hermes)  was  the  messenger  of  the  gods,  and  the  spokesman 
of  Zeus.  Hermes  was  of  beautiful  appearance  and  eloquent 
in  speech,  the  inventor  of  speech  in  legend.  Our  word  her- 
meneutlcs  or  science  of  interpretation  comes  from  this  word 
(Heb.  7:2;  John  1:38).  Because  he  was  the  chief  speaker 
{epeide  autos  en  ho  hegoumenos  tou  logou).  Paul  was  clearly 
"the  leader  of  the  talk."  So  it  seemed  a  clear  case  to  the 
natives.  If  preachers  always  knew  what  people  really  think 
of  them!  Whether  Paul  was  alluding  to  his  experience  in 
Lystra  or  not  in  Gal.  4:14,  certainly  they  did  receive  him  as 
an  angel  of  God,  as  if  "Mercury"  in  reality. 

13.  Whose  temple  was  before  the  city  {tou  ontos  pro  tes 
pbleos).  The  god  (Zeus)  is  identified  with  his  temple.  He  had 
a  statue  and  temple  there.  Oxen  and  garlands  {taurous  kai 
stemmata).  Probably  garlands  to  put  on  the  oxen  before 
they  were  slain.  It  was  common  to  sacrifice  bullocks  to 
Jupiter  and  Mercury.  Would  have  done  sacrifice  {ethelen 
thuein).  Imperfect  indicative,  wanted  to  offer  sacrifice.  He 
was  planning  to  do  it,  and  his  purpose  now  became  plain  to 
Paul  and  Barnabas. 

14.  Having  heard  {akousantes).  Such  elaborate  prepara- 
tion "with  the  multitudes"  {sun  tois  ochlois)  spread  rumours 
and  some  who  spoke  Greek  told  Paul  and  Barnabas.  It  is 
possible  that  the  priest  of  Jupiter  may  have  sent  a  formal 
request  that  the  visiting  "gods"  might  come  out  to  the 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  21 1 

statue  by  the  temple  gates  to  make  it  a  grand  occasion. 
They  rent  their  garments  (diarrexantes) .  First  aorist  active 
participle  from  diarregnumi,  old  verb  to  rend  in  two.  Like 
the  high  priest  in  Matt.  26:65  ^^  if  an  act  of  sacrilege  was 
about  to  be  committed.  It  was  strange  conduct  for  the  sup- 
posed gods!  Sprang  forth  (exepedesan).  First  aorist  (ingres- 
sive)  active  indicative  of  ekpedad  (note  ek),  old  verb,  here 
only  in  the  N.T.  It  was  all  a  sign  of  grief  and  horror  with 
loud  outcries  (krazontes). 

15.  Sirs  (andres).  Literally,  Men.  Abrupt,  but  courteous. 
We  also  are  men  of  like  passions  with  you  (kai  hemeis  hom- 
oiopatheis  esmen  humin  anthropoi).  Old  adjective  from  hom- 
oios  (like)  and  pascho,  to  experience.  In  the  N.T.  only  here 
and  James  5:17.  It  means  "of  like  nature"  more  exactly 
and  affected  by  like  sensations,  not  "gods"  at  all.  Their 
conduct  was  more  serious  than  the  obeisance  of  Cornelius 
to  Peter  (io:25f.).  Humin  is  associative  instrumental  case. 
And  bring  you  good  tidings  {euaggelizomenoi) .  No  "and"  in 
the  Greek,  just  the  present  middle  participle,  "gospelizing 
you."  They  are  not  gods,  but  evangelists.  Here  we  have 
Paul's  message  to  a  pagan  audience  without  the  Jewish 
environment  and  he  makes  the  same  line  of  argument  seen 
in  Acts  17:21-32  and  Rom.  1:18-23.  At  Antioch  in  Pisidia 
we  saw  Paul's  line  of  approach  to  Jews  and  proselytes 
(Acts  13:16-41).  That  ye  should  turn  from  these  vain  things 
{apo  toutbn  ton  mataion  epistrephein) .  He  boldly  calls  the 
worship  of  Jupiter  and  Mercury  and  all  idols  "vain"  or 
empty  things,  pointing  to  the  statues  and  the  temple. 
Unto  the  living  God  {epi  theon  zonta).  They  must  go  the 
whole  way.  Our  God  is  a  live  God,  not  a  dead  statue.  Paul 
is  fond  of  this  phrase  (II  Cor.  6:16;  Rom.  9:26).  Who  made 
{hos  epoiesen).  The  one  God  is  alive  and  is  the  Creator  of  the 
Universe  just  as  Paul  will  argue  in  Athens  (Acts  17:24).  Paul 
here  quotes  Psa.  146:6  and  has  Gen.  1:1  in  mind.  See  also 
I  Thess.  1 :9  where  a  new  allegiance  is  also  claimed  as  here. 


212      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

1 6.  In  the  generations  gone  by  {en  tais  paroichemenais 
geneais).  Perfect  middle  participle  from  paroichomai,  to  go 
by,  old  verb,  here  alone  in  the  N.T.  Suffered  (eiasen).  Con- 
stative  aorist  active  indicative  of  eao  (note  syllabic  aug- 
ment). Paul  here  touches  God  in  history  as  he  did  just  be- 
fore in  creation.  God's  hand  is  on  the  history  of  all  the 
nations  (Gentile  and  Jew),  only  with  the  Gentiles  he  with- 
drew the  restraints  of  his  grace  in  large  measure  (Acts  17:30; 
Rom.  1:24,  26,  28),  judgment  enough  for  their  sins.  To  walk 
in  their  ways  {poreuesthai  tais  hodois  auton).  Present  middle 
infinitive,  to  go  on  walking,  with  locative  case  without  en. 
This  philosophy  of  history  does  not  mean  that  God  was 
ignorant  or  unconcerned.  He  was  biding  his  time  in  patience. 

17.  And  yet  {kaitoi).  Old  Greek  compound  particle  {kai 
toi).  In  the  N.T.  twice  only,  once  with  finite  verb  as  here, 
once  with  the  participle  (Heb.  4:3).  Without  witness  {amartu- 
ron).  Old  adjective  {a  privative  and  martus,  witness),  only 
here  in  the  N.T.  Left  {apheken).  First  aorist  active  {k 
aorist  indicative  of  aphiemi).  In  that  he  did  good  {agathour- 
gon).  Present  active  causal  participle  of  agathourgeo,  late 
and  rare  verb  (also  agathoergeo  I  Tim.  6:18),  reading  of  the 
oldest  MSB.  here  for  agathopoied^  to  do  good.  Note  two  other 
causal  participles  here  parallel  with  agathourgon,  viz.,  didous 
("giving  you")  present  active  of  didomi,  empiplon  (''fill- 
ing") present  active  of  empimplao  (late  form  of  empimplemi). 
This  witness  to  God  (his  doing  good,  giving  rains  and  fruit- 
ful seasons,  filling  your  hearts  with  food  and  gladness)  they 
could  receive  without  the  help  of  the  Old  Testament  revela- 
tion (Rom.  1:20).  Zeus  was  regar-ded_as-jJie_ggd_gf  rain 
(Jupiter  Pluvius)  and  Paul  claims  the  rain  and  the  fruitful 
{karpophorous,  karpos,  and  phero,  fruit  bearing,"~old~word, 
here  alone  in  N.T.)_seasons  as  coming  from  God.  Lycaonia 
was  often  dry  and  it  would  be  an  appropriate  item.  "Mer- 
cury, as  the  God  of  merchandise,  was  also  the  dispenser  of 
food"  (Vincent).    Paul  does  not  talk  about  laws  of  nature 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  21 3 

as  if  they  governed  themselves,  but  he  sees  the  Hvhig  God 
"behind  the  drama  of  the  physical  world"  (Furneaux). 
These  simple  country  people  could  grasp  his  ideas  as  he 
claims  eyerything_for  the  one  true  God.  Gladness  {euphro- 
sunes).  Old  word  from  euphron  {eu  and  phren)^  good  cheer. 
In  the  N.T.  only  Acts  2:28  and  here.  Cheerfulness  should 
be  our  normal  attitude  when  we  consider  God's  goodness,  i^ 
Paul  does  not  here  mention  Christ  because  he  had  the  single 
definite  purpose  to  dissuade  them  from  worshipping  Barna- 
bas and  himself. 

18.  Scarce  (molts).  Adverb  in  same  sense  as  old  mogisy 
from  moloSf  jQiL,  Restrained  {katepausan).  Effective  first 
aorist  active  indicative  of  katapauo,  old  verb  in  causative 
sense  to  make  abstain  from.  From  doing  sacrifice  unto  them 
{tou  me  thuein  autois).  Ablative  case  of  the  articular  infini- 
tive with  redundant  negative  after  katepausan^  regular 
Greek  idiom  (Robertson,  Grammar,  pp.  1094,  1171).  It  had 
been  a  harrowing  and  well-nigh  a  horrible  ordeal,  but  finally 
Paul  had  won.    If  only  nobody  else  had  interposed! 

19.  But  there  came  thither  Jews  from  Antioch  and  Iconium 
(Epelthan  de  apo  Antiocheias  kai  Ikoniou  loudaioi).  Came 
to  or  upon  them,  epelthan,  second  aorist  (ingressive)  indica- 
tive of  eperchomai.  Whether  news  of  the  miracle  had  reached 
those  cities  we  do  not  know.  These  may  have  been  travel- 
ling grain  merchants.  At  any  rate  there  was  an  interval  in 
which  Paul  and  Barnabas  won  some  disciples  (verse  22). 
There  would  be  a  natural  reaction,  even  revulsion,  in  the 
minds  of  many  who  had  come  so  near  to  worshipping  Paul 
and  Barnabas.  The  pendulum  swings  easily  from  one  ex- 
treme to  the  other.  The  hostile  Jews  from  Antioch  and 
Iconium  may  even  have  followed  Paul  and  Barnabas  along 
the  fine  Roman  road  on  purpose  to  keep  them  on  the  run. 
They  had  driven  them  out  of  Antioch  and  out  of  Iconium 
and  now  appear  at  Lystra  at  an  opportune  moment  for  their 
work.     Having  persuaded  the  multitudes  (peisantes  tous  och- 


214      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

lous).  First  aorist  (effective)  active  participle  of  peitho. 
They  had  complete  success  with  many  and  struck  at  the 
psychological  moment.  They  stoned  Paul  {lithasantes  ton 
Paulon).  First  aorist  active  participle  oi  lithazo,  late  verb 
from  lithos  for  throwing  stones  (used  by  Paul  referring  to 
this  one  incident  when  alone  he  was  stoned,  II  Cor.  11:25). 
The  wounds  inflicted  may  have  left  some  of  the  scars  {stig- 
mata) mentioned  in  Gal.  6:17.  They  stoned  Paul  as  the 
chief  speaker  (Mercu.ry)  and  passed  by  Barnabas  (Jupiter). 
It  was  a  Jewish  mode  of  punishment  as  against  Stephen  and 
these  Jews  knew  that  Paul  was  the  man  that  they  had  to 
deal  with.  Hackett  notes  that  the  Jews  with  two  exceptions 
incited  the  persecutions  which  Paul  endured.  The  excep- 
tions were  in  Philippi  (16:16-40)  and  Ephesus  (19:23-41). 
Dragged  him  out  of  the  city  {esuron  exo  tes  polebs).  They 
hurled  Stephen  outside  of  the  city  before  stoning  him  (7:58). 
It  was  a  hurried  and  irregular  proceeding,  but  they  were 
dragging  (imperfect  active  of  surd,  old  verb)  Paul  out  now. 
Supposing  that  he  were  dead  (nomizontes  auton  tethnekenai). 
Present  active  participle  with  infinitive  (second  perfect  ac- 
tive of  thnesko)  in  indirect  discourse  with  accusative  of 
general  reference.  The  Jews  are  jubilant  this  time  with 
memories  of  Paul's  escape  at  Antioch  and  Iconium.  The 
pagan  mob  feel  that  they  have  settled  accounts  for  their 
narrow  escape  from  worshipping  two  Jewish  renegade 
preachers.  It  was  a  good  day's  work  for  them  all.  Luke 
does  not  say  that  Paul  was  actually  dead. 

20.  Stood  round  about  him  {kuklosantbn  auton).  Genitive 
absolute  with  first  aorist  active  participle  of  kukloo,  old 
verb  from  kuklos  (circle,  cycle)  to  make  a  circle  round,  to 
encircle.  The  would-be  murderers  left  and  a  group  of  dis- 
ciples gathered  round  to  see  if  Paul  was  dead  or  alive  and, 
if  dead,  to  bury  him.  In  that  group  Timothy  may  very  well 
have  been  along  with  Eunice  and  Barnabas.  Timothy,  a  lad 
of  about  fifteen,  would  not  soon  forget  that  solemn  scene 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  215 

(II  Tim.  3:11).  But  Paul  suddenly  (apparently  a  miraculous 
recovery)  rose  up  (anastas)  and  entered  the  city  to  the  sur- 
prise and  joy  of  the  disciples  who  were  willing  to  brave 
persecution  with  Paul.  fVith  Barnabas  (sun  toi  Barnabdi). 
With  the  assistance  of  Barnabas.  It  was  plainly  unwise  to 
continue  in  Lystra  so  that  they  set  out  on  the  next  day  (tH 
epaurion,  ten  times  in  Acts),  shaken  and  bruised  as  Paul  was. 
Derbe  was  some  forty  miles  distant,  near  the  pass  to  the 
Cilician  Gates. 

21.  When  they  had  preached  the  gospel  to  that  city  {euag- 
gelisamenoi  ten  polin  ekeinen).  Having  evangelized  (first 
aorist  middle  participle)  that  city,  a  smaller  city  and  ap- 
parently with  no  trouble  from  the  Jews.  Had  made  many 
disciples  {matheteus antes  hikanous).  First  aorist  active 
participle  of  matheteud  from  mathetes,  a  learner  or  disciple. 
Late  verb  in  Plutarch,  to  be  a  disciple  (Matt.  27:57  like 
John  19:38)  and  then  to  disciple  (old  English,  Spenser),  to 
make  a  disciple  as  in  Matt.  28:19  and  here.  Paul  and  Barna- 
bas were  literally  here  obeying  the  command  of  Jesus  in 
discipling  people  in  this  heathen  city.  They  returned  to 
Lystra  and  to  Iconium,  and  to  Antioch  (hupestrepsan  eis  ten 
Lustran  kai  eis  Ikonion  kai  eis  Antiocheian) ,  Derbe  was 
the  frontier  city  of  the  Roman  empire.  The  quickest  way 
to  return  to  Antioch  in  Syria  would  have  been  by  the  Cilician 
Gates  or  by  the  pass  over  Mt.  Taurus  by  which  Paul  and 
Silas  will  come  to  Derbe  in  the  second  tour  (Acts  15:41-16: 
i),  but  difficult  to  travel  in  winter.  But  it  was  necessary 
to  revisit  the  churches  in  Lystra,  Iconium,  Antioch  in 
Pisidia  and  to  see  that  they  were  able  to  withstand  persecu- 
tion. Paul  was  a  Roman  citizen  though  he  had  not  made 
use  of  this  privilege  as  yet  for  his  own  protection.  Against 
mob  violence  it  would  count  for  little,  but  he  did  not  hesi- 
tate. Paul  had  been  stoned  in  Lystra,  threatened  in  Iconium, 
expelled  in  Antioch.  He  shows  his  wisdom  in  conserving 
his  work. 


2l6      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

22.  Confirming  {episterizontes).  Late  verb  (in  LXX),  in 
N.T.  only  in  Acts  14:22;  15:32,  41,  to  make  more  firm,  to 
give  additional  {epi)  strength.  Each  time  in  Acts  the  word 
is  used  concerning  these  churches.  To  continue  in  the  faith 
{emmenein  tei  pistei).  To  remain  in  with  locative,  old  verb. 
It  is  possible  that  pistis  here  has  the  notion  of  creed  as  Paul 
uses  it  later  (Col.  i  :23  with  epimeno;  I  Tim.  5 :8).  It  seems  to 
be  here  more  than  trust  or  belief.  These  recent  converts 
from  heathenism  were  ill-informed,  were  persecuted,  had 
broken  family  and  social  ties,  greatly  needed  encouragement 
if  they  were  to  hold  out.  We  must  {dei  hemds).  It  does  not 
follow  from  this  use  of  "we"  that  Luke  was  present,  since 
it  is  a  general  proposition  applying  to  all  Christians  at  all 
times  (II  Tim.  3:12).  Luke,  of  course,  approved  this  princi- 
ple. Knowling  asks  why  Timothy  may  not  have  told  Luke 
about  Paul's  work.  It  all  sounds  like  quotation  of  Paul's 
very  language.  Note  the  change  of  construction  here  after 
parakalountes  (infinitive  of  indirect  command,  emmenein^ 
but  hoti  dei,  indirect  assertion).  They  needed  the  right 
understanding  of  persecution  as  we  all  do.  Paul  frankly 
warned  these  new  converts  in  this  heathen  environment 
of  the  many  tribulations  through  which  they  must  enter 
the  Kingdom  of  God  (the  culmination  at  last)  as  he  did  at 
Ephesus  (Acts  20:20)  and  as  Jesus  had  done  (John  16:33). 
These  saints  were  already  converted. 

23.  And  when  they  had  appointed  for  them  elders  in  every 
church  {cheirotones antes  de  autois  kat'  ekklesian  presbuterous). 
They  needed  also  some  form  of  organization,  though  already 
churches.  Note  distributive  use  of  kata  with  ekklesian 
(2:46;  5:42;  Titus  1:5).  Cheirotoneo  (from  cheirotonosy  ex- 
tending the  hand,  cheir,  hand,  and  teino,  to  stretch)  is  an  old 
verb  that  originally  meant  to  vote  by  show  of  the  hands, 
finally  to  appoint  with  the  approval  of  an  assembly  that 
chooses  as  in  II  Cor.  8:19,  and  then  to  appoint  without  re-  • 
gard  to  choice  as  In  Josephus  {Jnt.  XITL  2,  2)  of  the  ap- 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  217 

pointment  of  Jonathan  as  high  priest  by  Alexander.  So  in 
Acts  10:41  the  compound  procheiratoneb  is  used  of  witnesses 
appointed  by  God.  But  the  seven  (deacons)  were  first 
selected  by  the  Jerusalem  church  and  then  appointed  ijka^ 
tastesomen)  by  the  apostles.  That  is  probably  the  plan 
contemplated  by  Paul  in  his  directions  to  Titus  (i  15)  about 
the  choice  of  elders.  It  is  most  likely  that  this  plan  was  the 
one  pursued  by  Paul  and  Barnabas  with  these  churches. 
They  selected  the  elders  in  each  instance  and  Paul  and 
Barnabas  "ordained"  them  as  we  say,  though  the  word 
cheirotoneo  does  not  mean  that.  "Elders"  were  mentioned 
first  in  1 1 130.  Later  Paul  will  give  the  requirements  expected 
in  these  "elders"  or  "bishops"  (Phil.  1:1)  as  in  I  Tim.  3; 
1-7;  Titus  1:5-9.  It  is  fairly  certain  that  these  elders  were 
chosen  to  correspond  in  a  general  way  with  the  elders  in 
the  Jewish  synagogue  after  which  the  local  church  was 
largely  copied  as  to  organization  and  worship.  Paul,  like 
Jesus,  constantly  worshipped  and  spoke  in  the  synagogues. 
Already  it  is  plain,  as  at  Antioch  in  Syria  (11:26),  that 
the  Christians  can  no  longer  count  on  the  use  of  the  Jewish 
synagogue.  They  must  have  an  organization  of  their  own. 
The  use  of  the  plural  here  implies  what  was  true  at  Philippi 
(Phil.  1:1)  and  Ephesus  (Acts  20:17,  28)  that  each  church 
(one  in  each  city)  "had  its  college  of  elders"  (Hackett)  as 
in  Jerusalem  (21:18).  Elder  (presbuieros)  was  the  Jewish 
name  and  bishop  (episkopos)  the  Greek  name  for  the  same 
office.  "Those  who  are  called  elders  in  speaking  of  Jewish 
communities  are  called  bishops  in  speaking  of  Gentile  com- 
munities" (Hackett).  Hovey  rightly  holds  against  Hackett 
that  teaching  was  a  normal  function  of  these  elders,  pastors 
or  bishops  as  they  were  variously  called  (I  Tim.  3:2;  Titus 
1:9;  I  Cor.  12:28,  30;  Eph.  4:11).  Had  prayed  with  fasting 
{proseuxamenoi  meta  nesieion).  It  was  a  serious  matter, 
this  formal  setting  apart  of  these  "elders"  in  the  churches. 
So  it  was  done  in  a  public  meeting  with  prayer  and  fasting 


2X8      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

as  when  Paul  and  Barnabas  were  sent  forth  from  Antioch 
in  Syria  (13:3)  on  this  mission  tour.  They  commended  them 
to  the  Lord  {parethento  autous  tot  kuridi).  Second  aorist  mid- 
dle indicative  of  paratithemi.  Old  and  solemn  word,  to 
entrust,  to  deposit  as  in  a  bank  (I  Tim.  1:18;  II  Tim.  2:2). 
Cf.  paratheke  in  I  Tim.  6:20;  II  Tim.  1:12,  14.  It  was  all 
that  they  could  now  do,  to  commit  them  to  the  Lord  Jesus. 
Jesus  used  this  word  on  the  cross  (Luke  22:32).  On  whom 
they  had  believed  (eis  hon  pepisteukeisan).  Past  perfect  indic- 
ative (without  augment)  of  pisteuo.  They  had  ^'trusted" 
in  Jesus  (II  Tim.  1:12)  and  Paul  now  "entrusts"  them  to 
him  with  confidence.  It  was  a  solemn  and  serious  occasion 
in  each  instance  as  it  always  is  to  set  apart  men  for  the 
ministry.  These  men  may  not  have  been  ideal  men  for  this 
service,  but  they  were  the  only  ones  available  and  they  were 
chosen  from  the  actual  membership  in  each  instance,  men 
who  knew  local  conditions  and  problems. 

24.  When  they  had  spoken  the  word  in  Perga  (lalesantes  en 
Pergei  ton  logon).  Now  they  stopped  and  preached  in  Perga 
which  they  had  apparently  not  done  before  (see  13:13^). 
After  leaving  Antioch  they  passed  on  through  Pisidia,  as  if 
Antioch  was  not  strictly  in  Pisidia  (see  on  13:14)  and  into 
Pamphylia.  They  crossed  from  Perga  to  Attaleia,  the  pwrt 
of  Perga,  sixteen  miles  down  the  Cestus,  and  capital  of 
Pamphylia,  to  find  a  ship  for  Antioch  in  Syria.  It  is  now 
called  Adala  and  for  long  was  the  chief  harbour  of  the  south 
coast  of  Asia  Minor.  We  do  not  know  why  they  did  not  re- 
visit Cyprus,  perhaps  because  no  permanent  Gentile  churches 
were  founded  there. 

26.  They  sailed  away  to  Antioch  {apepleusan  eis  Antv- 
ocheian).  Effective  aorist  active  indicative  of  apopled,  to 
sail  off.  They  had  been  gone  some  eighteen  months.  They  had 
been  committed  (esan  paradedomenoi).  Periphrastic  past 
perfect  passive  of  paradidomi,  old  and  common  verb.  High 
and  serious  thoughts  filled  the  hearts  of  these  first  returned 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  219 

missionaries  as  they  neared  home.  The  grace  of  God  had 
been  with  them.  They  had  fulfilled  {eplerosan)  the  work  to 
which  they  had  been  set  apart  by  the  Holy  Spirit  with  the 
prayers  of  the  Antioch  church.  They  now  had  a  wondrous 
story  to  tell. 

27.  Gathered  the  church  together  {sunagagontes  ten  ekkle- 
sian).  Second  aorist  active  participle  of  sunago.  It  "was  the 
first  missionary  meeting  in  history"  (Furneaux).  It  was  not 
hard  to  get  the  church  together  when  the  news  spread  that 
Paul  and  Barnabas  had  returned.  "The  suitability  of  the 
Gospel  to  become  the  religion  of  the  world  had  not  before 
been  put  to  the  test"  (Furneaux).  Doubtless  many  "wise- 
acres" had  predicted  failure  as  they  did  for  William  Carey 
and  for  Adoniram  Judson  and  Luther  Rice.  Rehearsed 
(aneggellon).  Imperfect  active.  It  was  a  long  story  for  they 
had  many  things  to  tell  of  God's  dealings  "with  them" 
{met*  auton)  for  God  had  been  "with  them"  all  the  while  as 
Jesus  had  said  he  would  be  (Matt.  28:20,  meth'  humon). 
Paul  could  recount  some  of  the  details  given  later  in  II  Cor. 
II.  And  how  (kai  hoti).  Or  "and  that"  in  particular,  as 
the  upshot  of  it  all.  He  had  opened  a  door  of  faith  unto  the 
Gentiles  (enoixen  tois  ethnesin  thuran  piste os).  Three  times 
in  Paul's  Epistles  (I  Cor.  16:9;  II  Cor.  2:12;  Col.  4:3)  he 
employed  the  metaphor  of  "door,"  perhaps  a  reminiscence 
of  the  very  language  of  Paul  here.  This  work  in  Galatia 
gained  a  large  place  in  Paul's  heart  (Gal.  4:i4f.).  The 
Gentiles  now,  it  was  plain,  could  enter  the  kingdom  of  God 
(verse  22)  through  the  door  of  faith,  not  by  law  or  by  cir- 
cumcision or  by  heathen  philosophy  or  mythology. 

28.  And  they  tarried  no  little  time  (dietribon  de  chronon  ouk 
oligon).  Imperfect  active  of  diatriho,  old  verb  to  rub  hard, 
to  consume,  with  accusative  of  extent  of  time.  It  was  a 
happy  time  of  fellowship.  The  experiment  entered  upon  by 
the  church  of  Antioch  was  now  a  pronounced  success.  It  was 
at  the  direct  command  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  they  had 


220      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

prayed  for  the  absent  missionaries  and  rejoiced  at  their 
signal  success.  There  is  no  sign  of  jealousy  on  the  part  of 
Barnabas  when  Paul  returns  as  the  chief  hero  of  the  expedi- 
tion. A  new  corner  has  been  turned  in  the  history  of  Chris- 
tianity. There  is  a  new  centre  of  Christian  activity.  What 
will  Jerusalem  think  of  the  new  developments  at  Antioch? 
Paul  and  Barnabas  made  no  report  to  Jerusalem. 


CHAPTER  XV 

I.  And  certain  men  came  down  from  Judea  {kai  tines  katel- 
thontes  apo  tes  loudaias).  Evidently  the  party  of  the  circum- 
cision in  the  church  in  Jerusalem  (11:2)  had  heard  of  the 
spread  of  the  gospel  among  the  Gentiles  in  Cyprus,  Pam- 
phylia,  and  South  Galatia  (Phrygia,  Pisidia,  Lycaonia). 
Possibly  John  Mark  after  his  desertion  at  Perga  (13:13) 
told  of  this  as  one  of  his  reasons  for  coming  home.  At  any 
rate  echoes  of  the  jubilation  in  Antioch  in  Syria  would  be 
certain  to  reach  Jerusalem.  The  Judaizers  in  Jerusalem,  who 
insisted  that  all  the  Gentile  Christians  must  become  Jews 
also,  had  acquiesced  in  the  case  of  Cornelius  and  his  group 
(ii:i-i8)  after  plain  proof  by  Peter  that  it  was  the  Lord's 
doing.  But  they  had  not  agreed  to  a  formal  campaign  to 
turn  the  exception  into  the  rule  and  to  make  Christianity 
mainly  Gentile  with  a  few  Jews  instead  of  mainly  Jewish 
with  a  few  Gentiles.  Since  Paul  and  Barnabas  did  not  come 
up  to  Jerusalem,  the  leaders  among  the  Judaizers  decided 
to  go  down  to  Antioch  and  attack  Paul  and  Barnabas  there. 
They  had  volunteered  to  go  without  church  action  in  Jeru- 
salem for  their  activity  is  disclaimed  by  the  conference 
(Acts  15:24).  In  Gal.  2:4  Paul  with  some  heat  describes 
these  Judaizers  as  "false  brethren,  secretly  introduced  who 
sneaked  in  to  spy  out  our  liberty."  It  is  reasonably  certain 
that  this  visit  to  Jerusalem  described  in  Gal.  2:1-10  is  the 
same  one  as  the  Jerusalem  Conference  in  Acts  15:5-29  in 
spite  of  the  effort  of  Ramsay  to  identify  it  with  that  in 
1 1 :29f.  Paul  in  Galatians  is  not  giving  a  list  of  his  visits  to 
Jerusalem.  He  is  showing  his  independence  of  the  twelve 
apostles  and  his  equality  with  them.  He  did  not  see  them  in 
ii:29f.,  but  only  "the  elders."    In  Acts  15  Luke  gives  the 

331 


222      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

outward  narrative  of  events,  in  Gal.  2:1-10  Paul  shows  us 
the  private  interview  with  the  apostles  when  they  agreed 
on  their  line  of  conduct  toward  the  Judaizers.  In  Gal.  2:2 
by  the  use  of  "them"  (autois)  Paul  seems  to  refer  to  the 
first  public  meeting  in  Acts  before  the  private  interview 
that  came  in  between  verses  5  and  6  of  Acts  15.  If  we  recall 
the  difficulty  that  Peter  had  on  the  subject  of  preaching 
the  gospel  to  the  heathen  (io:i-ii:i8),  we  can  the  better 
understand  the  attitude  of  the  Judaizers.  They  were  men 
of  sincere  convictions  without  a  doubt,  but  they  were  ob- 
scurantists and  unable  and  unwilling  to  receive  new  light 
from  the  Lord  on  a  matter  that  involved  their  racial  and 
social  prejudices.  They  recalled  that  Jesus  himself  had  been 
circumcised  and  that  he  had  said  to  the  Syro-Phoenician 
woman  that  he  had  come  only  save  to  the  lost  sheep  of  the 
house  of  Israel  (Matt.  15:241?.).  They  argued  that  Christ 
had  not  repealed  circumcision.  So  one  of  the  great  religious 
controversies  of  all  time  was  begun,  that  between  spiritual 
religion  and  ritualistic  or  ceremonial  religion.  It  is  with  us 
yet  with  baptism  taking  the  place  of  circumcision.  These 
self-appointed  champions  of  circumcision  for  Gentile  Chris- 
tians were  deeply  in  earnest.  Taught  the  brethren  {edidaskon 
tous  adelphous).  Inchoative  imperfect  active,  began  to  teach 
and  kept  it  up.  Their  attitude  was  one  of  supercilious  superi- 
ority. They  probably  resented  the  conduct  of  Barnabas,  who, 
when  sent  by  the  Church  in  Jerusalem  to  investigate  the  con- 
version of  the  Greeks  in  Antioch  (11:20-26),  did  not  return 
and  report  till  a  strong  church  had  been  established  there 
with  the  help  of  Saul  and  only  then  with  a  big  collection  to 
confuse  the  issue.  Paul  and  Barnabas  were  on  hand,  but 
the  Judaizers  persisted  in  their  efforts  to  force  their  views 
on  the  church  in  Antioch.  It  was  a  crisis.  Except  ye  be  cir- 
cumcised after  the  custom  of  Moses,  ye  cannot  be  saved  {ean  me 
peritmethete  toi  ethei  Mouseos,  ou  dunasthe  sothenai).  There 
was  the  dictum  of  the  Judaizers  to  the  Gentiles.    Paul  and 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  223 

Barnabas  had  been  circumcised.  This  is  probably  the  precise 
language  employed,  for  they  spoke  in  Greek  to  these  Greeks. 
It  is  a  condition  of  the  third  class  (undetermined,  but  with 
prospect  of  being  determined,  ean  plus  the  first  aorist  passive 
subjunctive  of  peritemno).  There  was  thus  hope  held  out 
for  them,  but  only  on  condition  that  they  be  circumcised. 
The  issue  was  sharply  drawn.  The  associative  instrumental 
case  (toi  ethei)  is  customary.  "Saved"  (sothenai)  here  is  the 
Messianic  salvation.  This  doctrine  denied  the  efficacy  of 
the  work  of  Christ. 

2.  When  Paul  and  Barnabas  had  no  small  dissension  and 
questioning  with  them  (Genomenes  staseos  kai  zeteseos  ouk 
oliges  toi  Pauloi  kai  Barnahdi  pros  autous).  Genitive  absolute 
of  second  aorist  middle  participle  of  ginomai,  genitive 
singular  agreeing  with  first  substantive  staseos.  Literally, 
"No  little  (litotes  for  much)  strife  and  questioning  coming 
to  Paul  and  Barnabas  (dative  case)  with  them"  (pros 
autous,  face  to  face  with  them).  Paul  and  Barnabas  were 
not  willing  to  see  this  Gentile  church  brow-beaten  and 
treated  as  heretics  by  these  self-appointed  regulators  of 
Christian  orthodoxy  from  Jerusalem.  The  work  had  devel- 
oped under  the  leadership  of  Paul  and  Barnabas  and  they 
accepted  full  responsibility  for  it  and  stoutly  resisted  these 
Judaizers  to  the  point  of  sedition  (riot,  outbreak  in  Luke 
23:25;  Acts  19:40)  as  in  23:7.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the 
Judaizers  had  any  supporters  in  the  Antioch  church  so  that 
they  failed  utterly  to  make  any  impression.  Probably  these 
Judaizers  compelled  Paul  to  think  through  afresh  his  whole 
gospel  of  grace  and  so  they  did  Paul  and  the  world  a  real 
service.  If  the  Jews  like  Paul  had  to  believe,  it  was  plain  that 
there  was  no  virtue  in  circumcision  (Gal.  2:15-21).  It  is 
not  true  that  the  early  Christians  had  no  disagreements. 
They  had  selfish  avarice  with  Ananias  and  Sapphira,  mur- 
muring over  the  gifts  to  the  widows,  simony  in  the  case  of 
Simon  Magus,  violent  objection  to  work  in  Caesarea,  and 


224      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

now  open  strife  over  a  great  doctrine  (grace  vs.  legalism). 
The  brethren  appointed  (etaxan).  "The  brethren"  can  be 
supplied  from  verse  i  and  means  the  church  in  Antioch. 
The  church  clearly  saw  that  the  way  to  remove  this  dead- 
lock between  the  Judaizers  and  Paul  and  Barnabas  was  to 
consult  the  church  in  Jerusalem  to  which  the  Judaizers  be- 
longed. Paul  and  Barnabas  had  won  in  Antioch.  If  they 
can  win  in  Jerusalem,  that  will  settle  the  matter.  The  Judai- 
zers will  be  answered  in  their  own  church  for  which  they  are 
presuming  to  speak.  The  verb  etaxan  {tasso,  to  arrange) 
suggests  a  formal  appointment  by  the  church  in  regular 
assembly.  Paul  (Gal.  2:2)  says  that  he  went  up  by  rev- 
elation {kat^  apokalupsin),  but  surely  that  is  not  contradic- 
tory to  the  action  of  the  church.  Certain  others  of  them 
{tinas  allous).  Certainly  Titus  (Gal.  2:1,  3),  a  Greek  and 
probably  a  brother  of  Luke  who  is  not  mentioned  in  Acts. 
Rackham  thinks  that  Luke  was  in  the  number.  The  apostles 
and  elders  {tous  apostolous  kai  presbuterous).  Note  one 
article  for  both  (cf.  "the  apostles  and  the  brethren"  in  11  :i). 
"Elders"  now  (11:30)  in  full  force.  The  apostles  have  evi- 
dently returned  now  to  the  city  after  the  death  of  Herod 
Agrippa  I  stopped  the  persecution. 

3.  They  therefore  {hoi  men  oun).  Luke's  favourite  method 
of  resumptive  narrative  as  we  have  seen  (11:19,  etc.), 
demonstrative  hoi  with  men  (indeed)  and  oun  (therefore). 
Being  brought  on  their  way  by  the  church  {propemphthentes 
hupo  tes  ekklesias).  First  aorist  passive  participle  of  pro- 
pempo,  old  verb,  to  send  forward  under  escort  as  a  mark  of 
honour  as  in  20:38;  21:5;  III  John  6.  They  were  given  a 
grand  send-oflF  by  the  church  in  Antioch.  Passed  through 
(dierchonto) .  Imperfect  middle  describing  the  triumphal  pro- 
cession through  both  (te  kai)  Phoenicia  and  Samaria.  The 
conversion  {ten  epistrophen).  The  turning.  They  caused  great 
joy  {epoioun  charan  megalen).  Imperfect  active.  They 
were  raising  a  constant  paean  of  praise  as  they  proceeded 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  225 

toward  Jerusalem.    Probably  the  Judaizers  had  gone  on  or 
kept  still. 

4.  Were  received  {paredechthesan).  First  aorist  passive 
indicative  of  paradechomaij  old  verb,  to  receive,  to  wel- 
come. Here  it  was  a  public  reception  for  Paul  and  Bar- 
nabas provided  by  the  whole  church  including  the  apostles 
and  elders,  at  which  an  opportunity  was  given  to  hear  the 
story  of  Paul  and  Barnabas  about  God's  dealings  with 
them  among  the  Gentiles.  This  first  public  meeting  is  re- 
ferred to  by  Paul  in  Gal.  2:2  "I  set  before  them  {autois)  the 
gospel,  etc." 

5.  But  there  rose  up  {exanestesan  de).  Second  aorist  active 
indicative  (intransitive).  Note  both  ex  and  an.  These  men 
rose  up  out  of  the  crowd  at  a  critical  moment.  They  were 
believers  in  Christ  (pepisteukotes,  having  believed),  but  were 
still  members  of  "the  sect  of  the  Pharisees"  (tes  haireseos 
ton  Pharisaion).  Evidently  they  still  held  to  the  Pharisaic 
narrowness  shown  in  the  attack  on  Peter  (ii:2f.).  Note  the 
dogmatism  of  their  "must"  {dei)  after  the  opposition  of 
Paul  and  Barnabas  to  their  "except"  {ean  me)  at  Antioch 
(15:1).  They  are  unconvinced  and  expected  to  carry  the 
elders  with  them.  Codex  Bezae  says  that  they  had  appealed 
to  the  elders  (15:2,  5).  At  any  rate  they  have  made  the  issue 
in  open  meeting  at  the  height  of  the  jubilation.  It  is  plain 
from  verse  6  that  this  meeting  was  adjourned,  for  another 
gathering  came  together  then.  It  is  here  that  the  private 
conference  of  which  Paul  speaks  in  Galatians  2:1-10  took 
place.  It  was  Paul's  chance  to  see  the  leaders  in  Jerusalem 
(Peter,  James,  and  John)  and  he  won  them  over  to  his  view 
of  Gentile  liberty  from  the  Mosaic  law  so  that  the  next 
public  conference  (Acts  15:6-29)  ratified  heartily  the  views 
of  Paul,  Barnabas,  Peter,  James,  and  John.  It  was  a  diplo- 
matic triumph  of  the  first  order  and  saved  Christianity 
from  the  bondage  of  Jewish  ceremonial  sacramentalism. 
So  far  as  we  know  this  is  the  only  time  that  Paul  and  John 


226      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

met  face  to  face,  the  great  spirits  in  Christian  history  after 
Jesus  our  Lord.  It  is  a  bit  curious  to  see  men  saying  today 
that  Paul  surrendered  about  Titus  and  had  him  circumcised 
for  the  salie  of  peace,  the  very  opposite  of  what  he  says  in 
Galatians,  "to  whom  I  yielded,  no  not  for  an  hour."  Titus 
as  a  Greek  was  a  red  flag  to  the  Judaizers  and  to  the  com- 
promisers, but  Paul  stood  his  ground. 

6.  Were  gathered  together  (sunechthesan).  First  aorist 
(effective)  passive  indicative.  The  church  is  not  named  here 
as  in  verse  4,  but  we  know  from  verses  12  and  22  that  the 
whole  church  came  together  this  time  also  along  with  the 
apostles  and  elders.  Of  this  matter  {peri  tou  logon  toutou). 
Same  idiom  in  8:21;  19:38.  They  realized  the  importance  of 
the  issue. 

7.  When  there  had  been  much  questioning  {polles  letesebs 
genomenes).  Genitive  absolute  with  second  aorist  middle 
participle  of  ginomai.  Evidently  the  Judaizers  were  given 
full  opportunity  to  air  all  their  grievances  and  objections. 
They  were  allowed  plenty  of  time  and  there  was  no  effort 
to  shut  off  debate  or  to  rush  anything  through  the  meeting. 
Peter  rose  up  (anastas  Petros).  The  wonder  was  that  he  had 
waited  so  long.  Probably  Paul  asked  him  to  do  so.  He  was 
the  usual  spokesman  for  the  apostles  and  his  activities  in 
Jerusalem  were  well-known.  In  particular  his  experience 
at  Caesarea  (Acts  10)  had  caused  trouble  here  in  Jerusalem 
from  this  very  same  party  of  the  circumcism  (Acts  11  :i-i8). 
It  was  fitting  that  Peter  should  speak.  This  is  the  last  time 
that  Peter  appears  in  the  Acts.  A  good  while  ago  (aph* 
hemeron  archaion).  From  ancient  days.  The  adjective 
archaios  is  from  arche^  beginning,  and  its  actual  age  is  a  mat- 
ter of  relativity.  So  Mnason  (Acts  21:16)  is  termed  "an 
ancient  disciple."  It  was  probably  a  dozen  years  since  God 
"made  choice"  {exelexato)  to  speak  by  Peter's  mouth  to 
Cornelius  and  the  other  Gentiles  in  Caesarea.  His  point  is 
that  what  Paul  and  Barnabas  have  reported  is  nothing  new. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  227 

The  Judaizers   made  objection    then   as   they  are   doing 
now. 

8.  Which  knoweth  the  heart  (kardiognostes).  Late  word 
from  kardia  (heart)  and  gnostes  (known,  ginosko).  In  the 
N.T.  only  here  and  1:24  which  see.  Giving  them  the  Holy 
Spirit  (dous  to  pneuma  to  hagion).  And  before  their  bap- 
tism. This  was  the  Lord's  doing.  They  had  accepted  (11  :i8) 
this  witness  of  God  then  and  it  was  true  now  of  these  other 
Gentile  converts. 

9.  He  made  no  distinction  between  us  and  them  (outhen 
diekrinen  metaxu  hemon  te  kai  auton).  He  distinguished  noth- 
ing (first  aorist  active  ind.)  between  (both  dia  and  metaxu) 
both  {te  kai)  us  and  them.  In  the  matter  of  faith  and  con- 
version God  treated  us  Jews  as  heathen  and  the  heathen  as 
Jews.  Cleansing  their  hearts  by  faith  (tei  pistei  katharisas  tas 
kardias  auton).  Not  by  works  nor  by  ceremonies.  Peter 
here  has  a  thoroughly  Pauline  and  Johannine  idea  of  salva- 
tion for  all  both  Jew  and  Greek.   Cf.  10:15. 

10.  Why  tempt  ye  God?  (ti  peirazete  ton  theon;).  By  imply- 
ing that  God  had  made  a  mistake  this  time,  though  right 
about  Cornelius.  It  is  a  home-thrust.  They  were  refusing 
to  follow  the  guidance  of  God  like  the  Israelites  at  Massah 
and  Meribah  (Ex.  17:7;  Deut.  6:16;  I  Cor.  10:9).  That  ye 
should  put  (epitheinai).  Second  aorist  active  infinitive  of 
epitithemi,  epexegetic,  explaining  the  tempting.  ^  yoke  upon 
the  neck  {zugon  epi  ton  trachelon).  Familiar  image  of  oxen 
with  yokes  upon  the  necks.  Paul's  very  image  for  the  yoke 
of  bondage  of  the  Mosaic  law  in  Gal.  5:1.  It  had  probably 
been  used  in  the  private  interview.  Cf.  the  words  of  Jesus 
about  the  Pharisees  (Matt.  23*4)  and  how  easy  and  light 
his  own  yoke  is  (Matt.  1 1 :3o).  Were  able  to  bear  {ischusamen 
bastasai).  Neither  our  fathers  nor  we  had  strength  (ischuo) 
to  carry  this  yoke  which  the  Judaizers  wish  to  put  on  the 
necks  of  the  Gentiles.  Peter  speaks  as  the  spiritual  emanci- 
pator. He  had  been  slow  to  see  the  meaning  of  God's  dealings 


228      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

with  him  at  Joppa  and  Caesarea,  but  he  has  seen  clearly  by 
now.  He  takes  his  stand  boldly  with  Paul  and  Barnabas 
for  Gentile  freedom. 

11.  That  we  shall  be  saved  {sothenai).  First  aorist  passive 
infinitive  in  indirect  discourse  after  pisteuomen.  More  ex- 
actly, "We  believe  that  we  are  saved  through  the  grace  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  in  like  manner  as  they  also."  This  thoroughly 
Pauline  note  shows  that  whatever  hopes  the  Judaizers  had 
about  Peter  were  false.  His  doctrine  of  grace  is  as  clear  as  a 
bell.  He  has  lifted  his  voice  against  salvation  by  ceremony 
and  ritualism.    It  was  a  great  deliverance. 

12.  Kept  silence  (esigesen).  Ingressive  first  aorist  active 
of  sigao,  old  verb,  to  hold  one's  peace.  All  the  multitude 
became  silent  after  Peter's  speech  and  because  of  it.  Heark- 
ened {ekouon).  Imperfect  active  of  akouo,  descriptive  of  the 
rapt  attention,  were  listening.  Unto  Barnabas  and  Paul 
(Barnaba  kai  Paulou).  Note  placing  Barnabas  before  Paul 
as  in  verse  25,  possibly  because  in  Jerusalem  Barnabas  was 
still  better  known  than  Paul.  Rehearsing  (exegoumenon). 
Present  middle  participle  of  exegeomai^  old  verb,  to  go 
through  or  lead  out  a  narrative  of  events  as  in  Luke  24:35; 
Acts  10:8  which  see.  Three  times  (14:27;  15:4,  12)  Paul  is 
described  as  telling  the  facts  about  their  mission  work, 
facts  more  eloquent  than  argument  (Page).  One  of  the  cry- 
ing needs  in  the  churches  is  fuller  knowledge  of  the  facts  of 
mission  work  and  progress  with  enough  detail  to  give  life 
and  interest.  The  signs  and  wonders  which  God  had  wrought 
among  the  Gentiles  set  the  seal  of  approval  on  the  work 
done  through  (dia)  Barnabas  and  Paul.  This  had  been 
Peter's  argument  about  Cornelius  (11:17).  This  same  verb 
(exegesato)  is  used  by  James  in  verse  14  referring  to  Peter's 
speech. 

13.  y^fter  they  had  held  their  peace  {meta  to  sigesai  autous). 
Literally,  "after  the  becoming  silent  (ingressive  aorist 
active  of  the  articular  infinitive)  as  to  them  (Barnabas  and 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  229 

Paul,  accusative  of  general  reference)."  James  answered 
{apekrithe  lakobos).  First  aorist  passive  (deponent)  indica- 
tive. It  was  expected  that  James,  as  President  of  the  Con- 
ference, would  speak  last.  But  he  wisely  waited  to  give 
every  one  an  opportunity  to  speak.  The  challenge  of  the 
Judaizers  called  for  an  opinion  from  James.  Furneaux 
thinks  that  he  may  have  been  elected  one  of  the  twelve  to 
take  the  place  of  James  the  brother  of  John  since  Paul  (Gal. 
1:19)  calls  him  apostle.  More  likely  he  was  asked  to  preside 
because  of  his  great  gifts  and  character  as  chief  of  the  elders. 
14.  Hearken  unto  me  (akousate  mou).  Usual  appeal  for 
attention.  James  was  termed  James  the  Just  and  was  con- 
sidered a  representative  of  the  Hebraic  as  opposed  to  the 
Hellenistic  wing  of  the  Jewish  Christians  (Acts  6:1).  The 
Judaizers  had  doubtless  counted  on  him  as  a  champion 
of  their  view  and  did  later  wrongfully  make  use  of  his  name 
against  Peter  at  Antioch  (Gal.  2:12).  There  was  instant 
attention  when  James  began  to  speak.  Symeon  (Sumeon). 
The  Aramaic  form  of  Simon  as  in  H  Peter  2:1.  This  little 
touch  would  show  his  affinities  with  the  Jewish  Christians 
(not  the  Judaizers).  This  Aramaic  form  is  used  also  in  Luke 
2:25,  34  of  the  old  prophet  in  the  temple.  Possibly  both 
forms  (Symeon,  Aramaic,  and  Simon,  Greek)  were  current 
in  Jerusalem.  How  (kathos).  Strictly,  "according  as,"  here 
like  hos  in  indirect  discourse  somewhat  like  the  e'pexegetic 
or  explanatory  use  in  HI  John  3.  First  (proton).  Told  by 
Peter  in  verse  7.  James  notes,  as  Peter  did,  that  this  expe- 
rience of  Barnabas  and  Paul  is  not  the  beginning  of  work 
among  the  Gentiles.  Did  visit  (epeskepsato).  First  aorist 
middle  indicative  of  episkeptomai,  old  verb  to  look  upon, 
to  look  after,  provide  for.  This  same  verb  occurs  in  James 
1:27  and  is  one  of  various  points  of  similarity  between  this 
speech  of  James  in  Acts  and  the  Epistle  of  James  as  shown 
by  Mayor  in  his  Commentary  on  James.  Somehow  Luke 
may  have  obtained  notes  of  these  various  addresses.     To 


230     WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

take  from  the  Gentiles  a  people  for  his  name  {lahein  ex  ethnon 
laon  tot  onomati  autou).  Bengel  calls  this  egregium  paradoxoUy 
a  chosen  people  {laon)  out  of  the  Gentiles  {ethnon).  This 
is  what  is  really  involved  in  what  took  place  at  Caesarea 
at  the  hands  of  Peter  and  the  campaign  of  Barnabas  and 
Paul  from  Antioch.  But  such  a  claim  of  God's  purpose 
called  for  proof  from  Scripture  to  convince  Jews  and  this  is 
precisely  what  James  undertakes  to  give.  This  new  Israel 
from  among  the  Gentiles  is  one  of  Paul's  great  doctrines  as 
set  forth  in  Gal.  3  and  Rom.  9-1 1.  Note  the  use  of  God's 
"name"  here  for  "the  Israel  of  God"  (Gal.  6:16). 

15.  To  this  agree  {toutoi  sumphbnousin) .  Associative  in- 
strumental case  {toutoi)  after  sumphonousin  (voice  together 
with,  symphony  with,  harmonize  with),  from  sumphoneo, 
old  verb  seen  already  in  Matt.  18:19;  Luke  5:36;  Acts  5:9 
which  see.  James  cites  only  Amos  9:11  and  12  from  the  LXX 
as  an  example  of  "the  words  of  the  prophets"  {hoi  logoi  ton 
prophetbn)  to  which  he  refers  on  this  point.  The  somewhat 
free  quotation  runs  here  through  verses  16  to  18  of  Acts  15 
and  is  exceedingly  pertinent.  The  Jewish  rabbis  often  failed 
to  understand  the  prophets  as  Jesus  showed.  The  passage 
in  Amos  refers  primarily  to  the  restoration  of  the  Davidic 
empire,  but  also  the  Messiah's  Kingdom  (the  throne  of 
David  his  father,"  Luke  1:32). 

16.  /  will  build  again  {anoikodomeso).  Here  LXX  has 
anasteso.  Compound  {ana,  up  or  again)  of  oikodomeo,  the 
verb  used  by  Jesus  in  Matt.  16:18  of  the  general  church  or 
kingdom  as  here  which  see.  The  tabernacle  of  David  {ten 
skenen  Daueid),  a  poetical  figure  of  the  throne  of  David 
(II  Sam.  7:12)  now  "the  fallen  tent"  {ten  peptokuian)^ 
perfect  active  participle  of  pipto,  state  of  completion.  The 
ruins  thereof  {ta  katestrammena  autes).  Literally,  "the 
ruined  portions  of  it."  Perfect  passive  participle  of  katas- 
trepho,  to  turn  down.  It  is  a  desolate  picture  of  the  fallen, 
torn  down  tent  of  David.    /  will  set  it  up  {anorthoso).    Old 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  231 

verb  from  anorthoo  (ana,  orthos),  to  set  upright.  See  on  Luke 
13  :i3  of  the  old  woman  whose  crooked  back  was  set  straight. 

17.  That  the  residue  of  men  may  seek  after  the  Lord  (hopos 
an  ekzetesosin  hoi  kataloipoi  ton  anthropon  ton  kurion).  The 
use  of  hopos  with  the  subjunctive  (effective  aorist  active)  to 
express  purpose  is  common  enough  and  note  an  for  an  addi- 
tional tone  of  uncertainty.  On  the  rarity  of  an  with  hopos 
in  the  KoinS  see  Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  986.  Here  the 
Gentiles  are  referred  to.  The  Hebrew  text  is  quite  different, 
"that  they  may  possess  the  remnant  of  Edom."  Certainly 
the  LXX  suits  best  the  point  that  James  is  making.  But 
the  closing  words  of  this  verse  point  definitely  to  the  Gentiles 
both  in  the  Hebrew  and  the  LXX,  "all  the  Gentiles"  {panta 
ta  ethne).  Another  item  of  similarity  between  this  speech 
and  the  Epistle  of  James  is  in  the  phrase  "my  name  is  called" 
{epikekletai  to  onoma  mou)  and  James  2:7.  The  purpose  of 
God,  though  future,  is  expressed  by  this  perfect  passive  in- 
dicative epikekletai  from  epi-kaleo,  to  call  on.  It  is  a  Jewish 
way  of  speaking  of  those  who  worship  God. 

18.  From  the  beginning  of  the  world  {ap'  aionos).  Or,  "from 
of  old."  James  adds  these  words,  perhaps  with  a  reminiscence 
of  Isa.  45:21.  His  point  is  that  this  purpose  of  God,  as  set 
forth  in  Amos,  is  an  old  one.  God  has  an  Israel  outside  of  and 
beyond  the  Jewish  race,  whom  he  will  make  his  true  "Israel" 
and  so  there  is  no  occasion  for  surprise  in  the  story  of  God's 
dealings  with  the  Gentiles  as  told  by  Barnabas  and  Paul. 
God's  eternal  purpose  of  grace  includes  all  who  call  upon 
his  name  in  every  land  and  people  (Isa.  2:1;  Micah.4:i). 
This  larger  and  richer  purpose  and  plan  of  God  was  one  of 
the  mysteries  which  Paul  will  unfold  in  the  future  (Rom. 
16:25;  Eph.  3:9).  James  sees  it  clearly  now.  God  is  making 
it  known  [poion  tauta  gnosta),  if  they  will  only  be  willing 
to  see  and  understand.  It  was  a  great  deliverance  that 
James  had  made  and  it  exerted  a  profound  influence  on 
the  assembly. 


232      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

19.  Wherefore  {dio).  "Because  of  which,"  this  plain  pur- 
pose of  God  as  shown  by  Amos  and  Isaiah.  My  judgment  is 
(ego  krino).  Note  expression  of  ego.  I  give  my  judgment. 
{Ego  censeo).  James  sums  up  the  case  as  President  of  the 
Conference  in  a  masterly  fashion  and  with  that  consummate 
wisdom  for  which  he  is  noted.  It  amounts  to  a  resolution 
for  the  adoption  by  the  assembly  as  happened  (verse  33). 
That  we  trouble  not  {me  parenochlein).  Present  active  infini- 
tive with  me  in  an  indirect  command  (Robertson,  Grammar, 
p.  1046)  of  parenochleo,  a  common  late  verb,  occurring  here 
alone  in  the  N.T.  This  double  compound  {para,  en)  is  from 
the  old  compound  enochleb  {en  and  ochlos,  crowd,  annoyance) 
seen  in  Luke  6:18  and  Heb.  12:15,  ^^^  means  to  cause 
trouble  beside  {para)  one  or  in  a  matter.  This  is  the  general 
point  of  James  which  he  explains  further  concerning  "those 
who  are  turning  from  the  Gentiles  unto  God,"  the  very 
kind  of  people  referred  to  in  Amos. 

20.  But  that  we  write  unto  them  {alia  episteilai  autois). 
By  way  of  contrast  {alia).  First  aorist  active  infinitive  of 
epistello,  old  verb  to  send  to  one  (message,  letter,  etc.). 
Our  word  epistle  {epistole  as  in  verse  30)  comes  from  this 
verb.  In  the  N.T.  only  here,  Heb.  13:22,  and  possibly  Acts 
21:25.  That  they  abstain  from  {tou  apechesthai).  The  genitive 
of  the  articular  infinitive  of  purpose,  present  middle  (direct) 
of  apecho,  old  verb,  to  hold  oneself  back  from.  The  best  old 
MSB.  do  not  have  apo,  but  the  ablative  is  clear  enough  in 
what  follows.  James  agrees  with  Peter  in  his  support  of 
Paul  and  Barnabas  in  their  contention  for  Gentile  freedom 
from  the  Mosaic  ceremonial  law.  The  restrictions  named  by 
James  affect  the  moral  code  that  applies  to  all  (idolatry, 
fornication,  murder).  Idolatry,  fornication  and  murder  were 
the  outstanding  sins  of  paganism  then  and  now  (Rev. 
22:15).  Harnack  argues  ably  against  the  genuineness  of  the 
word  pniktou  (strangled)  which  is  absent  from  D  Irenaeus, 
Tertullian,  Cyprian.  It  is  a  nice  point,  though  the  best  MSS. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  233 

have  it  in  accord  with  Lev.  17:10-16.  The  problem  is  whether 
the  words  were  added  because  "blood"  was  understood  as 
not  "murder,"  but  a  reference  to  the  Mosaic  regulation  or 
whether  it  was  omitted  to  remove  the  ceremonial  aspect 
and  make  it  all  moral  and  ethical.  The  Western  text  omits 
the  word  also  in  verse  29.  But  with  the  word  retained  here 
and  in  verse  29  the  solution  of  James  is  not  a  compromise, 
though  there  is  a  wise  concession  to  Jewish  feeling.  Pollu- 
tions of  idols  {alisgematon).  From  alisgeo  only  in  the  LXX 
and  this  substantive  nowhere  else.  The  word  refers  to  idola- 
trous practices  (pollutions)  and  things  sacrificed  to  idols 
(eidoluthon)  in  verse  29,  not  to  sacrificial  meat  sold  in  the 
market  (I  Cor.  10:27),  ^  matter  not  referred  to  here.  Cf. 
Lev.  17:1-9.  All  the  four  items  in  the  position  of  James 
(accepting  pniktou)  are  mentioned  in  Lev.  17  and  18. 

21.  for  Moses  (Mouses  gar).  A  reason  why  these  four 
necessary  things  (verse  28)  are  named.  In  every  city  are 
synagogues  where  rabbis  proclaim  (kerussontas)  these  mat- 
ters. Hence  the  Gentile  Christians  would  be  giving  constant 
offence  to  neglect  them.  The  only  point  where  modern  Chris- 
tian sentiment  would  object  would  be  about  "things  stran- 
gled" and  "blood"  in  the  sense  of  any  blood  left  in  the 
animals,  though  most  Christians  probably  agree  with  the 
feeling  of  James  in  objecting  to  blood  in  the  food.  If  "blood " 
is  taken  to  be  "murder,"  that  difficulty  vanishes.  Moses 
will  suffer  no  loss  for  these  Gentile  Christians  are  not  adher- 
ents of  Judaism. 

22.  Then  it  seemed  good  {Tote  edoxen).  First  aorist  active 
indicative  of  dokeo.  A  regular  idiom  at  the  beginning  of 
decrees.  This  Eirenicon  of  James  commended  itself  to  the 
whole  assembly.  Apparently  a  vote  was  taken  which  was 
unanimous,  the  Judaizers  probably  not  voting.  The  apostles 
and  the  elders  {tois  apostolois  kai  tois  presbuterois,  article 
with  each,  dative  case)  probably  all  vocally  expressed  their 
position.      With  the  whole  church   (sun  holei  tei  ekklesidi). 


234     WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Probably  by  acclamation.  It  was  a  great  victory.  But 
James  was  a  practical  leader  and  he  did  not  stop  with 
speeches  and  a  vote.  To  choose  men  out  of  their  company 
{eklezamenous  andras  ex  auton).  Accusative  case,  though 
dative  just  before  {tots  apostolois,  etc.),  of  first  aorist  middle 
participle  of  eklego,  to  select.  This  loose  case  agreement 
appears  also  in  grapsantes  in  verse  23  and  in  MSS.  in  verse 
25.  It  is  a  common  thing  in  all  Greek  writers  (Paul,  for 
instance),  especially  in  the  papyri  and  in  the  Apocalypse 
of  John.  Judas  called  Barsabbas  {loudan  ton  kaloumenon 
Barsabban).  Not  otherwise  known  unless  he  is  a  brother  of 
Joseph  Barsabbas  of  1 123,  an  early  follower  of  Jesus.  The 
other,  Silas,  is  probably  a  shortened  form  of  Silvanus  (Sx7- 
ouanos,  I  Peter  5:12),  the  companion  of  Paul  in  his  second 
mission  tour  (Acts  15:32,  41;  16:25).  Chief  men  {hegoume- 
nous).  Leaders,  leading  men  (participle  from  hegeomai,  to 
lead). 

23.  And  they  wrote  (grapsantes).  First  aorist  active  par- 
ticiple of  grapho  and  the  nominative  as  if  a  principal  verb 
epempsan  had  been  used  instead  of  pempsai,  the  first  aorist 
active  infinitive  (anacoluthon).  This  committee  of  four 
(Judas,  Silas,  Barnabas,  Paul)  carried  the  letter  which  em- 
bodied the  decision  of  the  Conference.  This  letter  is  the 
writing  out  of  the  judgment  of  James  and  apparently  written 
by  him  as  the  President.  The  apostles  and  the  elders^  brethren 
{hoi  apostoloi  kai  hoi  presbuteroi,  adelphoi).  So  the  oldest 
and  best  MSS.  without  kai  (and)  before  "brethren."  This 
punctuation  is  probably  correct  and  not  "elder  brethren." 
The  inquiry  had  been  sent  to  the  apostles  and  elders  (verse 
2)  though  the  whole  church  joined  in  the  welcome  (verse  4) 
and  in  the  decision  (verse  22).  The  apostles  and  elders  send 
the  epistle,  but  call  themselves  "brothers  to  brothers," 
Fratres  Fratibus  Salutem.  "The  brothers"  (tois  adelphois) 
addressed  (dative  case)  are  of  the  Gentiles  {ex  ethnbn)  and 
those  in  Antioch,  Syria,  and  Cilicia,  because  they  were  im- 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  235 

mediately  involved.  But  the  decision  of  this  Conference 
was  meant  for  Gentile  Christians  everywhere  (16:4).  Greet- 
ing (Chairein).  The  customary  formula  in  the  beginning  of 
letters,  the  absolute  infinitive  (usually  chairein)  with  the 
nominative  absolute  also  as  in  James  1:1;  Acts  23:26  and 
innumerable  papyri  (Robertson,  Grammar,  pp.  I902f.). 

24.  Certain  which  went  from  us  {tines  ex  hemon,  Aleph  B 
omit  exelthontes).  A  direct  blow  at  the  Judaizers,  put  in  del- 
icate language  (we  heard  ekousamen)  as  if  only  at  Antioch 
(15:1),  and  not  also  in  Jerusalem  in  open  meeting  (15:5). 
Have  troubled  you  with  words  (etaraxan  humas  logois).  What 
a  picture  of  turmoil  in  the  church  in  Antioch,  words,  words, 
words.  Aorist  tense  of  the  common  verb  tarasso,  to  agitate, 
to  make  the  heart  palpitate  (John  14:1,  27)  and  instrumental 
case  of  logois.  Subverting  your  souls  {anaskeuazontes  tas 
psuchas  humon).  Present  active  participle  of  anaskeuazo, 
old  verb  (ana  and  skeuos,  baggage)  to  pack  up  baggage,  to 
plunder,  to  ravage.  Powerful  picture  of  the  havoc  wrought 
by  the  Judaizers  among  the  simple-minded  Greek  Chris- 
tians in  Antioch.  To  whom  we  gave  no  commandment  (hois 
ou  diesteilametha).  First  aorist  middle  indicative  of  dias- 
tell5,  old  verb  to  draw  asunder,  to  distinguish,  to  set  forth 
distinctly,  to  command.  This  is  a  flat  disclaimer  of  the 
whole  conduct  of  the  Judaizers  in  Antioch  and  in  Jerusalem, 
a  complete  repudiation  of  their  eflfort  to  impose  the  Mosaic 
ceremonial  law  upon  the  Gentile  Christians. 

25.  It  seemed  good  unto  us  (edoxen  hemin).  See  statement 
by  Luke  in  verse  22,  and  now  this  definite  decision  is  in  the 
epistle  itself.  It  is  repeated  in  verse  28.  Having  come  to  one 
accord  (genomenois  homothumadon) .  On  this  adverb,  com- 
mon in  Acts,  see  on  i  :i4.  But  genomenois  clearly  means  that 
the  final  unity  was  the  result  of  the  Conference  (private  and 
public  talks).  The  Judaizers  are  here  brushed  to  one  side 
as  the  defeated  disturbers  that  they  really  were  who  had 
lacked  the  courage  to  vote  against  the  majority.    To  choose 


236      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

out  men  and  send  them  (ek/examenois  andras  pempsai  A  B  L, 
though  Aleph  C  D  read  eklexamenous  as  in  verse  22).  Pre- 
cisely the  same  idiom  as  in  verse  22,  "having  chosen  out  to 
send."  With  our  beloved  Barnabas  and  Paul  {sun  tois  agape- 
tois  hembn  Barnabdi  kai  Pauloi).  The  verbal  adjective 
agapetois  (common  in  the  N.T.)  definitely  sets  the  seal  of 
warm  approval  on  Barnabas  and  Paul.  Paul  (Gal.  2:9)  con- 
firms this  by  his  statement  concerning  the  right  hand  of 
fellowship  given. 

26.  Have  hazarded  their  lives  (paradedokosi  tas  psuchas 
auton).  Perfect  active  participle  dative  plural  of  paradidomi, 
old  word,  to  hand  over  to  another,  and  with  psuchas,  to  hand 
over  to  another  their  lives.  The  sufferings  of  Paul  and  Bar- 
nabas in  Pisidia  and  Lycaonia  were  plainly  well-known  just 
as  the  story  of  Judson  in  Burmah  is  today.  On  the  use  of 
"name"  here  see  on  3:6. 

27.  Who  themselves  also  shall  tell  you  the  same  things  by 
word  of  mouth  {kai  autous  dia  logou  apaggellontas  ta  auta). 
Literally,  "they  themselves  also  by  speech  announcing  the 
same  things."  The  present  participle,  as  here,  sometimes  is 
used  like  the  future  to  express  purpose  as  in  3:26  eulogounta 
after  apesteilen  and  so  here  apaggellontas  after  apestalkamen 
(Robertson,  Grammar^  p.  11 28).  Judas  and  Silas  are  specifi- 
cally endorsed  (perfect  active  indicative  of  apostello)  as 
bearers  of  the  epistle  who  will  also  verbally  confirm  the 
contents  of  the  letter. 

28.  To  the  Holy  Spirit  and  to  us  {toi  pneumati  toi  hagioi 
kai  hemin).  Dative  case  after  edoxen  (third  example,  verses 
22,  25,  28).  Definite  claim  that  the  church  in  this  action  had 
the  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  That  fact  was  plain  to  the 
church  from  what  had  taken  place  in  Caesarea  and  in  this 
campaign  of  Paul  and  Barnabas  (verse  8).  Jesus  had  prom- 
ised that  the  Holy  Spirit  would  guide  them  into  all  truth 
(John  16:13).  Even  so  the  church  deliberated  carefully 
before  deciding.    What  a  blessing  it  would  be  if  this  were 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  237 

always  true!  But  even  so  the  Judaizers  are  only  silenced 
for  the  present,  not  convinced  and  only  waiting  for  a  better 
day  to  start  over  again.  No  greater  burden  (meden  pleon 
baros).  The  restrictions  named  did  constitute  some  burden 
(cf.  Matt.  20:12),  for  the  old  word  baros  means  weight  or 
heaviness.  Morality  itself  is  a  restraint  upon  one's  impulses 
as  is  all  law  a  prohibition  against  license. 

29.  Than  these  necessary  things  {plen  tout  on  ton  epanagkes). 
This  old  adverb  (from  epi  and  anagk^)  means  on  compul- 
sion, of  necessity.  Here  only  in  the  N.T.  For  discussion  of 
these  items  see  on  verses  20  and  21.  In  comparison  with  the 
freedom  won  this  "burden"  is  light  and  not  to  be  regarded 
as  a  compromise  in  spite  of  the  arguments  of  Lightfoot  and 
Ramsay,  It  was  such  a  concession  as  any  converted  Gentile 
would  be  glad  to  make  even  if  "things  strangled"  be  in- 
cluded. This  "necessity"  was  not  a  matter  of  salvation 
but  only  for  fellowship  between  Jews  and  Gentiles.  The 
Judaizers  made  the  law  of  Moses  essential  to  salvation 
(15:16).  It  shall  be  well  with  you  {eu  praxete).  Ye  shall  fare 
well.  A  classical  idiom  used  here  effectively.  The  peace 
and  concord  in  the  fellowship  of  Jews  and  Gentiles  will 
justify  any  slight  concession  on  the  part  of  the  Gentiles. 
This  letter  is  not  laid  down  as  a  law,  but  it  is  the  judgment 
of  the  Jerusalem  Christians  for  the  guidance  of  the  Gentiles 
(16:4)  and  it  had  a  fine  effect  at  once  (15:30-35).  Trouble 
did  come  later  from  the  Judaizers  who  were  really  hostile 
to  the  agreement  in  Jerusalem,  but  that  opposition  in  no 
way  discredits  the  worth  of  the  work  of  this  Conference. 
No  sane  agreement  will  silence  perpetual  and  professional 
disturbers  like  these  Judaizers  who  will  seek  to  unsettle 
Paul's  work  in  Antioch,  in  Corinth,  in  Galatia,  in  Jerusalem, 
in  Rome.  Fare  ye  well  (Errosthe).  Valete.  Perfect  passive 
imperative  of  rhonnumi,  to  make  strong.  Common  at  the 
close  of  letters.  Be  made  strong,  keep  well,  fare  well.  Here 
alone  in  the  N.T.  though  some  MSS.  have  it  in  23  130. 


238      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

30.  So  they  {hoi  men  oun).  As  in  verse  3.  When  they  were 
dismissed  {apoluthentes).  First  aorist  passive  participle  of 
apoluo,  common  verb  to  loosen,  to  dismiss.  Possibly  (Hack- 
ett)  religious  services  were  held  as  in  verse  33  (cf.  13:3) 
and  perhaps  an  escort  for  part  of  the  way  as  in  verse  3. 
The  multitude  {to  plethos).  Public  meeting  of  the  church  as 
in  verses  1-3.  Deissmann  {Bible  Studies,  p.  232)  gives  illus- 
trations from  the  inscriptions  of  the  use  of  plethos  for  offi- 
cial, political,  and  religious  gatherings.  The  committee 
formally  "delivered"  {epedbkan)  the  epistle  to  the  church 
authorities. 

3 1 .  When  they  had  read  it  {anagnontes).  Second  aorist  active 
participle  of  anaginosko.  Public  reading,  of  course,  to  the 
church.  They  rejoiced  {echaresan).  Second  aorist  (ingressive) 
passive  indicative  of  chairo.  .  They  burst  into  exultant  joy 
showing  clearly  that  they  did  not  consider  it  a  weak  compro- 
mise, but  a  glorious  victory  of  Gentile  liberty.  For  the  conso- 
lation {epi  tei  paraklesei).  The  encouragement,  the  cheer  in 
the  letter.  See  parekalesan  in  verse  32.  Consolation  and 
exhortation  run  into  one  another  in  this  word. 

32.  Being  themselves  also  prophets  {kai  autoi  prophetai 
ontes).  As  well  as  Paul  and  Barnabas  and  like  Agabus  (11: 
27-30),  for-speakers  for  Christ  who  justify  the  commenda- 
tion in  the  letter  (verse  27)  "with  many  words"  {dia  logon 
pollou),  "with  much  talk,"  and  no  doubt  with  kindly  words 
concerning  the  part  played  at  the  Conference  by  Paul  and 
Barnabas.  Confirmed  {epesterixan).  See  on  14:22.  It  was  a 
glorious  time  with  no  Judaizers  to  disturb  their  fellowship 
as  in  1-3. 

33.  Some  time  {chronon).  Accusative  after  poiesantes^ 
"having  done  time."  How  long  we  do  not  know. 

34.  But  it  seemed  good  unto  Silas  to  abide  there  {edoxe  de 
Sildi  epimeinai  autou).  This  verse  is  not  in  the  Revised 
Version  or  in  the  text  of  Westcott  and  Hort,  being  absent 
from  Aleph  A  B  Vulgate,  etc.     It  is  clearly  an  addition  to 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  239 

help  explain  the  fact  that  Silas  is  back  in  Antioch  in  verse 
40.  But  the  "some  days"  of  verse  36  afforded  abundant 
time  for  him  to  return  from  Jerusalem.  He  and  Judas  went 
first  to  Jerusalem  to  make  a  report  of  their  mission. 

35.  Tarried  (dietribon) .  Imperfect  active  of  diatribo,  old 
verb  to  pass  time,  seen  already  in  12:19;  ^4*3>  28.  With  many 
others  also  {meta  kai  heteron  pollon).  A  time  of  general  re- 
vival and  naturally  so  after  the  victory  at  Jerusalem.  It  is 
at  this  point  that  it  is  probable  that  the  sad  incident  took 
place  told  by  Paul  in  Gal.  2:11-21.  Peter  came  up  to  see 
how  things  were  going  in  Antioch  after  Paul's  victory  in 
Jerusalem.  At  first  Peter  mingled  freely  with  the  Greek 
Christians  without  the  compunctions  shown  at  Caesarea  and 
for  which  he  had  to  answer  in  Jerusalem  (Acts  11:1-18). 
Rumours  of  Peter's  conduct  reached  Jerusalem  and  the  Ju- 
daizers  saw  a  chance  to  reopen  the  controversy  on  the  line 
of  social  customs,  a  matter  not  passed  on  at  the  Jerusalem 
Conference.  These  Judaizers  threaten  Peter  with  a  new  trial 
and  he  surrenders  and  is  followed  by  Barnabas  and  all  the 
Jewish  brethren  in  Antioch  to  the  dismay  of  Paul  who  boldly 
rebuked  Peter  and  Barnabas  and  won  them  back  to  his  view. 
It  was  a  crisis.  Some  would  even  date  the  Epistle  to  the 
Galatians  at  this  time  also,  an  unlikely  hypothesis. 

36.  Let  us  return  now  and  visit  the  brethren  (epistrepsantes 
de  episkepsometha  tous  adelphous).  Paul  takes  the  initiative 
as  the  leader,  all  the  more  so  if  the  rebuke  to  Peter  and  Bar- 
nabas in  Gal.  2:11-21  had  already  taken  place.  Paul  is  anx- 
ious, like  a  true  missionary,  to  go  back  to  the  fields  where 
he  has  planted  the  gospel.  He  uses  the  hortatory  subjunc- 
tive {episkepsometha)  for  the  proposal  (see  on  15:14  for  this 
verb).  Note  the  repeated  epi  {epi-strepsantes  and  epi- 
skepsometha). There  is  special  point  in  the  use  of  de  (short- 
ened form  of  ede),  now  at  this  juncture  of  affairs  (cf.  13:2). 
How  they  fare  (pos  echousin).  Indirect  question,  "how  they 
have  it."    The  precariousness  of  the  life  of  new  converts  in 


240     WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

pagan  lands  is  shown  in  all  of  Paul's  Epistles  (Furneaux). 
So  he  wanted  to  go  city  by  city  (kata  polin  pdsan). 

37.  Was  minded  to  take  with  them  (ebouleto  sunparalahein). 
Imperfect  middle  {ebouleto)^  not  aorist  middle  ebouleusato 
of  the  Textus  Receptus.  Barnabas  willed,  wished  and  stuck 
to  it  (imperfect  tense).  Sunparalahein  is  second  aorist  active 
infinitive  of  the  double  compound  sunparalamhano,  old 
verb  to  take  along  together  with,  used  already  about  John 
Mark  in  12:25  ^^^  ^Y  ^^^^  in  Gal.  2:1  about  Titus.  No- 
where else  in  the  N.T.  Barnabas  used  the  ingressive  aorist 
in  his  suggestion. 

38.  But  Paul  thought  not  good  to  take  with  them  {Paulos  de 
exiou — me  sunparalambanein  teuton).  The  Greek  is  far  more 
effective  than  this  English  rendering.  It  is  the  imperfect  ac- 
tive of  axioo,  old  verb  to  think  meet  or  right  and  the  present 
active  infinitive  of  the  same  verb  {sunparalambanb)  with 
negative  used  with  this  infinitive.  Literally,  "But  Paul 
kept  on  deeming  it  wise  not  to  be  taking  along  with  them 
this  one."  Barnabas  looked  on  it  as  a  simple  punctiliar  pro- 
posal (aorist  infinitive),  but  Paul  felt  a  lively  realization  of 
the  problem  of  having  a  quitter  on  his  hands  (present  infini- 
tive). Each  was  insistent  in  his  position  (two  imperfects). 
Paul  had  a  definite  reason  for  his  view  describing  John  Mark 
as  **him  who  withdrew  from  them  from  Pamphylia"  {ton 
apostanta  ap' auton  apo  Pamphulias).  Second  aorist  active 
articular  participle  of  aphistemi,  intransitive  use,  "the  one 
who  stood  off  from,  apostatized  from"  (our  very  word 
"apostasy").  And  also  as  the  one  who  "went  not  with  them 
to  the  work"  {kai  me  sunelthonta  autois  eis  to  ergon).  At 
Perga  Mark  had  faced  the  same  task  that  Paul  and  Barna- 
bas did,  but  he  flinched  and  flickered  and  quit.  Paul  de- 
clined to  repeat  the  experiment  with  Mark. 

39.  J  sharp  contention  (paroxusmos) .  Our  very  word 
paroxysm  in  English.  Old  word  though  only  twice  in  the 
N.T.   (here  and  Heb.   10:24),  ^^om  paroxuno,  to  sharpen 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  241 

{paray  oxus)  as  of  a  blade  and  of  the  spirit  (Acts  17:16;  I  Cor. 
13:5).  This  "son  of  consolation"  loses  his  temper  in  a  dis- 
pute over  his  cousin  and  Paul  uses  sharp  words  towards  his 
benefactor  and  friend.  It  is  often  so  that  the  little  irritations 
of  life  give  occasion  to  violent  explosions.  If  the  incident  in 
Gal.  2:ii— 21  had  already  taken  place,  there  was  a  sore  place 
already  that  could  be  easily  rubbed.  And  if  Mark  also 
joined  with  Peter  and  Barnabas  on  that  occasion,  Paul 
had  fresh  ground  for  irritation  about  him.  But  there  is  no 
way  to  settle  differences  about  men  and  we  can  only  agree 
to  disagree  as  Paul  and  Barnabas  did.  So  that  they  parted 
asunder  from  one  another  (hoste  apochoristhenai  autous  ap* 
allelon).  Actual  result  here  stated  by  hoste  and  the  first  aorist 
passive  infinitive  of  apochorizo,  old  verb  to  sever,  to  separate, 
here  only  and  Rev.  6:4  in  the  N.T.  The  accusative  of  general 
reference  (autous)  is  normal.  For  construction  with  hoste 
see  Robertson,  Grammar,  pp.  gggi.  And  Barnabas  took 
Mark  with  him  and  sailed  away  to  Cyprus  {ton  te  Barnaban 
paralabonta  ton  Markon  ekpleusai  eis  Kupron).  Second  in- 
finitival clause  ekpleusai  after  hoste  connected  by  te.  The 
same  participle  is  used  here  minus  sun,  paralabonta  (second 
aorist  active).  Barnabas  and  Mark  sailed  out  {ekpleusai 
from  ekpleo)  from  the  harbour  of  Antioch.  This  is  the  last 
glimpse  that  Luke  gives  us  of  Barnabas,  one  of  the  noblest 
figures  in  the  New  Testament.  Paul  has  a  kindly  reference 
to  him  in  I  Cor.  9:6.  No  one  can  rightly  blame  Barnabas 
for  giving  his  cousin  John  Mark  a  second  chance  nor  Paul 
for  fearing  to  risk  him  again.  One's  judgment  may  go  with 
Paul,  but  one's  heart  goes  with  Barnabas.  And  Mark  made 
good  with  Barnabas,  with  Peter  (I  Peter  5:13)  and  finally 
with  Paul  (Col.  4:10;  II  Tim.  4:11).  See  my  little  book  on 
John  Mark  {Making  Good  in  the  Ministry).  Paul  and  Bar- 
nabas parted  in  anger  and  both  in  sorrow.  Paul  owed  more 
to  Barnabas  than  to  any  other  man.  Barnabas  was  leaving 
the  greatest  spirit  of  the  time  and  of  all  times. 


242      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

40.  Chose  {epilexamenos).  First  aorist  middle  (indirect) 
participle  of  epilego,  choosing  for  himself,  as  the  successor 
of  Barnabas,  not  of  Mark  who  had  no  place  in  Paul's  plans 
at  this  time.  Commended  {paradotheis).  First  aorist  passive 
of  paradidbmi,  the  same  verb  employed  about  Paul  and 
Barnabas  (14:26)  on  their  return  from  the  first  tour.  It  is 
clear  now  that  the  sympathy  of  the  church  at  Antioch  is 
with  Paul  rather  than  with  Barnabas  in  the  cleavage  that 
has  come.  The  church  probably  recalled  how  in  the  pinch 
Barnabas  flickered  and  went  to  the  side  of  Peter  and  that 
it  was  Paul  who  for  the  moment  stood  Paulus  contra  mun- 
dum  for  Gentile  liberty  in  Christ  against  the  threat  of  the 
Judaizers  from  Jerusalem.  Silas  had  influence  in  the  church 
in  Jerusalem  (verse  22)  and  was  apparently  a  Roman  citizen 
(16:37)  *'^so.  He  is  the  Silas  or  Silvanus  of  the  epistles  (I 
Thess.  1:1;  II  Thess.  1:1;  II  Cor.  1:19;  I  Peter  5:12).  It  is 
remarkable  that  Peter  mentions  both  Mark  and  Silas  as  with 
him  (I  Peter  5:i2f.)  at  the  same  time. 

41.  Went  through  (diercheto).  Imperfect  middle.  So  Paul 
went  forth  on  his  second  mission  tour  with  heart-aches  and 
high  hopes  mingled  together.  Syria  and  Cilicia  {ten  Surian 
kai  ten  Kilikian).  He  took  the  opposite  course  from  the  first 
tour,  leaving  Cyprus  to  Barnabas  and  Mark.  Probably 
Paul  had  established  these  churches  while  in  Tarsus  after 
leaving  Jerusalem  (Acts  9:30;  Gal.  1:21).  Paul  would  go 
"by  the  Gulf  of  Issus  through  the  Syrian  Gates,  a  narrow 
road  between  steep  rocks  and  the  sea,  and  then  inland, 
probably  past  Tarsus  and  over  Mt.  Taurus  by  the  Cilician 
gates"  (Page),  This  second  tour  will  occupy  Luke's  story 
in  Acts  through  18:22. 


CHAPTER  XVI 

1.  And  he  came  also  to  Derbe  and  Lystra  {katentesen  de  kai 
eis  Derben  kai  eis  Lustran).  First  aorist  active  of  katantdo, 
late  verb  to  come  down  to,  to  arrive  at.  He  struck  Derbe 
first  of  the  places  in  the  first  tour  which  was  the  last  city- 
reached  then.  Timothy  (Timotheos).  Apparently  a  native 
of  Lystra  ("there,"  ekei),  his  Hebrew  mother  named  Eunice 
and  grandmother  Lois  (H  Tim.  i  :$)  and  his  Greek  father's 
name  not  known.  He  may  have  been  a  proselyte,  but  not 
necessarily  so  as  Timothy  was  taught  the  Scriptures  by  his 
mother  and  grandn^ther  (H  Tim.  3:15),  and,  if  a  proselyte, 
he  would  have  had  Timothy  circumcised.  It  is  idle  to  ask 
if  Paul  came  on  purpose  to  get  Timothy  to  take  Mark's 
place.  Probably  Timothy  was  about  eighteen  years  of  age, 
a  convert  of  Paul's  former  visit  a  few  years  before  (I 
Tim.  1:2)  and  still  young  twelve  years  later  (I  Tim.  4:12). 
Paul  loved  him  devotedly  (I  Tim.  1:3;  5 123 ;  II  Tim.  3:15; 
Phil.  2:i9f.).  It  is  a  glorious  discovery  to  find  a  real  young 
preacher  for  Christ's  work. 

2.  fFas  well  reported  of  {emartureito).  Imperfect  passive. 
It  was  a  continuous  witness  that  was  borne  the  young  disciple 
both  in  his  home  town  of  Lystra  and  In  Derbe.  Already  he 
had  so  borne  himself  that  his  gifts  and  graces  for  the  minis- 
try were  recognized.  It  is  a  wise  precaution  that  the  ap- 
proval of  the  local  church  is  necessary  for  the  licensing  and 
the  ordaining  of  a  preacher.  If  God  has  called  a  man  for  the 
work  signs  of  it  will  be  manifest  to  others. 

3.  Him  would  Paul  have  to  go  forth  with  him  {touton  ethel- 
esen  ho  Paulos  sun  autoi  exelthein).  This  one  (note  emphatic 
position)  Paul  wanted  (first  aorist  active  indicative  of  thelo 
with  temporal  augment  as  if  from  ethelo  the  old  form).   Here 

243 


244      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

was  a  gifted  young  man  who  was  both  Jew  and  Greek.  He 
took  and  circumcised  him  {labon  perietem^n  auton).  Any- 
one could  perform  this  rite.  Paul  had  stoutly  resisted  cir- 
cumcision in  the  case  of  Titus,  a  pure  Greek  (Gal.  2:3,  5),  be- 
cause the  whole  principle  of  Gentile  liberty  was  at  stake. 
But  Timothy  was  both  Jew  and  Greek  and  would  continually 
give  offence  to  the  Jews  with  no  advantage  to  the  cause  of 
Gentile  freedom.  So  here  for  the  sake  of  expediency,  "be- 
cause of  the  Jews"  {dia  tous  loudaious),  Paul  voluntarily  re- 
moved this  stumbling-block  to  the  ministry  of  Timothy. 
Otherwise  Timothy  could  not  have  been  allowed  to  preach 
m  the  synagogues.  Idem  non  est  semper  idem.  But  Timothy's 
case  was  not  the  case  of  Titus.  Here  it  was  a  question  of 
efficient  service,  not  an  essential  of  salvation.  Hovey  notes 
that  Timothy  was  circumcised  because  of  Jewish  unbe- 
lievers, not  because  of  Jewish  believers.  Was  a  Greek  {Hellen 
huperchen).  Imperfect  active  in  indirect  assertion  where 
ordinarily  the  present  huparchei  would  be  retained,  pos- 
sibly indicating  that  his  father  was  no  longer  living. 

4.  They  delivered  them  {paredidosan  autois).  Imperfect 
active,  kept  on  delivering  to  them  in  city  after  city.  This  is  a 
proof  of  Paul's  loyalty  to  the  Jerusalem  compact  (Knowling). 
The  circumcision  of  Timothy  would  indicate  also  that  the 
points  involved  were  under  discussion  and  that  Paul  felt 
no  inconsistency  in  what  he  did.  The  decrees  {ta  dogmata). 
Old  word  from  doked,  to  give  an  opinion.  It  is  used  of  public 
decrees  of  rulers  (Luke  2:1;  Acts  17:7),  of  the  requirements 
of  the  Mosaic  law  (Col.  2:14),  and  here  of  the  regulations  or 
conclusions  of  the  Jerusalem  Conference.  Silas  was  with 
Paul  and  his  presence  gave  added  dignity  to  the  passing  out 
of  the  decrees,  a  charter  of  Gentile  freedom,  since  he  was 
one  of  the  committee  from  Jerusalem  to  Antioch  (15:22, 
27,  32).  Which  had  been  ordained  {ta  kekrimena).  Perfect 
passive  articular  participle  of  krino,  to  judge,  emphasizing 
the  permanence  of  the  conclusions  reached  by  the  apostles 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  245 

and  elders  in  Jerusalem.  For  to  keep  (phulassein) .  This 
present  active  infinitive  likewise  accents  that  it  is  a  charter 
of  liberty  for  continual  living,  not  a  temporary  compromise. 

5.  fVere  strengthened  {estereounto).  Imperfect  passive  of 
stereoo,  old  verb  to  make  firm  and  solid  like  the  muscles 
(Acts  3:7,  16),  these  three  the  only  examples  in  the  N.T. 
Increased  (eperisseuon).  Imperfect  active  of  the  old  and 
common  verb  perisseuo  from  perissos  (overplus).  The  bless- 
ing of  God  was  on  the  work  of  Paul,  Silas,  and  Timothy  in 
the  form  of  a  continuous  revival. 

6.  The  region  of  Phrygia  and  Galatia  {ten  Phrugian  kai 
Galatiken  choran).  This  is  probably  the  correct  text  with 
one  article  and  apparently  describes  one  "Region"  or  Dis- 
trict in  The  Province  of  Galatia  which  was  also  Phrygian 
(the  old-ethnographic  name  with  which  compare  the  use  of 
Lycaonia  in  14:6).  Strictly  speaking  Derbe  and  Lystra, 
though  in  the  Province  of  Galatia,  were  not  Phrygian,  and 
so  Luke  would  here  be  not  resumptive  of  the  record  in  verses 
1-5;  but  a  reference  to  the  country  around  Iconium  and 
Antioch  in  Pisidia  in  North  Galatia  is  not  included.  This 
verse  is  hotly  disputed  at  every  point  by  the  advocates  of 
the  North  Galatian  theory  as  represented  by  Chase  and  the 
South  Galatian  theory  by  Ramsay.  Whatever  is  true  in 
regard  to  the  language  of  Luke  here  and  in  18:23,  it  is  still 
possible  for  Paul  in  Gal.  i  :2  to  use  the  term  Galatia  of  the 
whole  province  of  that  name  which  could,  in  fact,  apply  to 
either  South  or  North  Galatia  or  to  both.  He  could,  of 
course,  use  it  also  in  the  ethnographic  sense  of  the  real 
Gauls  or  Celts  who  dwelt  in  North  Galatia.  Certainly  the 
first  tour  of  Paul  and  Barnabas  was  in  the  Province  of 
Galatia  though  touching  only  the  Regions  of  Pisidia, 
Phrygia,  and  Lycaonia,  which  province  included  besides  the 
Gauls  to  the  north.  In  this  second  tour  Lycaonia  has  been 
already  touched  (Derbe  and  Lystra)  and  now  Phrygia. 
The  question  arises  why  Luke  here  and  in  18:23  adds  the 


246      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

term  "of  Galatia"  {Galatiken)  though  not  in  13:14  (Pisidian 
Antioch)  nor  in  14:6  (cities  of  Lycaonia).  Does  Luke  mean 
to  use  "of  Galatia"  in  the  same  ethnographic  sense  as  "of 
Phrygia"  or  does  he  here  add  the  province  (Galatia)  to  the 
name  of  the  Region  (Phrygia)  ?  In  itself  either  view  is  possi- 
ble and  it  really  matters  very  little  except  that  the  question 
is  raised  whether  Paul  went  into  the  North  Galatian  Region 
^n  this  occasion  or  later  (18:23).  He  could  have  done  so  and 
the  Epistle  be  addressed  to  the  churches  of  South  Galatia, 
North  Galatia,  or  the  province  as  a  whole.  But  the  Greek 
participle  koluthenUs  ('^Jhajdag  beeri^  forbidden ")  plays  a 
part  in  the  argument  that  cannot  be  overlooked  whether 
Luke  means  to  say  that  Paul  went  north  or  not.  This  aorist 
passive  participle  of  ^o/uo,  to  hinder,  can  only  express  simulta- 
neous or  antecedent  action,  not  subsequent  action  as  Ram- 
say argues.  No  example  of  the  so-called  subsequent  use  of 
the  aorist  participle  has  ever  been  found  in  Greek  as  all 
Greek  grammarians  agree  (Robertson,  Grammar^  pp.  860-63, 
II 12-14).  Th^  o^ly  natural  meaning  of  kbluthentes  is  that 
Paul  withSilas  and  Timothy  "passed  through  the  region  of 
Phrygia  and  Galatia"  because  tKey  were  hindered  by  the 
Holy  Spirit  from  speaking  the  word  in  Asia  (the  Province 
of  Alia  of  whicir~Epiiebus  was  the  chief  city  and  west  of 
Derbe  and  Lystra).  This  construction  implies  that  the 
country  called  "the  region  of  Phrygia  and  Galatia"  is  not 
in  the  direct  line  west  toward  Ephesus.  What  follows  in 
verse  7  throws  further  light  on  the  point. 

7.  Over  against  Mysia  {kata  ten  Musian).  This  was  an  ill- 
defined  region  rather  north  and  west  of  Phrygia.  The  Ro- 
mans finally  absorbed  most  of  it  in  the  Province  of  Asia. 
They  assayed  to  go  into  Bithynia  {epeirazon  eis  ten  Bithunian 
poreuthenai) .  Conative  imperfect  of  peirazo  and  ingressive 
aorist  passive  infinitive  of  poreuomai.  Now  Bithynia  is  north- 
cast  of  Mysia  and  north  of  Galatia  (province).  Clearly 
Luke  means  to  say  that  Paul  had,  when  hindered  by  the 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  247 

Holy  Spirit  from  going  west  into  Asia,  gone  north  so  as  to 
come  in  front  of  Bithynia.  This  journey  would  take  him 
directly  through  Phrygia  and  the  North  Galatian  country 
(the  real  Gauls  or  Celts).  This  is,  to  my  mind,  the  strongest 
argument  for  the  North  Galatian  view  in  these  verses  6  and 
7.  The  grammar  and  the  topography  bring  Paul  right  up  to 
Bithynia  (north  of  the  old  Galatia).  It  is  verses  6  and  7 
that  make  me  pause  before  accepting  the  plausible  argu- 
ments of  Ramsay  for  the  South  Galatian  theory.  In  itself 
the  problem  is  nothing  like  so  important  or  so  determinative 
as  he  makes  it.  But  shall  we  smash  Luke's  grammar  to 
pieces  to  bolster  up  a  theory  of  criticism?  And  the  Spirit  of 
Jesus  suffered  them  not  (kai  ouk  eiasen  autousto  pneuma  lesou). 
The  same  Spirit  who  in  verse  6  had  forbidden  going  into 
Asia  now  closed  the  door  into  Bithynia.  This  expression 
occurs  nowhere  else,  but  we  have  the  spirit  of  Christ  (Rom. 
8:9)  and  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ  (Phil.  1:19).  Eiasen  is 
first  aorist  active  indicative  of  eao,  old  verb  to  allow. 

8.  Passing  by  Mysia  {parelthontes  ten  Musian).  Literally, 
passing  alongside  or  skirting  Mysia,  neglecting  it  without 
preaching  there.  Strictly  they  passed  through  part  of  it  to 
reach  Troas.  To  Troas  (eis  Troiada).  This  city,  named 
Alexandria  Troas  after  Alexander  the  Great,  was  the  sea- 
port of  Mysia,  though  a  Roman  colony  and  not  counted 
as  part  of  either  Asia  or  Bithynia.  New  Ilium,  on  the  site 
of  the  old  Troy,  was  four  miles  farther  north.  It  was  the 
place  to  take  ship  for  Philippi.  Twice  again  Paul  will  be 
here  (II  Cor.  2:12;  Acts  20:6). 

9.  A  vision  (horama).  Old  word,  eleven  times  in  Acts, 
once  in  Matt.  17:9.  Twice  Paul  had  been  hindered  by  the 
Holy  Spirit  from  going  where  he  wanted  to  go-  Most  men 
would  have  gone  back  home  with  such  rebuffs,  but  not  so 
Paul.  Now  the  call  is  positive  and  not  negative,  to  go  "far 
hence  to  the  Gentiles"  (22:21).  He  had  little  dreamed  of 
such  a  call  when  he  left  Antioch.     Paul's  frequent  visions 


248      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

always  came  at  real  crises  in  his  life.  A  man  of  Macedonia 
{aner  Makedon).  Ramsay  follows  Renan  in  the  view  that 
this  was  Luke  with  whom  Paul  had  conversed  about  condi- 
tions in  Macedonia.  Verse  10  makes  it  plain  that  Luke  was 
now  in  the  party,  but  when  he  joined  them  we  do  not  know. 
Some  hold  that  Luke  lived  at  Antioch  in  Syria  and  came  on 
with  Paul  and  Silas,  others  that  he  joined  them  later  in 
Galatia,  others  that  he  appeared  now  either  as  Paul's  physi- 
cian or  new  convert.  Ramsay  thinks  that  Philippi  was  his 
home  at  this  time.  But,  whatever  is  true  about  Luke,  the 
narrative  must  not  be  robbed  of  its  supernatural  aspect 
(10:10;  22:17).  Was  standing  {en  hestos).  Second  perfect 
active  participle  of  histemi,  intransitive,  periphrastic  im- 
perfect. Vivid  picture.  Help  us  {boetheson  hemin).  Ingres- 
sive  first  aorist  active  imperative  of  boetheo  {boe^  thed),  to 
run  at  a  cry,  to  help.  The  man  uses  the  plural  for  all  in- 
cluding himself.  It  was  the  cry  of  Europe  for  Christ. 

10.  fVe  sought  (ezetesamen).  This  sudden  use  of  the  plural, 
dropped  in  17:1  when  Paul  leaves  Philippi,  and  resumed  in 
20:5  when  Paul  rejoins  Luke  in  Philippi,  argues  conclusively 
that  Luke,  the  author,  is  in  the  party  ("we"  portions  of  Acts) 
and  shows  in  a  writer  of  such  literary  skill  as  Luke  that  he  is 
not  copying  a  document  in  a  blundering  sort  of  way.  Paul 
told  his  vision  to  the  party  and  they^were  all  ready  to  re- 
spond to  the  call.  Concluding  (sunbibazontes) .  A  very  strik- 
ing word,  present  active  participle  of  sunbibazo,  old  verb  to 
make  go  together,  jto^alesce  or  knit  together,  to  make  this 
and  that  agree  and  so  to  conclude.  Already  in  9:22  of  Paul's 
preaching.  This  word  here  gives  a  good  illustration  of  the 
proper  use  of  the  reason  in  connection  with  revelation,  to 
decide  whether  it  is  a  revelation  from  God,  to  find  out  what 
it  means  for  us,  and  to  see  that  we  obey  the  revelation 
when  understood.  God  had  called  them  to  preach  to  the 
Macedonians.    They  had  to  go. 

11.  Setting  sail  (anachthentes).    Same  word  in  13:13  which 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  249 

see.  We  made  a  straight  course  (euthudromesamen).  First 
aorist  active  indicative  of  compound  verb  euthudromeo  (in 
Philo)  from  adjective  euthudromos  (in  Strabo),  running  a 
straight  course  (euthus,  dromos).  In  the  N.T.  only  here  and 
21:1.  It  is  a  nautical  term  ior  sailing  hefnrp  thp  wind.  Luke 
has  a  true  feeling  for  the  sea.  To  Samothrace  {eis  Samo- 
thrdiken).  A  small  island  in  the  Aegean  about  halfway 
between  Troas  and  Neapolis.  The  day  following  (tei  epiou- 
sei).  Locative  case  of  time  with  hemerdi  (day)  to  be  sup- 
plied (7:26;  20:15;  21:18;  23:11).  With  adverse  winds  it 
took  five  days  to'  make  the  run  of  125  miles  (20:6).  To 
Neapolis  {eis  NeanPolin).  To  New  Town  (Newton,  Naples, 
Neapolis).  The  port  of  Philippi  ten  miles  distant,  Thracian, 
but  reckoned  as  Macedonian  after  Vespasian. 

12.  To  Philippi  {eis  Philippous).  The  plural  like  Athenai 
(Athens)  is  probably  due  to  separate  sections  of  the  city 
united  (Winer-Moulton,  Grammar ,  p.  220).  The  city  (ancient 
name  Krenides  or  Wells)  was  renamed  after  himself  by 
Philip,  the  father  of  Alexander  the  Great.  It  was  situated 
about  a  mile  east  of  the  small  stream  Gangites  which  flows 
into  the  river  Strymon  some  thirty  miles  away.  In  this  valley 
the  Battle  of  Philippi  was  fought  B.C.  42  between  the  Second 
Triumvirate  (Octavius,  Antonius,  Lepidus)  and  Brutus 
and  Cassius.  In  memory  of  the  victory  Octavius  made  it  a 
colony  {kolonia)  with  all  the  privileges  of  Roman  citizenship, 
such  as  freedom  from  scourging,  freedom  from  arrest  save 
in  extreme  cases,  and  the  right  of  appeal  to  the  emperor. 
This  Latin  word  occurs  here  alone  in  the  N.T.  Octavius 
planted  here  a  colony  of  Roman  veterans  with  farms 
attached,  a  military  outpost  and  a  miniature  of  Rome  it- 
self. The  language  was  Latin.  Here  Paul  is  face  to  face  with 
the  Roman  power  and  empire  in  a  new  sense.  He  was  a  new 
Alexander,  come  from  Asia  to  conquer  Europe  for  Christ, 
a  new  Caesar  to  build  the  Kingdom  of  Christ  on  the  work  of 
Alexander  and  Caesar.    One  need  not  think  that  Paul  was 


250      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

conscious  of  all  that  was  involved  in  destiny  for  the  world. 
Phillppi  was  on  the  Egnatian  Way,  one  of  the  great  Roman 
roads,  tTiat  ran  from  here  to  Dyrrachium  on  the  shores  of 
the  Adriatic,  a  road  that  linked  the  east  with  the  west.  Tht 
first  of  the  district  {prote  tis  truridos).  Philippi  was  not  the 
first  city  of  Macedonia  nor  does  Luke  say  so.  That  honour 
belonged  to  Thessalonica  and  even  Amphipolis  was  larger 
than  Philippi.  It  is  not  clear  whether  by  meris  Luke  means 
a  formal  division  of  the  province,  though  the  KoinS  has 
examples  of  this  geographical  sense  (papyri).  There  is 
no  article  with  prote  and  Luke  may  not  mean  to  stress  unduly 
the  position  of  Philippi  in  comparison  with  Amphipolis. 
But  it  was  certainly  a  leading  city  of  this  district  of  Mace- 
donia. fVe  were  tarrying  {emen  diatribontes).  Periphrastic 
imperfect  active. 

13.  By  a  river  side  {para  potamon).  The  little  river  Gan- 
gites  (or  Gargites)  was  one  mile  west  of  the  town.  Philippi 
as  a  military  outpost  had  few  Jews.  There  was  evidentfy 
no  synagogue  inside  the  city,  but  "without  the  gates" 
(exo  tes  pules)  they  had  noticed  an  enclosure  "where  we 
supposed  "  {hou  enomizomen,  correct  text,  imperfect  active), 
probably  as  they  came  into  the  city,  "was  a  place  of  prayer" 
(proseucken  einai).  Infinitive  with  accusative  of  general 
reference  in  indirect  discourse.  Proseuche  is  common  in  the 
LXX  and  the  N.T.  for  the  act  of  prayer  as  in  Acts  2:42, 
then  for  a  place  of  prayer  either  a  synagogue  (III  Mace. 
7:20)  or  more  often  an  open  air  enclosure  near  the  sea  or  a 
river  where^  there  was  water  for  ceremoniaLablutions.  The 
word  occurs  also  in  heathen  writers  for  a  place  of  prayer 
(Schiirer,  Jewish  People,  Div.  II,  Vol.  II,  p.  69,  Engl.  Tr.). 
Deissmann  {Bible  Studies,  p.  222)  quotes  an  Egyptian  in- 
scription of  the  third  century  B.C.  with  this  sense  of  the  word 
and  one  from  Panticapaeum  on  the  Black  Sea  of  the  first 
century  a.d.  {Light  from  the  Ancient  East,  p.  102).  Juvenal 
(III.  296)  has  a  sneering  reference  to  the  Jewish  proseucha. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  25 1 

Josephus  {Ant.  XIV.  10,  23)  quotes  a  decree  of  Halicarnas- 
sus  which  allowed  the  Jews  "to  make  their  prayers  (proseu- 
chas)  on  the  seashore  according  to  the  custom  of  their 
fathers."  There  was  a  synagogue  in  Thessalonica,  but  ap- 
parently none  in  Amphipolis  and  Apollonia  (Acts  17:1). 
The  rule,  of  the  rabbis  required  ten  men  to  constitute  a  syna- 
gogue, but  here  were  gathered  only  a  group  of  women  at 
the  hour  of  prayer.  ln_pioneer  days  in_jthis__CQmilry  it  was  a 
common  thing  to  preach  underlJusFaTbours  in  the  open  air.  "^ 
John  Wesley  and  George  Whitfield  were  great  open  air 
preachers.  Paul  did  not  have  an  inspiring  beginning  for  his 
work  in  Europe,  butjie  took  hold  where  he  could-  The  con- 
jecture was  correct.  It  was  a  place  of  prayer,  but  only  a 
bunch  of  women  had  come  together  {tais  sunelthousais  gun- 
aixin),  excuse  enough  for  not  preaching  to  some  preachers,/ 
but  not  to  Paul  and  his  party.  The  "man  of  Macedonia" 
turned  out  to  be  a  group  of  women  (Furneaux).  Mace- 
donian inscriptions  show  greater  freedoni^r  women  in  Mape- 
donia  than  eisgwliere  at  this  time  and  confirm  Luke's  story 
of  the  activities  of  women  in  Philippi,  Thessalonica,  Berea. 
We  sat  down  and  spake  {kathisantes  elaloumen).  Having  taken 
our_seals  (aorist  active  participle  of  kathizo)  we  began  to 
speak  or  preach  (inchoative  imperfect  of  laleo,  often  used 
for  preaching).  Sitting  was  the  Jewish  attitude  for  public 
speaking.  It  was  not  mere  conversation,  but  more  likely  con- 
versational preaching  of  an  historical  and  expository  char- 
acter! Luk?s~use  of^he  first  person  plural  implies  that 
each  of  the  four  (Paul,  Silas,  Timothy,  Luke)  preached  in 
turn,  with  Paul  as  chief  speaker. 

14.  Lydia  (Ludia).  Her  birthplace  was  Thyatira  in  Lydia. 
She  may  have  been  named  after  the  land,  though  Lydia  is 
a  common  female  name  (see  Horace).  Lydia  was  itself  a 
Macedonian  colony  (Strabo,  XIII.  4).  Thyatira  (note  plural 
form  like  Philippi  and  one  of  the  seven  churches  of  Asia 
here  Rev.  2:18)  was  famous  for  its  purple  dyes  as  old  as 


252      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Homer  (Iliad,  IV.  141)  and  had  a  guild  of  dyers  {hoi  hapheis) 
as  inscriptions  show.  A  seller  of  purple  (porphuropolis).  A 
female  seller  of  purple  fabrics  (porphura,  polis).  Late  word, 
masculine  form  in  an  inscription.  There  was  a  great  demand 
for  this  fabric  as  it  was  used  on  the  official  toga  at  Rome  and 
in  Roman  colonies.  We  still  use  the  term  "royal  purple." 
See  on  Luke  16:19.  Evidently  Lydia  was  a  woman  of  some 
means  to  carry  on  such  an  important  enterprise  from  her 
native  city.  She  may  have  been  a  freed-woman,  since 
racial  names  were  often  borne  by  slaves.  One  that  worshipped 
God  {sebomene  ton  theon).  ^God-fearer  or  proselyte  of  the 
gate.  There  was  a  Jewish  settlement  in  Thyatira  which 
was  especially  interested  in  the  dyeing  industry.  She  prob" 
ably  became  a  proselyte  there.  Whether  this  was  true  of 
the  other  women  we  do  not  know.  They  may  have  been 
Jewesses  or  proselytes  like  Lydia,  probably  all  of  them 
employees  of  hers  in  her  business.  When  Paul  writes  to 
the  Philippians  he  does  not  mention  Lydia  who  may  have 
died  meanwhile  and  who  certainly  was  not  Paul's  wife.  She 
was  wealthy  and  probably  a  widow.     Heard  us  (ekouen). 

JLrnperfect^active  of  akouOj  was  listening,  really  listening  and 
she  keptit  up,  listening  to  each  oTtEese  new  and  strange 
preachers.  Opened  (dienoixen).  First  aorist  active  indicative 
of  dianoigo,  old  word,  dcuiblecompound  (dia^  ana^  oigo)  to 

_open_up  wide  or  completely  like  a  folding  door  (both  sides, 
diay  two).  Only  the  Lord  could  do  that.  Jesus  had  opened 
(the  same  verb)  the  mind  of  the  disciples  to  understand  the 
Scriptures  (Luke  24:45).  To  give  heed  (prcsechein) .  To  hold 
the  mind  (ton  noun  understood),  present  active  infinitive. 
She  kept  her  mind  centred  on  the  things  spoken  by  Paul 
whose  words  gripped  her  attention.  She  rightly  perceived 
that  Paul  was  the  foremost  one  of  the  group.  He  had  personal 
magnetism  and  power  of  intellect  that  the  Spirit  of  God  used 
to  win  the  heart  of  this  remarkable  woman  to  Christ.  It 
was  worth  coming  to  Philippi  to  win  this  fine  personality  to 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  253 

the  Kingdom  of  God.  She  will  be  the  chief  spirit  in  this 
church  that  will  give  Paul  more  joy  and  co-operation  than 
any  of  his  churches.  It  is  not  stated  that  she  was  converted 
on  the  first  Sabbath,  though  this  may  have  been  the  case. 
"One  solitary  convert,  a  woman,  and  she  already  a  seeker 
after  God,  and  a  native  of  that  very  Asia  where  they  had 
been  forbidden  to  preach"  (Furneaux).  But  a  new  era 
had  dawned  for  Europe  and  for  women  in  the  conversion 
of  Lydia.  ^ 

15.  And  when  she  was  baptized  {hds  de  ebaptisthe).  First 
aorist  passive  indicative  of  baptizo.  The  river  Gangites  was 
handy  for  the  ordinance  and  she  had  now  been  converted 
and  was  ready  to  make  this  public  declaration  of  her  faith 
in  Jesus  Christ.  Jnd  her  household  {kai  ho  oikos  antes).  Who 
constituted  her  "household"  ^  The  term  oikoSy  originally 
means  the  building  as  below,  "into  my  house"  and  then  it 
includes  the  inmates  of  a  house.  There  is  nothing  here  to 
show  whether  Lydia's  "household"  went  beyond  "the 
women  "  employed  by  her  who  like  her  had  heard  the  preach- 
ing of  Paul  and  had  believed.  "Possibly  Euodia  and  Syn- 
tyche  and  the  other  women,  Phil.  4:2,  3,  may  have  been  in- 
cluded in  the  family  of  Lydia,  who  may  have  employed  many 
slaves  and  freed  women  in  her  trade"  (Knowling).  "This 
statement  cannot  be  claimed  as  any  argument  for  infant 
baptism,  since  the  Greek  word  may  mean  her  servants  or 
her  work-people"  (Furneaux).  In  the  household  baptisms 
(Cornelius,  Lydia,  the  jailor,  Crispus)  one  sees  "infants" 
or  not  according  to  his  predilections  or  preferences.  //  ye 
have  judged  me  (ei  kekrikate  me).  Condition  of  the  first  class, 
assumed  to  be  true  (ei  and  the  indicative,  here  perfect  active 
of  krino).  She  had  confessed  her  faith  and  submitted  to 
baptism  as  proof  that  she  was  "faithful  to  the  Lord"  (pisten 
toi  kurioi),  believing  on  the  Lord.  "  If  she  was  fit  for  that, 
surely  she  was  fit  to  be  their  hostess"  (Furneaux).  And  Paul 
and  his  party  had  clearly  no  comfortable  place  to  stay  while 


254      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

in  Philippi.  The  ancient  hotels  or  inns  were  abominable. 
Evidently  Paul  demurred  for  there  were  four  of  them  and  he 
did  not  wish  to  sacrifice  his  independence  or  be  a  burden  even 
to  a  woman  of  wealth.  And  she  constrained  us  (kai  parebia- 
sato  hemas).  Effective  first  aorist  middle  of  parabiazomai^ 
late  word,  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Luke  24:29.  Some  moral 
force  {bid)  or  hospitable  persuasion  was  required  (cf.  I  Sam. 
28:23),  but  Lydia  had  her  way  as  women  usually  do.  So  he 
accepted  Lydia's  hospitality  in  Philippi,  though  he  worked 
for  his  own  living  in  Thessalonica  (II  Thess.  3:8)  and  else- 
where (II  Cor.  1 1 :9).  So  far  only  women  have  been  won  to 
Christ  in  Philippi.  The  use  of  "us"  shows  that  Luke  was  not 
a  householder  in  Philippi. 

16.  A  spirit  of  divination  (pneuma  puthona).  So  the  cor- 
rect text  with  accusative  (apparition,  a  spirit,  a  python),  not 
the  genitive  (puthonos).  Hesychius  defines  it  as  daimonion 
manikon  (a  spirit  of  divination).  The  etymology  of  the  word 
is  unknown.  Bengel  suggests  puthesthai  from  punthanomai, 
-^to  inquire.  Python  was  the  name  given  to  the  serpent  that 
kept  guard  at  Delphi,  slain  by  Apollo,  who  was  called 
Puthios  Apollo  and  the  prophetess  at  Delphi  was  termed 
Pythia.  Certainly  Luke  does  not  mean  to  credit  Apollo 
with  a  real  existence  (I  Cor.  8:4).  But  Plutarch  (a.d.  50-100) 
says  that  the  term  puthones  was  applied  to  ventriloquists 
(eggastrimuthoi).  In  the  LXX  those  with  familiar  spirits  are 
called  by  this  word  ventriloquists  (Lev.  19:31,  20:6,  27,  in- 
cluding the  witch  of  Endor  I  Sam.  28:7).  It  is  possible  that 
this  slave  girljiad_th]s  gift  of  prophecy  "by  soothsaying" 
(manteuomene).  Present  middle  participle  of  manteuomaiy 
old  heathen  word  (in  contrast  with  propheteuo)  for  acting 
the  seer  {mantis)  and  this  kin  to  mainomai,  to  be  mad,  like 
the  howling  dervishes  of  later  times.  This  is  the  so-called 
instrumental  use  of  the  circumstantial  participles.  Brought 
{pareichen).  Imperfect  active  of  parecho,  a  steady  source  of 
income.    Much  gain  {ergasian  pollen).   Work,  business,  from 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  255 

ergazomai,  to  work.  Her  masters  {tois  kuriois  antes).  Dative 
case.  Joint  owners  of  this  poor  slave  girl  who  were  exploit- 
ing her  calamity,  whatever  it  was,  for  selfish  gain,  just  as 
men  and  women  today  exploit  girls  and  women  in  the  "white 
slave"  trade.  As  a  fortune-teller  she  was  a  valuable  asset 
for  all  the  credulous  dupes  of  the  community.  Simon  Magus 
in  Samaria  and  Elymas  Barjesus  in  Cyprus  had  won  power 
and  wealth  as  soothsayers. 

17.  The  Most  High  God  {ton  theou  ton  hupsistou).  Pagan 
inscriptions  use  this  language  for  the  Supreme  Being.  It 
looks  like  supernatural  testimony  like  that  borne  by  the 
demoniacs  to  Jesus  as  "son  of  the  Most  High  God"  (Luke 
8:28.  Cfi  also  Mark  1:24;  3:11;  Matt.  8:29;  Luke  4:41,  etc.). 
She  may  have  heard  Paul  preach  about  Jesus  as  the  way  of 
salvation.  The  way  of  salvation  (hodon  soterias),  A  way  of 
salvation,  strictly  speaking  (no  article).  There  were  many 
"ways  of  salvation"  offered  to  men  then  as  now. 

18.  She  did  (epoiei).  Imperfect  active,  kept  it  up  for  many 
days.  The  strange  conduct  gave  Paul  and  the  rest  an  un- 
pleasant prominence  in  the  community.  Being  sore  troubled 
(diaponetheis) .  First  aorist  passive  of  diaponeb,  old  verb, 
to  work  laboriously,  then  in  passive  to  be  "worked  up," 
displeased,  worn  out.  In  the  N.T.  only  here  and  4:2  which 
see  (there  of  the  Sadducees  about  Peter*s  preaching).  Paul 
was  grieved,  annoyed,  indignant.  He  wanted  no  testimony 
from  a  source  like  this  any  more  than  he  did  the  homage  of 
the  people  of  Lystra  (14:14).  That  very  hour  {autei  tei  hordi). 
Locative  case  of  time  and  familiar  Lukan  idiom  in  his  Gospel, 
"at  the  hour  itself."  The  cure  was  instantaneous.  Paul, 
like  Jesus,  distinguished  between  the  demon  and  the  indi- 
vidual. 

19.  Was  gone  {exelthen).  Was  gone  out  of  the  slave  girl, 
second  aorist  active  indicative  of  exerchomai.  "The  two 
most  important  social  revolutions  worked  by  Christianity 
have   been   the  elevation  of  woman   and  the  abolition  of 


256      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

slavery"  (Furneaux).  Both  are  illustrated  here  (Lydia  and 
this  slave  girl).  "The  most  sensitive  part  of  'civilized'  man 
is  the  pocket"  (Ramsay).  Laid  hold  on  {epilabomenoi) . 
Second  aorist  middle  participle  of  epilamhano  as  in  9:27  and 
17:19,  but  here  with  hostile  intent.  Dragged  {heilkusan). 
First  aorist  active  indicative  of  helkuo,  late  form  of  the  old 
verb  helko  (also  in  James  2:6)  to  draw  as  a  sword,  and  then 
to  drag  one  forcibly  as  here  and  21:30.  It  is  also  used  of 
spiritual  drawing  as  by  Jesus  in  John  12:32.  Here  it  is  by 
violence.  Into  the  marketplace  {eis  ten  agoran).  Into  the 
Roman  forum  near  which  would  be  the  courts  of  law  as  in 
our  courthouse  square,  as  in  17:17.  Marketing  went  on  also 
(Mark  7:4),  when  the  crowds  collect  (Mark  6:56),  from 
ageird,  to  collect  or  gather.  Unto  the  rulers  {epi  tous  archontas). 
General  Greek  term  for  "the  magistrates." 

20.  Unto  the  magistrates  (tois  strategois).  Greek  term 
{stratos,  ago)  for  leader  of  an  army  or  general.  But  in  civic 
life  a  governor.  The  technical  name  for  the  magistrates  in  a 
Roman  colony  was  duumviri  or  duumvirs,  answering  to 
consuls  in  Rome.  Strategoi  here  is  the  Greek  rendering  of 
the  Latin  praetor es  (praetors),  a  term  which  they  preferred 
out  of  pride  to  the  term  duumviri.  Since  they  represented 
consuls,  the  praetors  or  duumvirs  were  accompanied  by 
lictors  bearing  rods  (verse  35).  These  men  (houtoi  hoi  an- 
thrdpoi).  Contemptuous  use.  Being  Jews  {loudaioi  hupar- 
chontes).  The  people  of  Philippi,  unlike  those  in  Antioch 
(11:26),  did  not  recognize  any  distinction  between  Jews  and 
Christians.  These  four  men  were  Jews.  This  appeal  to  race 
prejudice  would  be  especially  pertinent  then  because  of  the 
recent  decree  of  Claudius  expelling  Jews  from  Rome  (18:2). 
It  was  about  a.d.  49  or  50  that  Paul  is  in  Philippi.  The  hatred 
of  the  Jews  by  the  Romans  is  known  otherwise  (Cicero, 
Pro  Flacco,  XXVIII;  Juvenal,  XIV.  96-106).  Do  exceedingly 
trouble  (ektarassousin).  Late  compound  (eflFective  use  of  ek  in 
composition)  and  only  here  in  the  N.T. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  257 

21.  Customs  which  it  is  not  lawful  for  us  to  receive^  or  to 
observe^  being  Romans  {ethe  ha  ouk  estin  hemin  paradechesthai 
oude  poiein  Romaiois  ousin).  Note  the  sharp  contrast 
between  "being  Jews"  in  verse  20  and  "being  Romans" 
here.  This  pose  of  patriotism  is  all  sound  and  fury.  It  is 
love  of  money  that  moves  these  "masters"  far  more  than 
zeal  for  Rome.  As  Roman  citizens  in  a  colony  they  make 
full  use  of  all  their  rights  of  protest.  Judaism  was  a  religio 
licita  in  the  Roman  empire,  only  they  were  not  allowed  to 
make  proselytes  of  the  Romans  themselves.  No  Roman 
magistrate  would  pass  on  abstract  theological  questions 
(18:15),  but  only  if  a  breach  of  the  peace  was  made  (ektaras- 
sousin  himon  ten  polin)  or  the  formation  of  secret  sects  and 
organizations.  Evidently  both  of  these  last  points  are  in- 
volved by  the  charges  of  "unlawful  customs"  by  the  masters 
who  are  silent  about  their  real  ground  of  grievance  against 
Paul  and  Silas.  Ethos  (kin  to  ethosy  I  Cor.  15:33)  is  from 
ethoj  to  be  accustomed  or  used  to  a  thing.  The  Romans 
granted  toleration  to  conquered  nations  to  follow  their  reli- 
gious customs  provided  they  did  not  try  to  win  the  Romans. 
But  the  Jews  had  made  great  headway  to  favour  (the  God- 
fearers)  with  increasing  hatred  also.  Emperor  worship  had 
in  store  grave  peril  for  both  Jews  and  Christians.  The 
Romans  will  care  more  for  this  than  for  the  old  gods  and 
goddesses.   It  will  combine  patriotism  and  piety. 

22.  Rose  up  together  (sunepeste).  Second  aorist  (ingressive) 
active  of  the  double  compound  sunephistemi,  intransitive, 
old  verb,  but  only  here  in  the  N.T.  (cf.  katepestesan  in  18:12). 
There  was  no  actual  attack  of  the  mob  as  Paul  and  Silas 
were  in  the  hands  of  the  officers,  but  a  sudden  and  violent 
uprising  of  the  people,  the  appeal  to  race  and  national  prej- 
udice having  raised  a  ferment.  Rent  their  garments  off  them 
{perirexantes  auton  ta  himatia).  First  aorist  active  participle 
of  periregnumiy  old  verb,  to  break  off  all  around,  to  strip  or 
rend  all  round.   Here  only  in  the  N.T.   The  duumvirs  prob- 


258      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

ably  gave  orders  for  Paul  and  Silas  to  be  stripped  of  their 
outer  garments  (himatia),  though  not  actually  doing  it  with 
their  own  hands,  least  of  all  not  stripping  off  their  own  gar- 
ments in  horror  as  Ramsay  thinks.  That  would  call  for  the 
middle  voice.  In  II  Mace.  4:38  the  active  voice  is  used  as 
here  of  stripping  off  the  garments  of  others.  Paul  in  I  Thess. 
2:2  refers  to  the  shameful  treatment  received  in  Philippi, 
"insulted"  (kubristhentas).  As  a  Roman  citizen  this  was  un- 
lawful, but  the  duumvirs  looked  on  Paul  and  Silas  as  vaga- 
bond and  seditious  Jews  and  "acted  with  the  highhandedness 
characteristic  of  the  fussy  provincial  authorities"  (Know- 
ling).  Commanded  {ekeleuon).  Imperfect  active,  repeatedly 
ordered.  The  usual  formula  of  command  was:  "Go,  lictors; 
strip  off  their  garments;  let  them  be  scourged."  To  beat  them 
with  rods  (rhabdizein).  Present  active  infinitive  of  rhabdizOj 
old  verb,  but  in  the  N.T.  =virgis  caedere  only  here  and  II 
Cor.  11:25  where  Paul  alludes  to  this  incident  and  two 
others  not  given  by  Luke  {tris  erhabdisthen) .  He  came  near 
getting  another  in  Jerusalem  (Acts  22:25).  Why  did  not 
Paul  say  here  that  he  was  a  Roman  citizen  as  he  does  later 
(verse  37)  and  in  Jerusalem  (22:26f.).'*  It  might  have  done 
no  good  in  this  hubbub  and  no  opportunity  was  allowed  for 
defence  of  any  kind. 

23.  When  they  had  laid  (epithentes) .  Second  aorist  (consta- 
tive)  active  participle  of  epitithemi,  to  place  upon.  Many 
stripes  {pollas  plegas).  The  Jewish  law  was  forty  stripes  save 
one  (II  Cor.  11:24).  The  Roman  custom  depended  on  the 
caprice  of  the  judge  and  was  a  terrible  ordeal.  It  was  the 
custom  to  inflict  the  stripes  on  the  naked  body  (back)  as 
Livy  2.5  says:  '* Missique  lictores  ad  sumendum  supplicium, 
nudatos  virgis  caedunt.^''  On  plegas  (from  plcsso,  to  strike  a 
blow)  see  on  Luke  10:30;  I2:47f.  The  jailor  (toi  desmophu- 
laki).  Late  word  {desmos,  phulax,  keeper  of  bonds),  in  the 
N.T.  only  here  (verses  23,  27,  36).  The  LXX  has  the  word 
archidesmophulax   (Gen.   39:21-23).    Chrysostom   calls   this 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  259 

jailor  Stephanus,  he  was  of  Achaia  (I  Cor.  16:15).  T^  ^^^P 
safely  (asphalos  terein).  Present  active  infinitive,  to  keep  on 
keeping  safely,  perhaps  "as  dangerous  political  prisoners" 
(Rackham).  He  had  some  rank  and  was  not  a  mere  turnkey. 

24.  Into  the  inner  prison  (eis  ten  esoteran  phulaken).  The 
comparative  form  from  the  adverb  eso  (within),  Ionic  and 
old  Attic  for  eisb.  In  the  LXX,  but  in  the  N.T.  only  here 
and  Heb.  6:19.  The  Roman  public  prisons  had  a  vestibule 
and  outer  prison  and  behind  this  the  inner  prison,  a  veritable 
dungeon  with  no  light  or  air  save  what  came  through  the 
door  when  open.  One  has  only  to  picture  modern  cells  in 
our  jails,  the  dungeons  in  feudal  castles,  London  prisons 
oefore  the  time  of  Howard,  to  appreciate  the  horrors  of  an 
inner  prison  cell  in  a  Roman  provincial  town  of  the  first 
century  a.d.  Made  their  feet  fast  (tous  podas  esphalisato 
auton).  First  aorist  (effective)  middle  of  asphalizo,  from 
asphales  (safe),  common  verb  in  late  Greek,  in  the  N.T. 
only  here  and  Matt.  24:64!?.  The  inner  prison  was  safe 
enough  without  this  refinement  of  cruelty.  In  the  stocks 
{eis  to  xulon).  Xulon,  from  xuo,  to  scrape  or  plane,  is  used  for 
a  piece  of  wood  whether  a  cross  or  gibbet  (Acts  5:30;  10:39; 
13:29;  Gal.  3:13;  I  Peter  2:24)  or  a  log  or  timber  with  five 
holes  (four  for  the  wrists  and  ankles  and  one  for  the  neck)  or 
two  for  the  feet  as  here,  xulopede,  Latin  vervus,  to  shackle 
the  feet  stretched  apart  (Job  33:11).  This  torment  was 
practiced  in  Sparta,  Athens,  Rome,  and  Adonirom  Judson 
suffered  it  in  Burmah.  Xulon  is  also  used  in  the  N.T.  for 
stick  or  staff  (Matt.  26:47)  and  even  a  tree  (Luke  23:31). 
Tertullian  said  of  Christians  in  the  stocks:  Nihil  cms  sentit 
in  vervo,  quum  animus  in  caelo  est  (Nothing  the  limb  feels 
in  the  stocks  when  the  mind  is  in  heaven). 

25.  About  midnight  (kata  de  mesqnuktion).  Middle  of  the 
night,  old  adjective  seen  already  in  Mark  13:35;  Luke  11:5 
which  see.  Were  praying  and  singing  (proseuchomenoi  hum- 
noun).    Present  middle  participle  and  imperfect  active  indie- 


26o      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

ative:  Praying  they  were  singing  (simultaneously,  blending 
together  petition  and  praise).  Humneo  is  an  old  verb  from 
humnos  (cf.  Isa.  12:4;  Dan.  3:23).  Paul  and  Silas  probably 
used  portions  of  the  Psalms  (cf.  Luke  i  :39f.,  67f.;  2:28f.) 
with  occasional  original  outbursts  of  praise.  Were  listening 
to  them  {epekroonto  auton).  Imperfect  middle  of  epakroaomai. 
Rare  verb  to  listen  with  pleasure  as  to  a  recitation  or  music 
(Page).  It  was  a  new  experience  for  the  prisoners  and  won- 
drously  attractive  entertainment  to  them. 

26.  Earthquake  (seismos).  Old  word  from  seio,  to  shake. 
Luke  regarded  it  as  an  answer  to  prayer  as  in  4:31.  He  and 
Timothy  were  not  in  prison.  So  that  the  foundations  of  the 
prison  house  were  shaken  {hoste  saleuthenai  ta  themelia  tou 
desmbteriou).  Regular  construction  of  the  first  aorist  pas- 
sive infinitive  and  the  accusative  of  general  reference  with 
hoste  for  actual  result  just  like  the  indicative.  This  old 
word  for  prison  house  already  in  Matt.  11:2;  Acts  5:21,  23 
which  see.  Themelia  is  neuter  plural  of  the  adjective  the- 
melios,  from  thema  (thing  laid  down  from  tithemi).  So  al- 
ready in  Luke  6:48;  14:29.  If  the  prison  was  excavated  from 
rocks  in  the  hillside,  as  was  often  the  case,  the  earthquake 
would  easily  have  slipped  the  bars  of  the  doors  loose  and  the 
chains  would  have  fallen  out  of  the  walls.  Were  opened 
{eneoichthesan).  First  aorist  passive  indicative  of  anoigb 
(or  -numi)  with  triple  augment  (^,  <?,  0),  while  there  is  no 
augment  in  anethe  (first  aorist  passive  indicative  of  aniemi, 
were  loosed),  old  verb,  but  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  27:40; 
Eph.  6:9;  Heb.  13:5. 

27.  Being  roused  out  of  sleep  {exupnos  genomenos).  Becom- 
ing exupnos  (rare  word,  only  here  in  N.T.,  in  LXX  and 
Josephus).  An  earthquake  like  that  would  wake  up  any  one. 
Open  {anebigmenos).  Perfect  passive  participle  with  double 
reduplication  in  predicate  position,  standing  open.  Drew 
his  sword  {spasamenos  ten  machairan).  First  aorist  middle 
participle  of  spab,  to  draw,  as  in  Mark  14:47,  drawing  his 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  26 1 

own  sword  himself.  Our  word  spasm  from  this  old  word. 
Was  about  {emellen).  Imperfect  active  of  mello  with  both 
syllabic  and  temporal  augment  and  followed  here  by  pres- 
ent infinitive.  He  was  on  the  point  of  committing  suicide 
as  Brutus  had  done  near  here.  Stoicism  had  made  suicide 
popular  as  the  escape  from  trouble  like  the  Japanese  hari- 
kari.  Had  escaped  (ekpepheugenai).  Second  perfect  active 
infinitive  of  ekpheugo,  old  verb  with  perfective  force  of  ek^ 
to  flee  out,  to  get  clean  away.  This  infinitive  and  accusative 
of  general  reference  is  due  to  indirect  discourse  after  nomi- 
zon.  Probably  the  prisoners  were  so  panic  stricken  by  the 
earthquake  that  they  did  not  rally  to  the  possibility  of 
escape  before  the  jailor  awoke.  He  was  responsible  for  the 
prisoners  with  his  life  (12:19;  27:42). 

28.  Do  thyself  no  harm  {meden  praxeis  seautoi  kakon). 
The  usual  construction  {me  and  the  aorist  subjunctive)  for  a 
prohibition  not  to  begin  to  do  a  thing.  The  older  Greek  would 
probably  have  used  poieseis  here.  The  later  Greek  does  not 
always  preserve  the  old  distinction  between  poied,  to  do  a 
thing,  and  prasso,  to  practice,  though  prassete  keeps  it  in 
Phil.  4:9  and  poied  is  rightly  used  in  Luke  3:10-14.  As  a 
matter  of  fact  prasso  does  not  occur  in  Matthew  or  in 
Mark,  only  twice  in  John,  six  times  in  Luke's  Gospel,  thir- 
teen in  Acts,  and  elsewhere  by  Paul.  Sprang  in  (eisepedesen). 
First  aorist  active  of  eispedad,  old  verb,  but  here  only  in  the 
N.T.  Cf.  ekpedao  in  14:14.  The  jailor  was  at  the  outer  door 
and  he  wanted  lights  to  see  what  was  inside  in  the  inner 
prison. 

29.  Trembling  for  fear  {entromos  genomenos).  "Becoming 
terrified."  The  adjective  entromos  (in  terror)  occurs  in  N.T. 
only  here  and  7:32  and  Heb.  12:21.  Fell  down  (prosepesen). 
Second  aorist  active  indicative  of  prospiptOy  old  verb.  An  act 
of  worship  as  Cornelius  before  Peter  (10:25),  when  prose- 
kunesen  is  used. 

30.  Brought   them    out    {progagon    autous   exb).       Second 


262      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAiMENT 

aorist  active  participle  of  proago,  to  lead  forward.  He  left 
the  other  prisoners  inside,  feeling  that  he  had  to  deal  with 
these  men  whom  he  had  evidently  heard  preach  or  had 
heard  of  their  message  as  servants  of  the  Most  High  God 
as  the  slave  girl  called  them.  There  may  have  been  super- 
stition behind  his  fear,  but  there  was  evident  sincerity. 

31.  To  be  saved  {hina  sotho).  Final  clause  with  hina  and 
first  aorist  passive  subjunctive.  What  did  he  mean  by 
" saved ".^  Certainly  more  than  escape  from  peril  about 
the  prisoners  or  because  of  the  earthquake,  though  these 
had  their  influences  on  him.  Cf.  way  of  salvation  In  verse  17. 
Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  {Pisteuson  epi  ton  kurion  lesoun). 
This  is  what  Peter  told  Cornelius  (10:43).  This  is  the  heart 
of  the  matter  for  both  the  jailor  and  his  house. 

32.  They  spake  the  word  of  God  {elalesan  ton  logon  tou 
theou).  So  Paul  and  Silas  gave  fuller  exposition  of  the  way 
of  life  to  the  jailor  "with  all  that  were  in  his  house."  It  was 
a  remarkable  service  with  keenest  attention  and  interest, 
the  jailor  with  his  warden,  slaves,  and  family. 

33.  Washed  their  stripes  {elousen  apo  ton  plegbn).  Deiss- 
mann  {Bible  Studies^  p.  227)  cites  an  inscription  of  Perga- 
mum  with  this  very  construction  of  apo  and  the  ablative, 
to  wash  off,  though  it  is  an  old  verb.  This  first  aorist  active 
indicative  of  louo,  to  bathe,  succinctly  shows  what  the 
jailor  did  to  remove  the  stains  left  by  the  rods  of  the  lictors 
(verse  22).  Nipto  was  used  for  washing  parts  of  the  body. 
And  was  baptized^  he  and  all  his,  immediately  {kai  ebaptisthe 
autos  kai  hoi  autou  hapantes  parachrema).  The  verb  is  in  the 
singular  agreeing  with  autos,  but  it  is  to  be  supplied  with 
hoi  autou,  and  it  was  done  at  once. 

34.  He  brought  them  up  (anagagon) .  Second  aorist  active 
participle  of  anagb.  It  looks  as  if  his  house  was  above  the 
prison.  The  baptism  apparently  took  place  in  the  pool  or 
tank  in  which  he  bathed  Paul  and  Silas  (Dc  Wette)  or  the 
rectangular  basin  iimpluvium)  in  the  court  for  receiving  the 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  263 

rain  or  even  in  a  swimming  pool  or  bath  {kolumheihra) 
found  within  the  walls  of  the  prison  (Kuinoel).  Meyer: 
"Perhaps  the  water  was  in  the  court  of  the  house;  and  the 
baptism  was  that  of  immersion,  which  formed  an  essential 
part  of  the  symbolism  of  the  act."  Set  meat  {paretheken 
trapezan).  Set  a  " table "  before  them  with  food  on  it.  They 
had  probably  had  no  food  for  a  day.  fVith  all  his  house 
{panoikex).  Adverb,  once  in  Plato,  though  usually  panoik- 
idi.  In  LXX,  but  here  alone  in  the  N.T.  It  is  in  an  am- 
phibolous position  and  can  be  taken  either  with  "rejoiced" 
(egalliasato)  or  "having  believed"  (pepisteukos,  perfect 
active  participle,  permanent  belief),  coming  between  them. 
The  whole  household  (family,  warden,  slaves)  heard  the 
word  of  God,  believed  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  made  confession, 
were  baptized,  and  rejoiced.  Furneaux  considers  the  haste 
in  baptism  here  "precipitate"  as  in  the  baptism  of  the 
eunuch.   But  why  delay  .'* 

35.  The  Serjeants  {tous  rhahdouchous) .  Fasces-bearers, 
regular  Greek  word  {rhabdos,  echo)  for  Latin  lictores  though 
Cicero  says  that  they  should  carry  baculi,  not  fasces.  Was 
this  message  because  of  the  earthquake,  the  influence  of 
Lydia,  or  a  belated  sense  of  justice  on  the  part  of  the  magis- 
trates (praetors).?  Perhaps  a  bit  of  all  three  may  be  true. 
The  Codex  Bezae  expressly  says  that  the  magistrates 
"assembled  together  in  the  market  place  and  recollecting 
the  earthquake  that  had  happened  they  were  afraid." 

36.  Now  therefore  {nun.oun).  Note  both  particles  (time 
and  inference).  It  was  a  simple  matter  to  the  jailor  and  he 
was  full  of  glee  over  this  happy  outcome. 

37.  Unto  them  {pros  autous).  The  lictors  by  the  jailor. 
The  reply  of  Paul  is  a  marvel  of  brevity  and  energy,  almost 
every  word  has  a  separate  indictment  showing  the  utter 
illegality  of  the  whole  proceeding.  They  have  beaten  us 
{deirantes  hemas).  First  aorist  active  participle  of  dero,  old 
verb  to  flay,  to  skin,  to  smite.    The  Lex  Valeria  b.c.  509 


264      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

and  the  Lex  Poscia  B.C.  248  made  it  a  crime  to  inflict  blows 
on  a  Roman  citizen.  Cicero  says,  "To  fetter  a  Roman  citizen 
was  a  crime,  to  scourge  him  a  scandal,  to  slay  him — parri- 
cide." Claudius  had  "deprived  the  city  of  Rhodes  of  its 
freedom  for  having  crucified  some  citizen  of  Rome"  (Rack- 
ham).  Publicly  {demosidi).  This  added  insult  to  injury. 
Common  adverb (Ao^o/)  supplied  with  adjective,  associative 
instrumental  case,  opposed  to  ididi  or  kaf  oikous,  Acts  20:20) 
Uncondemned  {akatakritous) .  This  same  verbal  adjective 
from  kata-krino  with  a  privative  is  used  by  Paul  in  22:25  and 
nowhere  else  in  the  N.T.  Rare  in  late  Greek  like  akatagnostoSy 
but  in  late  Koine  (papyri,  inscriptions).  The  meaning  is 
clearly  "without  being  tried."  Paul  and  Silas  were  not 
given  a  chance  to  make  a  defence.  They  were  sentenced 
unheard  (25:16).  Even  slaves  in  Roman  law  had  a  right  to 
be  heard.  Men  that  are  Romans  {anthropous  Romaious 
kuparchontas).  The  praetors  did  not  know,  of  course,  that 
Paul  and  Silas  were  Roman  citizens  any  more  than  Lysias 
knew  it  in  Acts  22:27.  Paul's  claim  is  not  challenged  in 
either  instance.  It  was  a  capital  offence  to  make  a  false 
claim  to  Roman  citizenship.  Have  cast  us  into  prison  {ehalan 
eis  phulaken).  Second  aorist  active  indicative  of  hallo,  old 
verb,  with  first  aorist  ending  as  often  in  the  Koine  {-an,  not 
-on).  This  was  the  climax,  treating  them  as  criminals.  And 
now  privily  {kai  nun  lathrdi).  Paul  balances  their  recent 
conduct  with  the  former.  Nay  verily,  but  {ou  gar,  alia).  No 
indeed!  It  is  the  use  of  gar  so  common  in  answers  (ge+ara) 
as  in  Matt.  27:23.  Jlla  gives  the  sharp  alternative.  Them- 
selves (autoi).  As  a  public  acknowledgment  that  they  had 
wronged  and  mistreated  Paul  and  Silas.  Let  them  come 
themselves  and  lead  us  out  {exagagetosan,  third  person  plural 
second  aorist  active  imperative  of  exago).  It  was  a  bitter 
pill  to  the  proud  praetors. 

39.   They  feared  (ephobethesan) .    This  is  the  explanation. 
They  became  frightened  for  their  own  lives  when  they  saw 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  265 

what  they  had  done  to  Roman  citizens.  They  asked  {erdtbn). 
Imperfect  active  of  erbtao.  They  kept  on  begging  them  to 
leave  for  fear  of  further  trouble.  The  colonists  in  Philippi 
would  turn  against  the  praetors  if  they  learned  the  facts, 
proud  as  they  were  of  being  citizens.  This  verb  in  the  Koine 
is  often  used  as  here  to  make  a  request  and  not  just  to  ask 
a  question. 

40.  Into  the  house  of  Lydia  {pros  ten  Ludi'an).  No  word  in 
the  Greek  for  "house,"  but  it  means  the  house  of  Lydia. 
Note  "the  brethren"  here,  not  merely  Luke  and  Timothy, 
but  other  brethren  now  converted  besides  those  in  the  house 
of  the  jailor.  The  four  missionaries  were  guests  of  Lydia 
(verse  15)  and  probably  the  church  now  met  in  her  home. 
They  departed  (exelthan).  Paul  and  Silas,  but  not  Luke  and 
Timothy.  Note  "they"  here,  not  "we."  Note  also  the  -an 
ending  instead  of  -on  as  above.  The  movements  of  Timothy 
are  not  perfectly  clear  till  he  reappears  at  Beroea  (17:15). 
It  seems  unlikely  that  he  came  to  Thessalonica  with  Paul 
and  Silas  since  only  Paul  and  Silas  obtained  security  there 
(17:9)  and  were  sent  on  to  Beroea  (17:10).  Probably  Tim- 
othy was  sent  to  Thessalonica  from  Philippi  with  gifts  of 
which  Paul  spoke  later  (Phil.  4:1 5f.).  Then  he  followed  Paul 
and  Silas  to  Beroea. 


CHAPTER  XVII 

I.  When  they  had  passed  through  {diodeus antes).  First 
aorist  active  participle  of  diodeub,  common  verb  in  the 
Koinl  (Polybius,  Plutarch,  LXX,  etc.),  but  in  the  N.T.  only 
here  and  Luke  8:i.  It  means  literally  to  make  one's  way 
(hodos)  through  (dia).  They  took  the  Egnatian  Way,  one 
of  the  great  Roman  roads  from  Byzantium  to  Dyrrachium 
(over  500  miles  long)  on  the  Adriatic  Sea,  opposite  Brundi- 
sium  and  so  an  extension  of  the  Appian  Way.  Amphipolis 
{ten  Amphipolin).  So  called  because  the  Strymon  flowed 
almost  around  {amphi)  it,  the  metropolis  of  Macedonia 
Prima,  a  free  city,  about  32  miles  from  Philippi,  about 
three  miles  from  the  sea.  Paul  and  Silas  may  have  spent 
only  a  night  here  or  longer.  Apollonia  {ten  Apollonian). 
Not  the  famous  Apollonia  in  Illyria,  but  32  miles  from 
Amphipolis  on  the  Egnatian  Way.  So  here  again  a  night 
was  spent  if  no  more.  Why  Paul  hurried  through  these  two 
large  cities,  if  he  did,  we  do  not  know.  There  are  many  gaps 
in  Luke's  narrative  that  we  have  no  way  of  filling  up.  There 
may  have  been  no  synagogues  for  one  thing.  To  Thessor 
lonica  {eis  Thessaloniken).  There  was  a  synagogue  here  in 
this  great  commercial  city,  still  an  important  city  called 
Saloniki,  of  70,000  population.  It  was  originally  called 
Therma,  at  the  head  of  the  Thermaic  Gulf.  Cassander  re- 
named it  Thessalonica  after  his  wife,  the  sister  of  Alexander 
the  Great.  It  was  the  capital  of  the  second  of  the  four  divi- 
sions of  Macedonia  and  finally  the  capital  of  the  whole 
province.  It  shared  with  Corinth  and  Ephesus  the  commerce 
of  the  Aegean.  One  synagogue  shows  that  even  in  this  com- 
mercial city  the  Jews  were  not  very  numerous.  As  a  political 
centre  it  ranked  with  Antioch  in  Syria  and  Caesarea  in  Pales- 

266 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  267 

tine.  It  was  a  strategic  centre  for  the  spread  of  the  gospel 
as  Paul  later  said  for  it  sounded  (echoed)  forth  from  Thes- 
salonica  throughout  Macedonia  and  Achaia  (I  Thess.  i  :8). 

2.  As  his  custom  was  {kata  to  eidthos  toi  Paulbi).  The  same 
construction  in  Luke  4:16  about  Jesus  in  Nazareth  {kata  to 
eidthos  autbi)  with  the  second  perfect  active  participle  neuter 
singular  from  etho.  Paul's  habit  was  to  go  to  the  Jewish 
synagogue  to  use  the  Jews  and  the  God-fearers  as  a  spring- 
board for  his  work  among  the  Gentiles.  For  three  Sabbaths 
{epi  sabbata  tria).  Probably  the  reference  is  to  the  first  three 
Sabbaths  when  Paul  had  a  free  hand  in  the  synagogue  as  at 
first  in  Antioch  in  Pisidia.  Luke  does  not  say  that  Paul  was 
in  Thessalonica  only  three  weeks.  He  may  have  spoken  there 
also  during  the  week,  though  the  Sabbath  was  the  great 
day.  Paul  makes  it  plain,  as  Furnfeaux  shows,  that  he  was 
in  Thessalonica  a  much  longer  period  than  three  weeks. 
The  rest  of  the  time  he  spoke,  of  course,  outside  of  the  syna- 
gogue.    Paul  implies  an  extended  stay  by  his  language  in 

I  Thess.  1 :8.  The  church  consisted  mainly  of  Gentile  con- 
verts (II  Thess.  3:4,  7,  8)  and  seems  to  have  been  well 
organized  (I  Thess.  5:12).  He  received  help  while  there 
several  times  from  Philippi  (Phil.  4:16)  and  even  so  worked 
night  and  day  to  support  himself  (I  Thess.  2:9).  His  preach- 
ing was  misunderstood  there  in  spite  of  careful  instruction 
ccMicerning  the  second  coming  of  Christ  (I  Thess.  4:13-5:5; 

II  Thess.  2:1-12).  Reasoned  (dielexato).  First  aorist  middle 
indicative  of  dialegomai,  old  verb  in  the  active  to  select, 
distinguish,  then  to  revolve  in  the  mind,  to  converse  (inter- 
change of  ideas),  then  to  teach  in  the  Socratic  ("dialectic") 
method  of  question  and  answer  (of.  dielegeto  in  verse  17), 
then  simply  to  discourse,  but  always  with  the  idea  of  intel- 
lectual stimulus.  With  these  Jews  and  God-fearers  Paul  ap- 
pealed to  the  Scriptures  as  text  and  basis  {apo)  of  his  ideas. 

3.  Opening  and  alleging  {dianoigbn  kai  paratithemenos). 
Opening  the  Scriptures,  Luke  means,  as  made  plain  by  the 


268      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

mission  and  message  of  Jesus,  the  same  word  {dianoigo) 
used  by  him  of  the  interpretation  of  the  Scriptures  by  Jesus 
(Luke  24:32)  and  of  the  opening  of  the  mind  of  the  disciples 
also  by  Jesus  (Luke  24:45)  and  of  the  opening  of  Lydia's 
heart  by  the  Lord  (16:14).  One  cannot  refrain  from  saying 
that  such  exposition  of  the  Scriptures  as  Jesus  and  Paul 
gave  would  lead  to  more  opening  of  mind  and  heart.  Paul 
was  not  only  ''expounding"  the  Scriptures,  he  was  also  "pro- 
pounding" (the  old  meaning  of  "allege")  his  doctrine  or 
setting  forth  alongside  the  Scriptures  {para-tithemenos), 
quoting  the  Scripture  to  prove  his  contention  which  was 
made  in  much  conflict  (I  Thess.  2:2),  probably  in  the  midst 
of  heated  discussion  by  the  opposing  rabbis  who  were  any- 
thing but  convinced  by  Paul's  powerful  arguments,  for  the 
Cross  was  a  stumbling-block  to  the  Jews  (I  Cor.  i  :23).  That 
it  behoved  the  Christ  to  suffer  (hoti  ton  Christon  edei  pathein). 
The  second  aorist  active  infinitive  is  the  subject  of  edei  with 
ton  Christon,  the  accusative  of  general  reference.  This  is 
Paul's  major  premise  in  his  argument  from  the  Scriptures 
about  the  Messiah,  the  necessity  of  his  sufferings  according 
to  the  Scriptures,  the  very  argument  made  by  the  Risen 
Jesus  to  the  two  on  the  way  to  Emmaus  (Luke  24:25-27). 
The  fifty-third  chapter  of  Isaiah  was  a  passage  in  point  that 
the  rabbis  had  overlooked.  Peter  made  the  same  point  in 
Acts  3:18  and  Paul  again  in  Acts  26:23.  The  minor  premise 
is  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  from  the  dead.  To  rise  again  from 
the  dead  {anastenai  ek  nekron).  This  second  aorist  active  in- 
finitive anastenai  is  also  the  subject  of  edei.  The  actual 
resurrection  of  Jesus  was  also  a  necessity  as  Paul  says  he 
preached  to  them  (I  Thess.  4:14)  and  argued  always  from 
Scripture  (I  Cor.  15:3-4)  and  from  his  own  experience  (Acts 
9:22;  22:7;  26:8,  14;  I  Cor.  15:8).  This  Jesus  is  the  Christ 
{houtos  estin  ho  Christos,  ho  lesous).  More  precisely,  "This 
is  the  Messiah,  viz.,  Jesus  whom  I  am  proclaiming  unto  you." 
This  is  the  conclusion  of  Paul's  line  of  argument  and  it  is 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  269 

logical  and  overwhelming.  It  is  his  method  everywhere  as  in 
Damascus,  in  Antioch  in  Pisidia,  here,  in  Corinth.  He  spoke 
as  an  eye-witness. 

4.  Some  of  them  {tines  ex  auton).  That  is  of  the  Jews  who 
were  evidently  largely  afraid  of  the  rabbis.  Still  "some" 
were  persuaded  {epeisthesan^  effective  first  aorist  passive 
indicative)  and  "consorted  with"  {proseklerbthesan).  This 
latter  verb  is  also  first  aorist  passive  indicative  of  proskleroo, 
a  common  verb  in  late  Greek  (Plutarch,  Lucian),  but  only 
here  in  the  N.T.,  from  pros  and  kleros,  to  assign  by  lot.  So 
then  this  small  group  of  Jews  were  given  Paul  and  Silas  by 
God's  grace.  And  of  the  devout  Greeks  a  great  multitude  {ton  te 
sehomenon  Hellenon  plethos  polu).  These  "God-fearers" 
among  the  Gentiles  were  less  under  the  control  of  the  jealous 
rabbis  and  so  responded  more  readily  to  Paul's  appeal. 
In  I  Thess.  1:9  Paul  expressly  says  that  they  had  "turned 
to  God  from  idols,"  proof  that  this  church  was  mainly 
Gentile  (cf.  also  I  Thess.  2:14).  And  of  the  chief  women  not  a 
few  {gunaikon  te  ton  proton  ouk  oligai).  Literally,  "And  of 
women  the  first  not  a  few."  That  is,  a  large  number  of 
women  of  the  very  first  rank  in  the  city,  probably  devout 
women  also  like  the  men  just  before  and  like  those  in  13:50 
in  Antioch  in  Pisidia  who  along  with  "the  first  men  of  the 
city"  were  stirred  up  against  Paul.  Here  these  women  were 
openly  friendly  to  Paul's  message,  whether  proselytes  or 
Gentiles  or  Jewish  wives  of  Gentiles  as  Hort  holds.  It  is 
noteworthy  that  here,  as  In  PhlllppI,  leading  women  take 
a  bold  stand  for  Christ.  In  Macedonia  women  had  more 
freedom  than  elsewhere.  It  is  not  to  be  Inferred  that  all  those 
converted  belonged  to  the  higher  classes,  for  the  industrial 
element  was  clearly  large  (I  Thess.  4:11).  In  II  Cor.  8:2 
Paul  speaks  of  the  deep  poverty  of  the  Macedonian  churches, 
but  with  Phillppi  mainly  In  mind.  Ramsay  thinks  that  Paul 
won  many  of  the  heathen  not  affiliated  at  all  with  the  syna- 
gogue.     Certain  it  is   that  we   must   allow  a  considerable 


270      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

interval  of  time  between  verses  4  and  5  to  understand  what 
Paul  says  in  his  Thessalonian  Epistles. 

5.  Moved  with  jealousy  {zelos antes).  Both  our  English 
words,  zeal  3ind  jealousy.,  are  from  the  Greek  z^/oj.  In  13:45 
the  Jews  (rabbis)  "were  filled  with  jealousy"  {eplesthesan 
zelou).  That  is  another  way  of  saying  the  same  thing  as 
here.  The  success  of  Paul  was  entirely  too  great  in  both 
places  to  please  the  rabbis.  So  here  is  jealousy  of  Jewish 
preachers  towards  Christian  preachers.  It  is  always  between 
men  or  women  of  the  same  profession  or  group.  In  I  Thess. 
2:3-10  Paul  hints  at  some  of  the  slanders  spread  against 
him  by  these  rabbis  (deceivers,  using  words  of  flattery  as 
men-pleasers,  after  vain-glory,  greed  of  gain,  etc.).  Took 
unto  them  (proslabomenoi).  Second  aorist  middle  (indirect, 
to  themselves)  participle  of  proslambano,  old  and  common 
verb.  Certain  vile  fellows  of  the  rabble  {ton  agoraion  andras 
tinas  ponerous).  The  agora  or  market-place  was  the  natural 
resort  for  those  with  nothing  to  do  (Matt.  20:4)  like  the 
court-house  square  today  or  various  parks  in  our  cities  where 
bench-warmers  flock.  Plato  {Protagoras  347  C)  calls  these 
agoraioi  (common  word,  but  in  N.T.  only  here  and  19:38) 
idlers  or  good-for-nothing  fellows.  They  are  in  every  city 
and  such  "bums"  are  ready  for  any  job.  The  church  in 
Thessalonica  caught  some  of  these  peripatetic  idlers  (II 
Thess.  3:iof.)  "doing  nothing  but  doing  about."  So  the 
Jewish  preachers  gather  to  themselves  a  choice  collection  of 
these  market-loungers  or  loafers  or  wharf-rats.  The  Romans 
called  them  subrostrani  (hangers  round  the  rostrum  or  sub- 
basilicari).  Gathering  a  crowd  {ochlopoiesantes).  Literally, 
making  or  getting  {poieo)  a  crowd  {ochlos),  a  word  not  found 
elsewhere.  Probably  right  in  the  agora  itself  where  the  rabbis 
could  tell  men  their  duties  and  pay  them  in  advance.  In- 
stance Hyde  Park  in  London  with  all  the  curious  gatherings 
every  day,  Sunday  afternoons  in  particular.  Set  the  city  on  an 
uproar    {ethoruboun).      Imperfect    active  of   thorubed,  from 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  271 

thorubos  (tumult),  old  verb,  but  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and 
20:10;  Matt.  9:23;  Mark  4:39.  They  kept  up  the  din,  this 
combination  of  rabbis  and  rabble.  Assaulting  the  house  of 
Jason  {epistantes  tei  oikidi  lasonos).  Second  aorist  (ingres- 
sive)  active  oi  ephistemi^X2ik\n%  a  stand  against,  rushing  at, 
because  he  was  Paul's  host.  He  may  have  been  a  Gentile 
(Jason  the  name  of  an  ancient  king  of  Thessaly),  but  the 
Jews  often  used  it  for  Joshua  or  Jesus  (H  Mace,  i  7).  They 
sought  (ezetoun).  Imperfect  active.  They  burst  into  the 
house  and  searched  up  and  down.  Them  (autous).  Paul  and 
Silas.  They  were  getting  ready  to  have  a  lynching  party. 

6.  When  they  found  them  not  {me  heurontes).  Usual  nega- 
tive me  with  the  participle  in  the  Koine,  second  aorist  (effec- 
tive) active  participle,  complete  failure  with  all  the  noise 
and  "bums."  They  dragged  (esuron).  Imperfect  active, 
vivid  picture,  they  were  dragging  (literally).  See  already 
8:3;  16:19.  If  they  could  not  find  Paul,  they  could  drag 
Jason  his  host  and  some  other  Christians  whom  we  do  not 
know.  Before  the  rulers  of  the  city  {epi  tous  politarchas).  This 
word  does  not  occur  in  Greek  literature  and  used  to  be  cited 
as  an  example  of  Luke's  blunders.  But  now  it  is  found  in  an 
inscription  on  an  arch  in  the  modern  city  preserved  in  the 
British  Museum.  It  is  also  found  in  seventeen  inscriptions 
(five  from  Thessalonica)  where  the  word  or  the  verb  politar- 
ched  occurs.  It  is  a  fine  illustration  of  the  historical  accuracy 
of  Luke  in  matters  of  detail.  This  title  for  city  officers  in 
Thessalonica,  a  free  city,  is  correct.  They  were  burgomasters 
or  "rulers  of  the  city."  Crying  {hoontes).  Yelling  as  if  the 
house  was  on  fire  like  the  mob  in  Jerusalem  (21:28).  These 
that  have  turned  the  world  upside  down  {hoi  ten  oikoumenen 
anastat  OS  antes).  The  use  of  oikoumenen  (supply  gen  or 
chbran,  the  inhabited  earth,  present  passive  participle  of 
oikeb)  means  the  Roman  Empire,  since  it  is  a  political  charge, 
a  natural  hyperbole  in  their  excitement,  but  the  phrase  occurs 
for  the  Roman  Empire  in  Luke  2:1.   It  is  possible  that  news 


272      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

had  come  to  Thessalonica  of  the  expulsion  of  the  Jews  from 
Rome  by  Claudius.  There  is  truth  in  the  accusation,  for 
Christianity  is  revolutionary,  but  on  this  particular  occasion 
the  uproar  (verse  5)  was  created  by  the  rabbis  and  the  hired 
loafers.  The  verb  anastatoo  (here  first  aorist  active  participle) 
does  not  occur  in  the  ancient  writers,  but  is  in  LXX  and  in 
Acts  17:6;  21:38;  Gal.  5:12.  It  occurs  also  in  Harpocration 
(a.d.  4th  cent.)  and  about  100  B.C.  exanastatoo  is  found  in  a 
fragment  of  papyrus  (Tebtunis  no.  2)  and  in  a  Paris  Magical 
Papyrus  1.  2243f.  But  in  an  Egyptian  letter  of  Aug.  4,  41 
A.D.  (Oxyrhynchus  Pap.  no.  119,  10)  "the  bad  boy"  uses 
it  =  "he  upsets  me"  or  "  he  drives  me  out  of  my  senses" 
{anastatoi  me).  See  Deissmann,  Light  from  the  Ancient  East, 
pp.  84f.  It  is  not  a  "Biblical  word"  at  all,  but  belongs 
to  the  current  Koine.  It  is  a  vigorous  and  graphic  term. 
7.  Whom  Jason  hath  received  {hous  hupodedektai  lason). 
Present  perfect  middle  indicative  of  hupodechomai,  to  enter- 
tain, old  verb,  but  in  N.T.  only  in  Luke  10:38;  19:6;  Acts 
17-75  James  2:25.  This  is  Jason's  crime  and  he  is  the  prisoner 
before  the  politarchs.  These  all  {houtoi  pantes).  Jason,  the 
"brethren"  of  verse  6,  Paul  and  Silas,  and  all  Christians 
everywhere.  Contrary  (apenanti).  Late  compound  preposi- 
tion {apo,  en,  anti)  found  in  Polybius,  LXX,  here  only  in  the 
N.T.  The  decrees  of  Caesar  {ton  dogmatbn  Kaisaros).  This 
was  a  charge  of  treason  and  was  a  sure  way  to  get  a  convic- 
tion. Probably  the  Julian  Leges  Majestatis  are  in  mind 
rather  than  the  definite  decree  of  Claudius  about  the  Jews 
(Acts  18:2).  Saying  that  there  is  another  king,  one  Jesus 
(Basilea  heteron  legontes  einai  lesoun).  Note  the  very  order 
of  the  words  in  the  Greek  indirect  discourse  with  the  ac- 
cusative and  infinitive  after  legontes.  Basilea  heteron  comes 
first,  a  different  king,  another  emperor  than  Caesar.  This 
was  the  very  charge  that  the  smart  student  of  the  Pharisees 
and  Herodians  had  tried  to  catch  Jesus  on  (Mark  12:14). 
The   Sanhedrin   made   it   anyhow   against  Jesus   to  Pilate 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  273 

(Luke  23:2)  and  Pilate  had  to  notice  it.  "Although  the 
emperors  never  ventured  to  assume  the  title  rex  at  Rome, 
in  the  Eastern  provinces  they  were  regularly  termed  hasil- 
eus'*'*  (Page).  The  Jews  here,  as  before  Pilate  (John  19:15), 
renounce  their  dearest  hope  of  a  Messianic  king.  It  is  plain 
that  Paul  had  preached  about  Jesus  as  the  Messiah,  King 
of  the  Kingdom  of  God  over  against  the  Roman  Empire,  a 
spiritual  kingdom,  to  be  sure,  but  the  Jews  here  turn  his 
language  to  his  hurt  as  they  did  with  Jesus.  As  a  matter  of 
fact  Paul's  preaching  about  the  kingdom  and  the  second 
coming  of  Christ  was  gravely  misunderstood  by  the  Chris- 
tians at  Thessalonica  after  his  departure  (I  Thess.  4:13-5:4; 
II  Thess.  2).  The  Jews  were  quick  to  seize  upon  his  language 
about  Jesus  Christ  to  his  own  injury.  Clearly  here  in  Thes- 
salonica Paul  had  faced  the  power  of  the  Roman  Empire 
in  a  new  way  and  pictured  over  against  it  the  grandeur  of 
the  reign  of  Christ. 

8.  They  troubled  the  multitude  and  the  rulers  {etaraxan  ton 
ochlon  kai  tous  politarchas).  First  aorist  active  of  tarasso,  old 
verb  to  agitate.  The  excitement  of  the  multitude  "agitated" 
the  politarchs  still  more.  To  the  people  it  meant  a  revolu- 
tion, to  the  politarchs  a  charge  of  complicity  in  treason  if 
they  let  it  pass.  They  had  no  way  to  disprove  the  charge 
of  treason  and  Paul  and  Silas  were  not  present. 

9.  When  they  had  taken  security  {labontes  to  hikanon).  A 
Greek  idiom  =  Latin  satis  accipere,  to  receive  the  sufficient 
(bond),  usually  money  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  judgment. 
Probably  the  demand  was  made  of  Jason  that  he  see  to  it 
that  Paul  and  Silas  leave  the  city  not  to  return.  In  I  Thess. 
2:i7f.  Paul  may  refer  to  this  in  mentioning  his  inability  to 
visit  these  Thessalonians  again.  The  idiom  lambanein  to 
hikanon  now  is  found  in  two  inscriptions  of  the  second  cen- 
tury A.D.  (0.  G.  I.  S.  484,  50  and  629,  loi).  In  Vol.  Ill 
Oxyrhynchus  Papyri  no.  294  a.d.  22  the  corresponding 
phrase  dounai  heikanon  ("to  give  security")  appears.    77i^y 


274      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

let  them  go  {apelusan  autous).  The  charge  was  serious  but  the 
proof  slim  so  that  the  politarchs  were  glad  to  be  rid  of  the 
case. 

10.  Immediately  by  night  (eutheos  dia  nuktos).  Paul's  work 
had  not  been  in  vain  in  Thessalonica  (I  Thess.  i  -.ji. ;  2 : 1 3 ,  20) . 
Paul  loved  the  church  here.  Two  of  them,  Aristarchus  and 
Secundus,  will  accompany  him  to  Jerusalem  (Acts  20:4) 
and  Aristarchus  will  go  on  with  him  to  Rome  (27:2).  Plainly 
Paul  and  Silas  had  been  in  hiding  in  Thessalonica  and  in 
real  danger.  After  his  departure  severe  persecution  came  to 
the  Christians  in  Thessalonica  (I  Thess.  2:14;  3:1-5;  II 
Thess.  1 :6).  It  is  possible  that  there  was  an  escort  of  Gentile 
converts  with  Paul  and  Silas  on  this  night  journey  to  Beroea 
which  was  about  fifty  miles  southwest  from  Thessalonica 
near  Pella  in  another  district  of  Macedonia  (Emathia). 
There  is  a  modern  town  there  of  some  6,000  people.  Went 
(apeiesan).  Imperfect  third  plural  active  of  apeimi,  old 
verb  to  go  away,  here  alone  in  the  N.T.  A  literary,  almost 
Atticistic,  form  instead  of  apelthon.  Into  the  synagogue  of  the 
Jews  (eis  ten  sunagogen  ton  loudaion).  Paul's  usual  custom 
and  he  lost  no  time  about  it.  Enough  Jews  here  to  have  a 
synagogue. 

11.  More  noble  than  those  (eugenesteroi  ton).  Comparative 
form  of  eugenes,  old  and  common  adjective,  but  in  N.T.  only 
here  and  Luke  19:12;  I  Cor.  i  :26.  Followed  by  ablative  case 
ton  as  often  after  the  comparative.  With  all  readiness  of  mind 
{meta  pases  prothumias).  Old  word  from  prothumos  (prOy 
thumos)  and  means  eagerness,  rushing  forward.  In  the  N.T. 
only  here  and  II  Cor.  8:11-19;  9:2.  In  Thessalonica  many  of 
the  Jews  out  of  pride  and  prejudice  refused  to  listen.  Here 
the  Jews  joyfully  welcomed  the  two  Jewish  visitors.  Examin- 
ing the  Scriptures  daily  {kath'  hemeran  anakrinontes  tas 
graphas).  Paul  expounded  the  Scriptures  daily  as  in  Thes- 
salonica, but  the  Beroeans,  instead  of  resenting  his  new 
interpretation,  examined  (anakrino  means  to  sift  up  and 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  275 

down,  make  careful  and  exact  research  as  in  legal  processes 
as  in  Acts  4:9;  12:19,  ^'t^O  ^he  Scriptures  for  themselves. 
In  Scotland  people  have  the  Bible  open  on  the  preacher 
as  he  expounds  the  passage,  a  fine  habit  worth  imitating. 
Whether  these  things  were  so  (ei  echoi  tauta  houtos).  Literally, 
"if  these  things  had  it  thus."  The  present  optative  in  the 
indirect  question  represents  an  original  present  indicative 
as  in  Luke  1:29  (Robertson,  Grammar,  pp.  I043f.).  This  use 
of  ei  with  the  optative  may  be  looked  at  as  the  condition 
of  the  fourth  class  (undetermined  with  less  likelihood 
of  determination)  as  in  Acts  17:27;  20:16;  24:19;  27:12 
(Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  102 1).  The  Beroeans  were  eagerly 
interested  in  the  new  message  of  Paul  and  Silas  but  they 
wanted  to  see  it  for  themselves.  What  a  noble  attitude. 
Paul's  preaching  made  Bible  students  of  them.  The  duty  of 
private  interpretation  is  thus  made  plain  (Hovey). 

12.  Many  therefore  {Polloi  men  oun).  As  a  result  of  this 
Bible  study.  Also  of  the  Greek  women  of  honourable  estate. 
The  word  Hellenis  means  Greek  woman,  but  the  word  gune 
is  added.  In  particular  women  of  rank  {euschemonon,  from 
eu  and  echo,  graceful  figure  and  the  honourable  standing)  as 
in  13 :50  (Mark  15 :43).  Probably  Luke  means  by  implication 
that  the  "men"  (andrdn)  were  also  noble  Greeks  though  he 
does  not  expressly  say  so.  So  then  the  Jews  were  more  open 
to  the  message,  the  proselytes  or  God-fearers  followed  suit, 
with  "not  a  few"  {ouk  oligoi)  real  Greeks  (both  men  and 
women)  believing.    It  was  quick  and  fine  work. 

13.  Was  proclaimed  (kateggele).  Second  aorist  passive 
indicative  of  kataggello,  common  late  verb  as  in  Acts  16:21. 
Of  Paul  {hupo  Paulou).  By  Paul,  of  course.  Stirring  up  and 
troubling  the  multitudes  {saleuontes  kai  tarassontes  tous  och- 
lous).  Shaking  the  crowds  like  an  earthquake  (4:31)  and 
disturbing  like  a  tornado  (17:8).  Success  at  Thessalonica 
gave  the  rabbis  confidence  and  courage.  The  attack  was 
sharp  and  swift.   The  Jews  from  Antioch  in  Pisidia  had  like- 


276      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

wise  pursued  Paul  to  Iconium  and  Lystra.  How  long  Paul 
had  been  in  Beroea  Luke  does  not  say.  But  a  church  was 
established  here  which  gave  a  good  account  of  itself  later 
and  sent  a  messenger  (Acts  20:4)  with  their  part  of  the  col- 
lection to  Jerusalem.  This  quiet  and  noble  town  was  in  a 
whirl  of  excitement  over  the  attacks  of  the  Jewish  emissaries 
from  Thessalonica  who  probably  made  the  same  charge  of 
treason  against  Paul  and  Silas. 

14.  And  then  immediately  {euthebs  de  tote).  They  acted 
swiftly  as  in  Thessalonica.  Sent  forth  {exapesteilan).  Double 
compound  {ex^  apo,  both  out  and  away)  common  in  late 
Greek.  First  aorist  active  indicative  {exapostello,  liquid 
verb).  Same  form  in  9:30.  As  far  as  to  the  sea  {heos  epi  ten 
thalassan).  It  is  not  clear  whether  Paul  went  all  the  way  to 
Athens  by  land  or  took  ship  at  Dium  or  Pydna,  some  six- 
teen miles  away,  and  sailed  to  Athens.  Some  even  think 
that  Paul  gave  the  Jews  the  slip  and  went  all  the  way  by 
land  when  they  expected  him  to  go  by  sea.  At  any  rate  we 
know  that  Paul  was  grieved  to  cut  short  his  work  in  Mace- 
donia, probably  not  over  six  months  in  all,  which  had  been  so 
fruitful  in  Philippi,  Thessalonica,  and  Beroea.  Silas  and 
Timothy  (note  his  presence)  remained  behind  in  Beroea  and 
they  would  keep  the  work  going.  Paul  no  doubt  hoped  to 
return  soon.  Silas  and  Timothy  in  Beroea  would  also  serve 
to  screen  his  flight  for  the  Jews  wanted  his  blood,  not  theirs. 
The  work  in  Macedonia  spread  widely  (I  Thess.  i  :7f.). 

15.  But  they  that  conducted  Paul  {hoi  de  kathistanontes  ton 
Paulon).  Articular  present  active  participle  of  kathistano 
(late  form  in  A  B  of  kathistemi  or  kathistao),  an  old  verb  with 
varied  uses  to  put  down,  to  constitute,  to  conduct,  etc.  This 
use  here  is  in  the  LXX  (Josh.  6:23)  and  old  Greek  also.  To 
Athens  {heos  Athenbn).  To  make  sure  of  his  safe  arrival. 
That  they  should  come  to  him  with  all  speed  {hina  hos  tachista 
elthbsin  pros  auton).  Note  the  neat  Greek  idiom  hos  tachista 
as  quickly  as  possible  (good  Attic  idiom).   The  indirect  com- 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  277 

mand  and  purpose  (hina-elthosin,  second  aorist  active  sub- 
junctive) is  also  neat  Greek  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  1046). 
Departed  (exeiesan).  Imperfect  active  of  exeimi,  old  Greek 
word,  but  rare  in  N.T.     All  in  Acts  (13:42;  17:15;  20:7; 

27:43) 

16.  Now  while  Paul  waited  for  them  in  Athens  {En  de  tais 
Athenais  ekdechomenou  autous  tou  Paulou).  Genitive  absolute 
with  present  middle  participle  of  ekdechomai,  old  verb  to 
receive,  but  only  with  the  sense  of  looking  out  for,  expecting 
found  here  and  elsewhere  in  N.T,  We  know  that  Timothy 
did  come  to  Paul  in  Athens  (I  Thess.  3:1,  6)  from  Thessa- 
lonica  and  was  sent  back  to  them  from  Athens.  H  Silas  also 
came  to  Athens,  he  was  also  sent  away,  possibly  to  Philippi, 
for  that  church  was  deeply  interested  in  Paul.  At  any  rate 
both  Timothy  and  Silas  came  from  Macedonia  to  Corinth 

^with  messages  and  relief  for  Paul  (Acts  18:5;  II  Cor.  ii:8f.). 

/  Before  they  came  and  after  they  left,  Paul  felt  lonely  in 

'  Athens  (I  Thess.  3:1),  the  first  time  on  this  tour  or  the  first 
that  he  has  been  completely  without  fellow  workers.  Athens 
had  been  captured  by  Sulla  B.C.  86.  After  various  changes 
Achaia,  of  which  Corinth  is  the  capital,  is  a  separate  province 
from  Macedonia  and  a.d.  44  was  restored  by  Claudius  to 
the  Senate  with  the  Proconsul  at  Corinth.  Paul  is  probably 
here  about  a.d.  50.  Politically  Athens  is  no  longer  of  impor- 
tance when  Paul  comes  though  it  is  still  the  univergity^eat 
of  the  world  with  all  its  rich  environment  and  traditions. 
Rackham  grows  eloquent  over  Paul  the  Jew  of  Tarsus  being 
in  the  city  of  Pericles  and  Demosthenes,  Socrates  and  Plate 
and  Aristotle,  Sophocles  and  Euripides.  In  its  Agora  Socrates 
had  taught,  here  was  the  Academy  of  Plato,  the  Lyceum  of 
Aristotle,  the  Porch  of  Zeno,  the  Garden  of  Epicurus.   Here 

/  men  still  talked  about  philosophy,  poetry,  politics,  religion, 
anything  and  everything.  It  was  the  art  centre  of  the  world. 
The  Parthenon,  the  most  beautiful  of  temples,  crowned  the 
Acropolis.    Was  Paul  insensible  to  all  this  cultural  environ- 


278      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

ment?  It  is  hard  to  think  so  for  he  was  a  university  man  of 
Tarsus  and  he  makes  a  number  of  allusions  to  Greek  writers. 
Probably  it  had  not  been  in  Paul's  original  plan  to  evangelize 
Athens,  difficult  as  all  university  seats  are,  but  he  cannot 
be  idle  though  here  apparently  by  chance  because  driven  out 
of  Macedonia.  Was  provoked  {par oxuneio).  Imperfect  passive 
of  paroxunby  old  verb  to  sharpen,  to  stimulate,  to  irritate 
(from  para,  oxus),  from  paroxusmos  (Acts  15:39),  common  in 
old  Greek,  but  in  N.T.  only  here  and  I  Cor.  13:5.  It  was  a 
continual  challenge  to  Paul's  spirit  when  he  beheld  [theo- 
rountos,  genitive  of  present  participle  agreeing  with  autou 
(his),  though  late  MSS.  have  locative  theorounti  agreeing 
with  en  autot\.  The  city  full  of  idols  (kateidolon  ousan  ten 
polin).  Note  the  participle  ousan  not  preserved  in  the 
English  (either  the  city  being  full  of  idols  or  that  the  city 
\  was  full  of  idols,  sort  of  indirect  discourse).  Paul,  like  any 
\  stranger  was  looking  at  the  sights  as  he  walked  around. 
This  adjective  kateidolon  (perfective  use  of  kata  and  eidolon 
is  found  nowhere  else,  but  it  is  formed  after  the  analogy  of 
katampelos,  katadendron),  full  of  idols.  Xenophon  (de  Republ. 
Ath.)  calls  the  city  hole  bomos,  hole  thuma  theois  kai  ana- 
thema (all  altar,  all  sacrifice  and  oflFering  to  the  gods).  These 
statues  were  beautiful,  but,  Paul  was  not  deceived  J2y__the_ 
mere  art  for  art's  sake.  The  idolatry  and  sensualism  of 
it  all  glared  at  him  (Rom.  1:18-32).  Renan  ridicules  Paul's 
ignorance  in  taking  these  statues  for  idols,  but  Paul  knew 
paganism  better  than  Renan.  The  superstition  of  this  centre 
of  Greek  culture  was  depressing  to  Paul.  One  has  only  to  re- 
call how  superstitious  cults  today  flourish  in  the  atmosphere 
of  Boston  and  Los  Angeles  to  understand  conditions  in 
Athens.  Pausanias  says  that  Athens  had  more  images  than 
all  the  rest  of  Greece  put  together.  Pliny  states  that  in  the 
time  of  Nero  Athens  hnd  over  30,000  public  statues  besides 
countless  private  ones  in  the  homes.  Petronius  sneers  that 
it  was  easier  to  find  a  god  than  a  man  in  Athens.     Every 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  279 

gateway  or  porch  had  its  protecting  god.  They  lined  the 
street  from  the  Piraeus  and  caught  the  eye  at  every  place  of 
prominence  on  wall  or  in  the  agora. 

17.  So  he  reasoned  {dielegeto  men  oun).  Accordingly  there- 
fore, with  his  spirit  stirred  by  the  proof  of  idolatry.  Imper- 
fect middle  of  dialego,  same  verb  used  in  verse  2  which  see. 
First  he  reasoned  in  the  synagogue  at  the  services  to  the 
Jews  and  the  God-fearers,  then  daily  in  the  agora  or  market- 
place (southwest  of  the  Acropolis,  between  it  and  the  Are- 
opagus and  the  Pnyx)  to  the  chance-comers,  "them  that  met 
I  him"   (pros  tous  paratugchanontas).      Simultaneously  with 

the  synagogue  preaching  at  other  hours  Paul  took  his  stand 
like  Socrates  before  him  and  engaged  in  conversation  with 
{pros)  those  who  happened  by.  This  old  verb,  paratugchanb^ 
occurs  here  alone  in  the  N.T.  and  accurately  pictures  the 
life  in  the  agora.  The  listeners  to  Paul  in  the  agora  would 
be  more  casual  than  those  who  stop  for  street  preaching,  a 
Salvation  Army  meeting,  a  harangue  from  a  box  in  Hyde 
Park.  It  ^yas  a  slim  chance  either  in  synagogue  or  in  agora, 
but  Paul  could  not  remain  still  with  all  the  reeking  idolatry 
around  him.  The  boundaries  of  the  agora  varied,  but  there 
was  always  the  Poikile  Stoa  (the  Painted  Porch),  over 
against  the  Acropolis  on  the  west.  In  this  Stoa  (Porch)  Zeno 
and  other  philosophers  and  rhetoricians  held  forth  from 
time  to  time.    Paul  may  have  stood  near  this  spot. 

18.  And  certain  also  of  the  Epicurean  and  Stoic  philos- 
ophers encountered  him  {tines  de  kai  ton  Epikourion  kai 
Stoikon  philosophon  suneballon  autbi).    Imperfect  active  of 

I  sunballo,  old  verb,  in  the  N.T.  only  by  Luke,  to  bring  or  put 
'  together  in  one's  mind  (Luke  2:19),  to  meet  together  (Acts 
20:14),  to  bring  together  aid  (18:27),  to  confer  or  converse  or 
dispute  as  here  and  already  4:15  which  see.  These  profes- 
sional philosophers  were  always  ready  for  an  argument  and 
so  they  frequented  the  agora  for  that  purpose.  Luke  uses 
one  article  and  so  groups  the  two  sects  together  in  their 


28o      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

attitude  toward  Paul,  but  they  were  very  different  in  fact. 
Both  sects  were  eager  for  argument  and  both  had  disdain 
for  Paul,  but  they  were  the  two  rival  practical  philosophies 
of  the  day,  succeeding  the  more  abstruse  theories  of  Plato 
and  Aristotle.  Socrates  had  turned  men's  thought  inward 
(Gnothi  Seautouy  "Know  Thyself)  away  from  the  mere  study 
of  physics.  Plato  followed  with  a  profound  development 
of  the  inner  self  (metaphysics).  Aristotle  with  his  cyclopae- 
dic grasp  sought  to  unify  and  relate  both  physics  and  meta- 
physics. Both  Zeno  and  Epicurus  (340-272  b.c.)  took  a  more 
practical  turn  in  all  this  intellectual  turmoil  and  raised  the 
issues  of  everyday  life.  Zeno  (360-260  b.c.)  taught  in  the 
Stoa  (Porch)  and  so  his  teaching  was  called  Stoicism.  He 
advanced  many  noble  ideas  that  found  their  chief  illustration 
in  the  Roman  philosophers  (Seneca,  Epictetus,  Marcus 
Aurelius).  He  taught  self-mastery  and  hardness  with  an 
austerity  that  ministered  to  pride  or  suicide  in  case  of 
failure,  a  distinctly  selfish  and  unloving  view  of  life  and  with 
a  pantheistic  philosophy.  Epicurus  considered  practical^ 
atheism  the  true  view  of  the  universe  and  denied  a  future 
life  and  claimed  pleasure  as  the  chief  thing  to  be  gotten 
out  of  life.  He  did  not  deny  the  existence  of  gods,  but  re- 
garded  them  as  unconcerned  with  the  life  of  men.  The  Stoics 
called  Epicurus  an  atheist.  Lucretius  and  Horace  give  the 
Epicurean  view  of  life  in  their  great  poems.  This  low  view 
^  of  life  led  to  sensualism  and  does  today,  for  both  Stoicism 
and  Epicureanism  are  widely  influential  with  people  now. 
"Eat  and  drink  for  tomorrow  we  die,"  they  preached.  Paul 
had  doubtless  become  acquainted  with  both  of  these  philoso- 
phies for  they  were  widely  prevalent  over  the  world.  Here 
he  confronts  them  in  their  very  home.  He  is  challenged  by 
past-masters  in  the  art  of  appealing  to  the  senses,  men  as 
skilled  in  their  dialectic  as  the  Pharisaic  rabbis  with  whom 
Paul  had  been  trained  and  whose  subtleties  he  had  learned 
how  to  expose.    But,  so  far  as  we  know,  this  is  a  new  expe- 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  281 

rience  for  Paul  to  have  a  public  dispute  with  these  philosoph- 
ical experts  who  had  a  natural  contempt  for  all  Jews  and  for 
rabbis  in  particular,  though  they  found  Paul  a  new  type  at 
any  rate  and  so  with  some  interest  in  him.  "In  Epicurean- 
ism, it  was  man's  sensual  nature  which  arrayed  Itself  against 
the  claims  of  the  gospel;  in  Stoicism  it  was  his  self-righteous- 
ness and  pride  of  intellect"  (Hackett).  Knowling  calls  the 
Stoic  the  Pharisee  of  philosophy  and  the  Epicurean  the  Sad- 
ducee  of  philosophy.  Socrates  in  this  very  agora  used  to  try 
to  interest  the  passers-by  in  some  desire  for  better  things. 
That  was  450  years  before  Paul  is  challenged  by  these 
superficia.LsaphisticaJ  Epicureans  and  Stoics.  It  is  doubtful 
if  Paul  had  ever  met  a  more  difficult  situation.  What  would 
this  babbler  say?  (Ti  an  theloi  ho  spermologos  houtos  legein?). 
The  word  for  "babbler "  means  "seed-picker "  or  picker  up  of 
seeds  {sperma,  seed,  lego,  to  collect)  like  a  bird  in  the  agora 
hopping  about  after  chance  seeds.  Plutarch  applies  the 
word  to  crows  that  pick  up  grain  in  the  fields.  Demosthenes 
called  Aeschines  a  spermologos.  Eustathius  uses  it  of  a  man 
hanging  around  in  the  markets  picking  up  scraps  of  food 
that  fell  from  the  carts  and  so  also  of  mere  rhetoricians  and 
\/  plagiarists  who  picked  up  scraps  of  wisdom  from  others. 
Ramsay  considers  it  here  a  piece  of  Athenian  slang  used  to 
describe  the  picture  of  Paul  seen  by  these  philosophers  who 
use  it,  for  not  all  of  them  had  it  ("some,"  tines).  Note  the 
use  of  an  and  the  present  active  optative  theloi,  conclusion 
of  a  fourth-class  condition  in  a  rhetorical  question  (Robert- 
son, Grammar,  p.  1021).  It  means,  What  would  this  picker 
iip_^of_seeds  wish  to  say,  if  he  should  get  oif  an  idea.'*  It  is  a 
contemptuous  tone  of  supreme_j:jdicule  and  doubtless  Paul 
/  heard  this  comment.  Probably  the  Epicureans  made  this 
sneer  that  Paul  was  a_charlata_a  or^quack.  Other  some  {hoi 
de).  But  others,  in  contrast  with  the  "some"  just  before. 
Perhaps  the  Stoics  take  this  more  serious  view  of  Paul.  He 
seemeth  to  be  a  setter  forth  of  strange  gods  (zenon  daimonion 


282      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

dokei  kataggeleus  einai).  This  view  is  put  cautiously  by  dokei 
(seems).  Kataggeleus  does  not  occur  in  the  old  Greek,  though 
in  ecclesiastical  writers,  but  Deissmann  {Light  from  the 
Ancient  East,  p.  99)  gives  an  example  of  the  word  "on  a 
marble  stele  recording  a  decree  of  the  Mitylenaens  in  honour 
of  the  Emperor  Augustus,"  where  it  is  the  herald  of  the 
games.  Here  alone  in  the  N.T.  Daimonion  is  used  in 
the  old  Greek  sense  of  deity  or  divinity  whether  good  or 
bad,  not  in  the  N.T.  sense  of  demons.  Both  this  word  and 
kataggeleus  are  used  from  the  Athenian  standpoint.  Xenos 
is  an  old  word  for  a  guest-friend  (Latin  hospes)  and  then  host 
(Rom.  16:23),  then  for  foreigner  or  stranger  (Matt.  25:31; 
Acts  17:21),  new  and  so  strange  as  here  and  Heb.  13:9;  I 
Peter  4:12,  and  then  aliens  (Eph.  2:12).  This  view  of  Paul 
is  the  first  count  against  Socrates:  Socrates  does  wrong,  in- 
troducing new  deities  {adikei  Sokrates,  kaina  daimonia 
eispheron,  Xen.  Alem.  i).  On  this  charge  the  „AthenIaijs 
voted  the  hemlock  for  their  greatest  citizen.  What  will  they 
do  to  Paul.^  This  Athens  was  more  sceptical  and  more 
tolerant  than  the  old  Athens.  But  Roman  law  did  not  allow 
the  introduction  of  a  new  religion  {religio  illicita).  Paul  was 
1  walking  on  thin  ice  though  he  was  the  real  master  philosopher 
and  these  Epicureans  and  Stoics  were  quacks.  Paul  had  the 
I  only  true  philosophy  of  the  universe  and  life  with  Jesus 
pChrist  as  the  centre  (Col.  i :  12-20),  the  greatest  of_alIj2hiloso- 
phers  as  Ramsay  justly  terms  him.  But  these  men  are  mock- 
ing him.  Because  he  preached  Jesus  and  the  resurrection  {hoti 
ton  lesoun  kai  ten  anastasin  eueggelizato).  Reason  for  the 
view  just  stated.  Imperfect  middle  indicative  of  euaggelizo, 
to  "gospelize."  Apparently  these  critics  considered  anastasis 
(Resurrection)  another  deity  on  a  par  with  Jesus.  The 
Athenians  worshipped  all  sorts  of  abstract  truths  and  vir- 
tues and  they  misunderstood  Paul  on  this  subject.  They 
will  leave  him  as  soon  as  he  mentions  the  resurrection 
(verse    32).      It  is  objected  that  Luke  would  not  use  the 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  283 

word  in  this  sense  here  for  his  readers  would  not  under- 
stand him.  But  Luke  is  describing  the  misapprehension 
of  this  group  of  philosophers  and  this  interpretation  fits  in 
precisely. 

19.  And  they  took  hold  of  him  {epilahomenoi  de  autou). 
Second  aorist  middle  participle  of  epilambano,  old  verb, 
but  in  the  N.T.  only  in  the  middle,  here  with  the  genitive 
autou  to  lay  hold  of,  but  with  no  necessary  sense  of  violence 
(Acts  9:27;  23:27;  Mark  8:23),  unless  the  idea  is  that 
Paul  was  to  be  tried  before  the  Court  of  Areopagus  for  the 
\crime  of  bringing  in  strange  gods.  But  the  day  for  that  had 
passed  in  Athens.  Even  so  it  is  not  clear  whether  ^^unto 
the  Areopagus  {epi  ton  Areion  Pagon^^)  means  the  Hill  of 
Mars  (west  of  the  Acropolis,  north  of  the  agora  and  reached 
by  a  flight  of  steps  in  the  rock)  or  the  court  itself  which 
met  elsewhere  as  well  as  on  the  hills,  usually  in  fact  in  the 
Stoa  Basilica  opening  on  the  agora  and  near  to  the  place 
where  the  dispute  had  gone  on.  Raphael's  cartoon  with  Paul 
standing  on  Mars  Hill  has  made  us  all  familiar  with  the 
common  view,  but  it  is  quite  uncertain  if  it  is  true.  There 
was  not  room  on  the  summit  for  a  large  gathering.  If  Paul 
was  brought  before  the  Court  of  Areopagus  (commonly  called 
the  Areopagus  as  here),  it  was  not  for  trial  as  a  criminal,  but 
simply  for  examination  concerning  his  new  teaching  in  this 
university  city  whether  it  was  strictly  legal  or  not.  Paul 
was  really  engaged  in  proselytism  to  turn  the  Athenians 
away  from  their  old  gods  to  Jesus  Christ.  But  "the  court 
of  refined  and  polished  Athenians  was  very  different  from 
the  rough  provincial  magistrates  of  Philippi,  and  the  philoso- 
phers who  presented  Paul  to  their  cognizance  very  different 
from  the  mob  of  Thessalonians"  (Rackham).  Itwas^all  very 
polite.  May  we  know?  {Dunametha  gnonai).  Can  we  come 
to  know  (ingressive  second  aorist  active  infinitive).  This  new 
teaching  {he  kaine  haute  didache).  On  the  position  of  haute 
see    Robertson,    Grammar,    pp.    70of.    The    question    was 


284      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

prompted  by  courtesy,  sarcasm,  or  irony.      Evidently  no 
definite  charge  was  laid  against  Paul. 

20.  For  thou  bringest  certain  strange  things  {xenizonta  gar 
tina  eisphereis).  The  very  verb  used  by  Xenophon  {Mem.  i) 
about  Socrates.  Xenizonta  is  present  active  neuter  plural 
participle  of  xenizo  and  from  xenos  (verse  18),  "things  sur- 
prising or  shocking  us."  fVe  would  know  therefore  (boulometha 
oun  gnonai).  Very  polite  still,  we  wish  or  desire,  and  repeat- 
ing gnonai  (the  essential  point). 

21.  Spent  their  time  (eukairoun).  Imperfect  active  of  euk- 
aireo.  A  late  word  to  have  opportunity  (eu,  kairos)  from 
Polybius  on.  In  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Mark  6:31.  They 
had  time  for,,  etc.  This  verse  is  an  explanatory  parenthesis 
by  Luke.  Some  new  thing  {ti  kainoteron).  Literally  "some- 
thing newer"  or  "fresher"  than  the  new,  the  very  latest, 
the  comparative  of  kainos.  Demosthenes  {Philipp.  I.  43) 
pictures  the  Athenians  "in  the  agora  inquiring  if  anything 
newer  is  said"  {punthanomenoi  kata  ten  agoran  ei  ti  legetai 
neoteron).  .The  new  soon  became  stale  with  these  itching 
and    frivolous    Athenians. 

22.  Stood  in  the  midst  0/  the  Areopagus  (statheis  en  mesoi 
tou  Areiou  Pagou).  First  aorist  passive  of  histemi  used  of 
Peter  in  2:14.  Majestic  figure  whether  on  Mars  Hill  or  in 
the  Stoa  Basilica  before  the  Areopagus  Court.  There  would 
be  a  crowd  of  spectators  and  philosophers  in  either  case  and 
Paul  seized  the  opportunity  to  preach  Christ  to  this  strange 
audience  as  he  did  in  Caesarea  before  Herod  Agrippa  and 
the  crowd  of  prominent  people  gathered  by  Festus  for  the 
entertainment.  Paul  does  not  speak  as  a  man  on  trial,  but 
as  one  trying  to  get  a  hearing  for  the  gospel  of  Christ.  Some- 
what superstitious  (hos  deisidaimonesterous) .  The  Authorized 
Version  has  "too  superstitious,"  the  American  Standard 
"very  religious."  Deisidaimon  is  a  neutral  word  (from 
deidoj  to  fear,  and  daimon,  deity).  The  Greeks  used  it  either 
in  the  good  sense  of  pious  or  religious  or  the  bad  sense  of 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  285 

superstitious.  Thayer  suggests  that  Paul  uses  it  "with 
kindly  ambiguity."  Page  thinks  that  Luke  uses  the  word  to 
represent  the  religious  feeling  of  the  Athenians  (religiosus) 
which  bordered  on  superstition.  The  Vulgate  has  super- 
stitiosiores.  In  25:19  Festus  uses  the  term  deisidaimonia  for 
"religion."  It  seems  unlikely  that  Paul  should  give  this 
audience  a  slap  in  the  face  at  the  very  start.  The  way  one 
takes  this  adjective  here  colours  Paul's  whole  speech  before 
the  Council  of  Areopagus.  The  comparative  here  as  in  verse 
21  means  more  religions  than  usual  (Robertson,  Grammar, 
pp.  66^i.),  the  object  of  the  comparison  not  being  expressed. 
The  Athenians  had  a  tremendous  reputation  for  their  de- 
votion to  religion,  "full  of  idols"  (verse  16). 

23.  For  {gar).  Paul  gives  an  illustration  of  their  reli- 
giousness from  his  own  experiences  in  their  city.  The  objects 
of  your  worship  {ta  sebasmata  humbn).  Late  word  from 
sebazomai,  to  worship.  In  N.T.  only  here  and  II  Thess.  2:4. 
The  use  of  this  word  for  temples,  altars,  statues,  shows  the 
conciliatory  tone  in  the  use  of  deisidaimonesterous  in  verse  22. 
An  altar  (bdmon).  Old  word,  only  here  in  the  N.T.  and  the 
only  mention  of  a  heathen  altar  in  the  N.T.  With  this  inscrip- 
tion (en  hoi  epegegrapto).  On  which  had  been  written  (stood 
written),  past  perfect  passive  indicative  of  epigrapho,  old 
and  common  verb  for  writing  on  inscriptions  (epigraph?, 
Luke  23:38).  To  an  Unknown  God  [AGNOSTO  THEO). 
Dative  case,  dedicated  to.  Pausanias  (I.  i,  4)  says  that  in 
Athens  there  are  "altars  to  gods  unknown"  {bomoi  theon 
agnoston).  Epimenides  in  a  pestilence  advised  the  sacri- 
fice of  a  sheep  to  the  befitting  god  whoever  Ke  might  be.  If 
an  altar  was  dedicated  to  the  wrong  deity,  the  Athenians 
feared  the  anger  of  the  other  gods.  The  only  use  in  the  N.T. 
of  agnostos,  old  and  common  adjective  (from  a  privative  and 
gnbstos  verbal  of  ginosko,  to  know).  Our  word  agnostic  comes 
from  it.  Here  it  has  an  ambiguous  meaning,  but  Paul  uses 
it  though  to  a  stern  Christian  philosopher  it  may  be  the 


286      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

"confession  at  once  of  a  bastard  philosophy  and  of  a  bastard 
religion"  (Hort,  Hulsean  Lectures,^.  64).  Paul  was  quick  to 
use  this  confession  on  the  part  of  the  Athenians  of  a  higher 
power  than  yet  known  to  them.  So  he  gets  his  theme  from 
this  evidence  of  a  deeper  religious  sense  in  them  and  makes 
a  most  clever  use  of  it  with  consummate  skill.  In  ignorance 
{agnoountes).  Present  active  participle  of  agnoeo,  old  verb 
from  same  root  as  agnostos  to  which  Paul  refers  by  using  it. 
This  set  I  forth  unto  you  {touto  ego  kataggello  humin).  He  is  a 
kataggeleus  (verse  18)  as  they  suspected  of  a  God,  both  old 
and  new,  old  in  that  they  already  worship  him,  new  in  that 
Paul  knows  who  he  is.  By  this  master  stroke  he  has  brushed 
to^one^ideany  notion  of  violation  of  Roman  law  or  suspicion 
of  heresy  and  claims  their  endorsement  of  his  new  gospel,  a 
shrewd  and  consummate  turn.  He  has  their  attention  now  and 
proceeds  to  describe  this  God  left  out  of  their  list  as  the 
one  true  and  Supreme  God.  The  later  MSS.  here  read 
hon — touton  (whom — this  one)  rather  than  ho — touto  (what — 
this),  but  the  late  text  is  plainly  an  effort  to  introduce  too 
soon  the  personal  nature  of  God  which  comes  out  clearly 
in  verse  24. 

24.  The  God  that  made  the  world  {Ho  theos  ho  poiesas  ton 
kosmon).  Not  a  god  for  this  and  a  god  for  that  like  the  30,000 
gods  of  the  Athenians,  but  the  one  God  who  made  the  Uni- 
verse (kosmos  on  the  old  Greek  sense  of  orderly  arrangement 
of  the  whole  universe).  And  all  things  therein  {kai  panta  ta 
en  autbi).  All  the  details  in  the  universe  were  created  by  this 
one  God.  Paul  is  using  the  words  of  Isa.  42^.  The  Epi- 
cureans held  that  matter  was  eternal.  Paul  sets  them  aside. 
This  one  God  was  not  to  be  confounded  with  any  of  their 
numerous  gods  save  with  this  "Unknown  God."  Being 
Lord  oj  heaven  and  earth  {ouranou  kai  ges  huparchon  kurios). 
Kurios  here  owner,  absolute  possessor  of  both  heaven  and 
earth  (Isa.  457),  not  of  just  parts.  Dwelleth  not  in  temples 
made  with  hands  iouken  cheiropoietois  naois  katoikei).    The 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  287 

old  adjective  cheiropoietos  (cheir,  poieo)  already  in  Stephen's 
speech  (7:48).  No  doubt  Paul  pointed  to  the  wonderful 
Parthenon,  supposed  to  be  the  home  of  Athene  as  Stephen 
denied  that  God  dwelt  alone  in  the  temple  in  Jerusalem. 

25.  As  though  he  needed  anything  (prosdeomenos  tinos). 
Present  middle  participle  of  prosdeomaij  to  want  besides, 
old  verb,  but  here  only  in  the  N.T.  This  was  strange  doc- 
trine for  the  people  thought  that  the  gods  needed  their 
offerings  for  full  happiness.  This  self-sufficiency  of  God  was 
taught  by  Philo  and  Lucretius,  but  Paul  shows  that  the 
Epicurean  missed  it  by  putting  God,  if  existing  at  all,,  out: 
side  the  universe.  Seeing  he  himself  giveth  to  all  {autos  didous 
pasin).  This  Supreme  Personal  God  is  the  source  of  life, 
breath,  and  everything.  Paul  here  rises  above  all  Greek 
philosophers. 

26.  And  he  made  of  one  (epoiesen  te  ex  henos).  The  word 
haimatos  (blood)  is  absent  from  Aleph  A  B  and  is  a  later 
explanatory  addition.  What  Paul  affirms  is  the  unity  of  the 
human  race  with  a  common  origin  and  with  God  as  the 
Creator.  This  view  runs  counter  to  Greek  exclusiveness 
which  treated  other  races  as  barbarians  and  to  Jewish  pride 
which  treated  other  nations  as  heathen  or  pagan  (the  Jews 
were  laos,  the  Gentiles  ethne).  The  cosmopolitanism  of  Paul 
here  rises  above  Jew  and  Greek  and  claims  the  one  God  as 
the  Creator  of  the  one  race  of  men.  The  Athenians  them- 
selves claimed  to  be  antochthonous  (indigenous)  and  a  special 
creation.  Zeno  and  Seneca  did  teach  a  kind  of  cosmopoli- 
tanism (really  pantheism)  far  different  from  the  personal 
God  of  Paul.  It  was  Rome,  not  Greece,  that  carried  out 
the  moral  ideas  of  Zeno.  Man  is  part  of  the  universe  (verse 
24)  and  God  created  {epoiesen)  man  as  he  created  (poiesas) 
the  all.  For  to  dwell  (katoikein).  Infinitive  (present  active) 
of  purpose,  so  as  to  dwell.  Having  determined  (horisas). 
First  aorist  active  participle  of  horizo,  old  verb  to  make  a 
horizon  as  already  in  19:42  which  sec.     Paul  here  touches 


288      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

God's  Providence.  God  has  revealed  himself  in  history  as 
in  creation.  His  hand  appears  in  the  history  of  all  men  as 
well  as  in  that  of  the  Chosen  People  of  Israel.  Appointed 
seasons  {prostetagmenous  kairous).  Not  the  weather  as  in 
14:17,  but  "the  times  of  the  Gentiles"  (kairoi  ethnon)  of 

t  which  Jesus  spoke  (Luke  21 124).  The  perfect  passive  partici- 
ple of  prostasso,  old  verb  to  enjoin,  emphasizes  God's  con- 
trol of  human  history  without  any  denial  of  human  free 
agency  as  was  involved  in  the  Stoic  Fate  {Heirmarmene). 
Bounds  {horothesias).  Limits.''  Same  idea  in  Job  12:23. 
Nations  rise  and  fall,  but  it  is  not  blind  chance  or  hard  fate. 
Thus  there  is  an  interplay  betwen  God's  will  and  man's 
activities,  difficult  as  it  is  for  us  to  see  with  our  shortened 
vision. 

27.  That  they  should  seek  God  {Zetein  ton  theon).  Infinitive 
(present  active)  of  purpose  again.  Seek  him,  not  turn  away 
from  him  as  the  nations  had  done  (Rom.  i :  18-3 2).  //  haply 
they  might  feel  after  him  {ei  ara  ge  pselapheseian  auton). 
First  aorist  active  (Aeolic  form)  optative  of  pselaphao,  old 
/  verb  from  psao,  to  touch.    So  used  by  the  Risen  Jesus  in  his 

y  challenge  to  the  disciples  (Luke  24:39),  by  the  Apostle  John 
of  his  personal  contact  with  Jesus  (I  John  i:i),  of  the  con- 
tact with  Mount  Sinai  (Heb.  12:18).  Here  it  pictures  the 
blind  groping  of  the  darkened  heathen  mind  after  God  to 
"find  him"  (heuroien,  second  aorist  active  optative)  whom 
they  had  lost.  One  knows  what  it  is  in  a  darkened  room  to 
feel  along  the  walls  for  the  door  (Deut.  28:29;  Job  5:14; 
12:25;  Isa.  59:10).  Helen  Keller,  when  told  of  God,  said  that 
she  knew  of  him  already,  groping  in  the  dark  after  him.  The 
optative  here  with  ei  is  due  to  the  condition  of  the  fourth 
class  (undetermined,  but  with  vague  hope  of  being  deter- 
mined) with  aim  also  present  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  1021). 
Note  also  ara  ge  the  inferential  particle  ara  with  the  delicate 
intensive  particle  ge.  Though  he  is  not  far  from  each  one  of  us 
{km  ge  ou  makran  apo  henos  hekastou  hemon  huparchonta). 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  289 

More  exactly  with  B  L  {kai  ge  instead  of  kaitoi  or  kaitoi  ge), 
"and  yet  being  not  far  from  each  one  of  us,"  a  direct  state- 
ment rather  than  a  concessive  one.  The  participle  hupar- 
chonta  agrees  with  auton  and  the  negative  ou  rather  than  the 
usual  me  with  the  participle  makes  an  emphatic  negative. 
Note  also  the  intensive  particle  ge. 

28.  For  in  him  {en  autoi  gar).  Proof  of  God's  nearness,  not 
stoic  pantheism,  but  real  immanence  in  God  asTjoTdweils 
in  us.  The  three  verbs  (zomen,  kinoumetha,  esmen)  form  an 
ascending  scalejind  reach  a  climax  in^God  (life>  movement, 
existence).  Kinbumetha  is  either  direct  middle  present  indica- 
tive (we  move  ourselves)  or  passive  (we  are  moved).  As  cer- 
tain even  of  your  own  poets  (hos  kai  tines  ton  kath*  humds 
poieton).  "As  also  some  of  the  poets  among  you."  Aratus  of 
Soli  in  Cilicia  (ab.  B.C.  270)  has  these  very  words  in  his  Ta 
Phainomena  and  Cleanthes,  Stoic  philosopher  (300-220  b.c.) 
in  his  Hymn  to  Zeus  has  Ek  sou  gar  genos  esmen.  In  I  Cor. 
15:32  Paul  quotes  from  Menander  and  in  Titus  1:12  from 
Epimenides.  J.  Rendel  Harris  claims  that  he  finds  allusions 
in  Paul's  Epistles  to  Pindar,  Aristophanes,  and  other  Greek 
writers.  There  is  no  reason  in  the  world  why  Paul  should  not 
have  acquaintance  with  Greek  literature,  though  one  need 
not  strain  a  point  to  prove  it.  Paul,  of  course,  knew  that 
the  words  were  written  of  Zeus  (Jupiter),  not  of  Jehovah, 
but  he  applies  the  idea  in  them  to  his  point  just  made  that 
all  men  are  the  offspring  of  God. 

29.  fFe  ought  not  to  think  (ouk  opheilomen  nomizein).  It  is 
a  logical  conclusion  {oun^  therefore)  from  the  very  language  of 
Aratus  and  Cleanthes.  That  the  Godhead  is  like  {to  theion 
einai  homoion).  Infinitive  with  accusative  of  general  refer- 
ence in  indirect  discourse.  To  theion  is  strictly  "the  divine" 
nature  like  theiotes  (Rom.  l  :2o)  rather  than  like  theotes  (Col. 
2:9).  Paul  may  have  used  to  theion  here  to  get  back  behind 
all  their  notions  of  various  gods  to  the  real  nature  of  God. 
The  Athenians  may  even  have  used  the  term  themselves. 


290      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

After  homoios  (like)  the  associative  instrumental  case  is  used 
as  with  chrusoi,  arguroi,  liihoi.  Graven  by  art  and  device  of  man 
{charagmati  iechnes  kai  enthumeseos  anthrdpou).  Apposition 
with  preceding  and  so  charagmati  in  associative  instrumental 
case.  Literally,  graven  work  or  sculpture  from  charasso,  to 
engrave,  old  word,  but  here  alone  in  N.T.  outside  of  Revela- 
tion (the  mark  of  the  beast).  Graven  work  of  art  {technes)  or 
external  craft,  and  of  thought  or  device  {enthumeseos)  or 
internal  conception  of  man. 

30.  The  times  of  ignorance   {tous  chronous  tes  agnoias). 
^ThetLmes  before  full  knowledge  of  God  came  in  Jesus  Christ. 

Paul  uses  the  very  word  for  their  ignorance  (agnoountes) 
employed  in  verse  23.  Overlooked  (huperidon).  Second  aorist 
active  participle  of  huperorao  or  hupereidoj  old  verb  to  see 
beyond,  not  to  see,  to  overlook,  not  "to  wink  at"  of  the 
Authorized  Version  with  the  notion  of  condoning.  Here  only 
in  the  N.T.  It  occurs  in  the  LXX  in  the  sense  of  overlooking 
or  neglecting  (Psa.  18:62;  55:1).  But  it  has  here  only  a  nega- 
tive force.  God  has  all  the  time  objected  to  the  polytheism 
of  the  heathen,  and  now  he  has  made  it  plain.  In  Wisdom 
11:23  we  have  these  words:  "Thou  overlookest  the  sins  of 
men  to  the  end  they  may  repent."  But  now  (ta  nun).  Accusa- 
tive of  general  reference,  "as  to  the  now  things  or  situation." 
All  is  changed  now  that  Christ  has  come  with  the  full  knowl- 
edge of  God.  See  also  27:22.  /^ll  everywhere  {pantas  panta- 
chou).  No  exceptions  anywhere.  Repent  (metanoein) .  Present 
active  infinitive  of  metanoed  in  indirect  command,  a  per- 
manent command  of  perpetual  force.  See  on  metanoed  Acts 
2:38  and  the  Synoptic  Gospels.  This  word  was  the  message 
of  the  Baptist,  of  Jesus,  of  Peter,  of  Paul,  this  radical  change 
of  attitude  and  life. 

31.  Inasmuch  as  (kathoti).  According  as  {kata^  hoti).  Old 
causal  conjunction,  but  in  N.T.  only  used  in  Luke's  writings 
(Luke  1:7;  19:9;  Acts  2:45;  4:35;  17:31).  Hath  appointed  a 
day    {est? sen   hemeran).      First   aorist   active   indicative   of 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  291 

hvstemi,  to  place,  set.  God  did  set  the  day  in  his  counsel  and 
he  will  fulfil  it  in  his  own  time.  Will  judge  {mellei  krinein). 
Rather,  is  going  to  judge,  mello  and  the  present  active  in- 
finitive of  krino.  Paul  here  quotes  Psa.  9:8  where  krinei  ^ 
occurs.  By  the  man  whom  he  hath  ordained  {en  andri  hoi 
horisen).  Here  he  adds  to  the  Psalm  the  place  and  function 
of  Jesus  Christ,  a  passage  in  harmony  with  Christ's  own 
words  in  Matt.  25.  Hoi  (whom)  is  attracted  from  the 
accusative,  object  of  horisen  (first  aorist  active  indicative 
of  horizo)  to  the  case  of  the  antecedent  andri.  It  has  been 
said  that  Paul  left  the  simple  gospel  in  this  address  to  the 
council  of  the  Areopagus  for  philosophy.  But  did  he.''  He 
skilfully  caught  their  attention  by  reference  to  an  altar  to 
an  Unknown  God  whom  he  interprets  to  be  the  Creator  of 
all  things  and  all  men  who  overrules  the  whole  world  and 
who  now  commands  repentance  of  all  and  has  revealed  his 
will  about  a  day  of  reckoning  when  Jesus  Christ  will  be 
Judge.  He  has  pj;eached  the  unity  of  God,  the  one  and  only 
God,  has  proclaimed  repentance,  a  judgment  day,  Jesus  as 
the  Judge  as  shown  by  his  Resurrection,  great  fundamental 
doctrines,  and  doubtless  had  much  more  to  say  when  they 
interrupted  his  address.  There  is  no  room  here  for  such  a 
charge  against  Paul.  He  rose  to  a  great  occasion  and  made 
a  masterful  exposition  of  God's  place  and  power  in  human 
history.  Whereof  he  hath  given  assurance  {pistin  paraschon). 
Second  aorist  active  participle  of  parecho,  old  verb  to  furnish, 
used  regularly  by  Demosthenes  for  bringing  forward  ev- 
idence. Note  this  old  use  of  pistis  as  conviction  or  ground 
of  confidence  (Heb.  ii:i)  like  a  note  or  title-deed,  a  convic- 
tion resting  on  solid  basis  of  fact.  All  the  other  uses  of  pistis 
grow  out  of  this  one  from  peitho,  to  persuade.  In  that  he  hath 
raised  him  from  the  dead  {anastesas  auton  ek  nekron).  First 
aorist  active  participle  of  anistemij  causal  participle,  but 
literally,  "having  raised  him  from  the  dead."  This  Paul 
knew  to  be  a  fact  because  he  himself  had  seen  the  Risen 


292      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Christ.  Paul  has  here  come  to  the  heart  of  his  message  and 
could  now  throw  light  on  their  misapprehension  about 
"Jesus  and  the  Resurrection"  (verse  i8).  Here  Paul  has 
given  the  proof  of  all  his  claims  in  the  address  that  seemed 
Knew  and  strange  to  them. 

32.  The  resurrection  of  the  dead  {anastasin  nekron).  Rather, 
"a  resurrection  of  dead  men."  No  article  with  either  word. 
The  Greeks  believed  that  the  souls  of  men  lived  on,  but 
they  had  no  conception  of  resurrection  of  the  body.  They 
had  listened  with  respect  till  Paul  spoke  of  the  actual  resur- 
rection of  Jesus  from  the  dead  as  a  fact,  when  they  did  not 
care  to  hear  more.  Some  mocked  {hoi  men  echleuazon).  Im- 
perfect active  of  chleuazo,  a  common  verb  (from  chleue, 
jesting,  mockery).  Only  here  in  the  N.T.  though  late  MSS. 
have  it  in  2:13  (best  MSS.  diachleuazo) .  Probably  inchoa- 
tive here,  began  to  mock.  In  contempt  at  Paul's  statement 
they  declined  to  listen  further  to  "this  babbler"  (verse  18) 
who  had  now  lost  what  he  had  gained  with  this  group  of 
hearers  (probably  the  light  and  flippant  Epicureans).  But 
others  {hoi  de).  A  more  polite  group  like  those  who  had  in- 
vited him  to  speak  (verse  19).  They  were  unconvinced, 
but  had  better  manners  and  so  were  in  favour  of  an  adjourn- 
ment. This  was  done,  though  it  is  not  clear  whether  it  was 
a  serious  postponement  or  a  courteous  refusal  to  hear  Paul 
further  (probably  this).  It  was  a  virtual  dismissal  of  the 
matter.  "It  is  a  sad  story — the  noblest  of  ancient  cities  and 
the  noblest  man  of  history — and  he  never  cared  to  look  on  it 
again"   (Furneaux). 

33.  Thus  Paul  went  out  from  among  them  {houtos  ho  Paulos 
exelthen  ek  mesou  auton).  No  further  questions,  no  effort 
to  arrest  him,  no  further  ridicule.  He_walked  out  never  ta 
return  to  Athens.    Had  he  failed.'' 

34.  Clave  unto  him  and  believed  ikollethentes  autbi  episteu- 
san).  First  aorist  passive  of  this  strong  word  koUad,  to  glue 
to,  common  in  Acts  (5:13;  8:29;  9:26;  10:28).   No  sermon  is  a 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  293 

failure  which  leads  a  group  of  men  {andres)  to  believe  (in- 
gressive  aorist  of  pisteub)  in  Jesus  Christ.  Many  so-called 
great  or  grand  sermons  reap  no  such  harvest.  Dionysius  the 
Areopagite  {Dionusios  ho  Areopagites).  One  of  the  judges 
of  the  Court  of  the  Areopagus.  That  of  itself  was  no  small 
victory.  He  was  one  of  this  college  of  twelve  judges  who 
had  helped  to  make  Athens  famous.  Eusebius  says  that  he 
became  afterwards  bishop  of  the  Church  at  Athens  and 
died  a  martyr.  A  woman  named  Damaris  {gune  onomati 
Damans).  A  woman  by  name  Damaris.  Not  the  wife  of 
Dionysius  as  some  have  thought,  but  an  aristocratic  woman, 
not  necessarily  an  educated  courtezan  as  Furneaux  holds. 
And  there  were  "others"  (heteroi)  with  them,  a  group  strong 
enough  to  keep  the  fire  burning  in  Athens.  It  is  common 
to  say  that  Paul  in  I  Cor.  2:1-5  alludes  to  his  failure  with 
philosophy  in  Athens  when  he  failed  to  preach  Christ  cruci- 
fied and  he  determined  never  to  make  that  mistake  again. 
On  the  other  hand  Paul  determined  to  stick  to  the  Cross 
of  Christ  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  intellectual  pride  and 
superficial  culture  of  Athens  had  prevented  the  largest 
success.  As  he  faced  Corinth  with  its  veneer  of  culture  and 
imitation  of  philosophy  and  sudden  wealth  he  would  go  on 
with  the  same  gospel  of  the  Cross,  the  only  gospel  that 
Paul  knew  or  preached.  And  it  was  a  great  thing  to  give  the 
world  a  sermon  like  that  preached  in  Athens. 


CHAPTER  XVIII 

1,  To  Corinth  {eis  Korinthon).  Mummius  had  captured 
and  destroyed  Corinth  B.C.  146.  It  was  jestored  by  Julius 
Caesar  b.c.  46  as  a  boom  town  and  made  a  colony.  It  was 
now  the  capital  of  the  province  of  Achaia  and  the  chief 
commercial  city  of  Greece  with  a  cosmopolitan  population. 
It  was  only  fiftyL-saiks^ironL^thens.  The  summit  of  Acro- 
corinthus  was  1,800  feet  high  and  the  ports  of  Cenchreae  and 
Lechaeum  and  the  Isthmus  across  which  ships  were  hauled 
gave  it  command  of  the  trade  routes  between  Asia  and  Rome. 
The  temple  of  Aphrodite  on  the  Acrocorinthus  had  a  thou- 
sand consecrated  prostitutes  and  the  very  name  to  Corin- 
thianize  meant  immorality.  Not  the  Parthenon  with  Athene 
faced  Paul  in  Corinth,  but  a  worse  situation.  Naturally 
many  Jews  were  in  such  a  mart  of  trade.  Philippi,  Thessa- 
lonica,  Beroea,  Athens,  all  had  brought  anxiety  to  Paul. 
What  could  he  expect  in  licentious  Corinth.'' 

2.  Aquila  {Akulan).  Luke  calls  him  a  Jewfrom  Pontus, 
apparently  not^£t^a  disciple,  though  there  were  Jews  from 
Pontus  at  the  great  Pentecost  who  were  converted  (2:9). 
Aquila  who  made  the  famous  a.d.  translation  of  the  O.T. 
was  also  from  Pontus.  Paul  "found"  (heuron,  second  aorist 
active  participle  of  heuriskb)  though  we  do  not  know 
how.  Edersheim  says  that  a  Jewish  guild  always  kept  to- 
gether whether  in  street  or  synagogue  so  that  by  this  bond 
they  probably  met.  Lately  come  from  Italy  (prosphatos 
eleluthota  apo  tes  Italias).  Second  perfect  participle  of  erch- 
omai.  Koine  adverb,  here  only  in  the  N.T.,  from  adjective 
prosphatos  {pro,  sphao  or  sphazo,  to  kill),  lately  slaughtered 
and  so  fresh  or  recent  (Heb.  10:20).  With  his  wife  Priscilla 
{kai  Priskillan  gunaika  autou).   Diminutive  of  Priska  (Rom. 

294 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  295 

16:3;  I  Cor.  16:19).  Prisca  is  a  name  in  the  Acilian  family 
and  the  Prisci  was  the  name  of  another  noble  clan.  Aquila 
may  have  been  a  freedman  like  many  Jews  in  Rome.  Her 
name  comes  before  his  in  verses  ^8^^;  Roni^i6:3;  ILXim. 
4:9.  Because  Claudius  had  commanded  {dia  to  diatetachenai 
Klaudion).  Perfect  active  articular  infinitive  of  diatasso,  old 
verb  to  dispose,  arrange,  here  with  accusative  of  general 
reference.  Dia  here  is  causal  sense,  "because  of  the  having 
ordered  as  to  Claudius."  This  was  about  a.d.  49,  done, 
Suetonius  says  {Claudius  C.  25),  because  "the  Jews  were 
in  a  state  of  constant  tumult  at  the  instigation  of  one  Chces- 
tus"  (probably  among  the  Jews  about  Christ  so  pronounced). 
At  any  rate  Jews  were  unpopular  in  Rome  for  Tiberius  had 
deported  4,000  to  Sardinia.  There  were  20,000  Jews  in 
Rome.  Probably  mainly  those  implicated  in  the  riots  ac- 
tually left. 

3.  Because  he  was  of  the  same  trade  {dia  to  homotechnon 
einai).  Same  construction  with  dia  as  above.  Homotechnon 
is  an  old  word  {homos,  techne),  though  here  alone  in  N.T. 
Rabbi  Judah  says:  "He  that  teacheth  not  his  son  a  trade, 
doth  the  same  as  if  he  taught  him  to  be  a  thief,"  So  it  was 
easy  for  Paul  to  find  a  home  with  these  "tentmakers  by 
trade"  {skenoipoioi  tei  technei).  Late  word  from  skene  and 
poieoj  here  only  in  the  N.T.  They  made  portable  tents  of 
leather  or  of  cloth  of  goat's  hair.  So  Paul  lived  in  this  home 
with  this  noble  man  and  his  wife,  all  the  more  congenial  if 
already  Christians  which  they  soon  became  at  any  rate.  - 
They  worked  as  partners  in  the  common  trade.  Paul  worked 
for  his  support  elsewhere,  already  in  Thes^alonica  (I  Thess. 
2:9;  n  Thess.  3:8)  and  later  at  Ephesus  with  Aquila  and 
Priscilla  (Acts  18:18,  26;  20:34;  I  Cor.  16:19).  They  moved 
again  to  Rome  (Rom.  16:3)  and  were  evidently  a  couple  of 
considerable  wealth  and  generosity.  It  was  a  blessing  to 
Paul  to  find  himself  with  these  people.  So  he  "abode" 
{emenen,  imperfect  active)  with  them  and  "they  wrought" 


296      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

(ergazonto,  imperfect  middle),  happy  and  busy  during  week 
days. 

4.  He  reasoned  (dielegeto).  Imperfect  middle,  same  form  as 
in  17:17  about  Paul's  work  in  Athens,  here  only  on  the 
Sabbaths.  Persuaded  {epeithen).  Imperfect  active,  conative, 
he  tried  to  persuade  both  Jews  and  Greeks  (God-fearers  who 
alone  would  come). 

5.  Was  constrained  hy  the  wor^  {suneicheto  toi  logoi).  This 
is  undoubtedly  the  correct  text  and  not  tot  pneumati  of  the 
Textus  Receptus,  but  suneicheto  is  in  my  opinion  the  direct 
middle  imperfect  indicative,  not  the  imperfect  passive  as 
the  translations  have  it  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  808). 
Paul  held  himself  together  or  completely  to  the  preaching 
instead  of  just  on  Sabbaths  in  the  synagogue  (verse  4). 
The  coming  of  Silas  and  Timothy  with  the  gifts  from  Mace- 
donia fl  Thess.  3:6;  II  Cor.  11:9;  Phil.  4:15)  set  Paul 
free  from  tent-making  for  a  while  so  that  he_began  to  devote 
himself  (inchoative  imperfect)  with  fresh_consecration  to 
preaching.  See  the  active  in  II  Cor.  5:14.  He  was  now  also 
assisted  by  Silas  and  Timothy  (II  Cor.  1:19).  Testifying  to 
the  Jews  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ  (diamarturomenos  tois 
loudaiois  einai  ton  Christon  lesoun).  Paul's  witness  every- 
where (9:22;  17:3).  This  verb  diamarturomenos  occurs  in 
2:40  (which  see)  for  Peter's  earnest  witness.  Perhaps  daily 
now  in  the  synagogue  he  spoke  to  the  Jews  who  came.  Einai 
is  the  infinitive  in  indirect  discourse  (assertion)  with  the 
accusative  of  general  reference.  By  ton  Christon  Paul  means 
"the  Messiah."  His  witness  is  to  show  to  the  Jews  that 
Jesus  of  Nazareth  is  the  Messiah. 

6.  When  they  opposed  themselves  (antitassomenon  auton). 
Genitive  absolute  with  present  middle  (direct  middle  again) 
of  antitasso,  old  verb  to  range  in  battle  array  (tasso)  face 
to  face  with  or  against  (anti).  In  the  N.T.  only  here  and 
Rom.  13:2;  James  4:6;  I  Peter  5:5.  Paul's  fresh  activity 
roused  the  rabbis  as  at  Antioch  in  Pisidia  and  at  Thessalonica 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  297 

in  concerted  opposition  and  railing  (blasphemy).  He  shook 
out  his  raiment  {ektinaxamenos  ta  himatia).  First  aorist 
middle  of  ektinasso,  old  verb,  in  the  N.T.  only  here  as  in 
13:51  (middle)  and  Mark  6:11  =  Matt.  10:15  where  active 
voice  occurs  of  shaking  out  dust  also.  Vivid  and  dramatic 
picture  here  like  that  in  Neh.  5:13,  "undoubtedly  a  very 
exasperating  gesture"  (Ramsay),  but  Paul  was  deeply 
stirred.  Your  blood  be  upon  your  own  heads  {To  haima  humon 
epi  ten  kephalen  humon).  As  in  Ez'ek.  3:i8f.  and  33:4,  8f.; 
II  Sam.  1:16.  Not  as  a  curse,  but  "a  solemn  disclaimer  of 
responsibility"  by  Paul  (Page)  as  in  Acts  20:26.  The  Jews 
used  this  very  phrase  in  assuming  responsibility  for  the 
blood  of  Jesus  (Matt.  27:25).  Cf.  Matt.  23:35.  /  am  clean 
{katharos  ego).  Pure  from  your  blood.  Repeats  the  claim 
made  in  previous  sentence.  Paul_had-jio_ne-bis-^uty.  From 
henceforth  {apo  tou  nun).  Turning  point  reached  in  Corinth. 
He  will  devote,  himself  to  the  Gentiles,  though  Jews  will 
be  converted  there  also.  Elsewhere  as  in  Ephesus  (19:1-10) 
and  in  Rome  (Acts  28:23-28)  Paul  will  preach  also  to  Jews. 
7.  Titus  Justus  {Titou  loustou).  So  Aleph  E  Vulgate, 
while  B  has  Titiau  loustou^  while  most  MSS.  have  only 
loustou.  Evidently  a  Roman  citizen  and  not  Titus,  brother 
of  Luke,  of  Gal.  2:1.  We  had  Barsabbas  Justus  (Acts  1:23) 
and  Paul  speaks  of  Jesus  Justus  (Col.  4:11).  The  Titii  were 
a  famous  family_of_g9tters  in  Corinth.  This  Roman  was  a 
God-fearer  whose  house  "joined  hard  to  the  synagogue" 
{en  sunomorousa  tei  sunagogei).  Periphrastic  imperfect  active 
of  sunomoreo,  a  late  (Byzantine)  word,  here  only  in  the  N.T., 
followed  by  the  associative  instrumental  case,  from  suno- 
moros  {sun,  homoros  from  homos,  joint,  and  horos,  boundary) 
having  joint  boundaries,  right  next  to.  Whether  Paul 
chose  this  location  for  his  work  because  it  was  next  to  the 
synagogue,  we  do  not  know,  but  it  caught  the  attendants  at 
the  synagogue  worship.  In  Ephesus  when  Paul  had  to  leave 
the  synagogue  he  went  to  the  school  house  of  Tyrannus 


V 


298      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

(i9:9f.).  The  lines  are  being  drawn  between  the  Christians 
and  the  Jews,  drawn  by  the  Jews  themselves. 

8.  Crispus  (Krispos).  Though  a  Jew  and  ruler  of  the 
synagogue  (cf.  13:15),  he  had  a  Latin  name.  Paul  baptized 
him  (I  Cor.  i  :I4)  himself,  perhaps  because  oniis_prorninence,  ^ 
apparently  letting  Silas  and  Timothy  baptize  niost  of  the 
converts  (I  Cor.  1:14-17).  Probably  he  followed  Paul  to 
the  house  of  Titus  Justus.  It  looked  like  ruin  for  the  syna- 
gogue. IVith  all  his  house  (sun  holoi  toi  oikbi  autou).  Another 
household  conversion,  for  Crispus  "believed  (episteusen)  in 
the  Lord  with  all  his  house."  Hearvng  believed  and  were 
baptized  [akouontes  episteuon  kai  ebaptizonto).  Present  active 
participle  and  imperfect  indicatives  active  and  passive,  ex- 
pressing repetition  for  the  "many"  others  who  kept  coming 

to  the  Lord  in  Corinth.  It  was  a  continual  revival  after  Silas 
and  Timothy  came  and  a  great  chuTch  was  gathered  here 
during  the  nearly  two  years  that  Paul  laboured  in  Corinth 
(possibly  A.D.  51  and  52). 

9.  Be  not  afraid,  but  speak,  and  hold  not  thy  peace  {Me 
phobou,  alia  lalei  kai  me  siopeseis).  Literally,  "stop  being 
afraid  {me  with  present  middle  imperative  of  phobeo),  but 

^o  on  speaking  (present  active  imperative  of  laleo)  and  do 
not  become  silent  (me  and  first  aorist  active  of  siopad,  in- 
gressive  aorist)."  Evidently  there  weresiggsjof  a  gathering 
storm  before  this  vision  and  message  from  the  Lord  Jesus 
came  to  Paul  one  night.  Paul  knew  only  too  well  what 
Jewish  hatred  could  do  as  he  had  learned  it  at  Damascus, 
Jerusalem,  Antioch  in  Pisidia,  Iconium,  Lystra,  Derbe, 
Thcssalonica,  Bcroea.  He  had  clearly  moments  of  doubt 
whether  he  had  not  better  move  on  or  become  silent  for  a 
while  in  Corinth.  Every  pastor  knows  what  it  is  to  have  such 
moods  and  moments.  In  II  Thess.  3:2  (written  at  this  time) 
we  catch  Paul's  dejection  of  spirits.  He  was  like  Elijah 
(I  Kings  19:4)  and  Jeremiah  (Jer.  i5:i5fT.). 

10.  BiTausf  I  am  with  thee  idiots  ego  cimi  meta  sou).    Jesus 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  299 

had  given  this  promise  to  all  believers  (Matt.  28:20)  and  here 
he  renews  it  to  Paul.  This  promise  changes  Paul's  whole 
outlook.  Jesus  had  spoken  to  Paul  before,  on  the  way  to 
Damascus  (9:4),  in  Jerusalem  (22:i7f.),  in  Troas  (16:9), 
in  great  crises  of  his  life.  He  will  hear  him  again  (25:11; 
27:23).  Paul  knows  the  voice  of  Jesus.  N^o  man  shall  set 
on  thee  to  harm  thee  (oudeis  epithesetai  soi  tou  kakosai  se). 
Future  direct  middle  indicative  of  epitithemi,  old  and  com- 
mon verb,  here  in  direct  middle  to  lay  or  throw  oneself  upon, 
.loattack.  Jesus  kept  that  promise  in  Corinth  for  Paul.  Tou, 
kakosai  is  genitive  articular  infinitive  of  purpose  of  kakoo,  to 
do  harm  to.  Paul  would  now  face  all  the  rabbis  without 
fear.  /  have  much  people  {laos  estin  moi  polus).  Dative  of 
personal  interest.  "There  is  to  me  much  people,'^  not  yet 
saved,  but  who  will  be  if  Paul  holds  on.  There  is  the  problem 
for  every  preacher  and  pastor,  how  to  win  the  elect  to  Christ. 

11.  y^  year  and  six  months  {eniauton  kai  menas  hex). 
Accusative  of  extent  of  time.  How  much  time  before  this 
incident  he  had  been  there  we  do  not  know.  He  was  in 
Corinth  probably  a  couple  of  years  in  all.  His  work  extended 
beyond  the  city  (H  Cor.  11:10)  and  there  was  a  church  in 
Cenchreae  (Rom.  16:1). 

12.  When  Gallio  was  proconsul  of  Achaia  {Gallionos  de 
anthupatou  onios  tes  Achaias).  Genitive  absolute  of  present 
participle  ontos.  Brother  of  Seneca  the  Stoic  (Nero's  tutor) 
and  uncle  of  Lucan  the  author  of  the  Pharsalia.  His  original 
name  was  M.  Annaeus  Novatus  till  he  was  adopted  by  Gallio 
the  rhetorician.  The  family  was  Spanish.  Gallio  was  a  man 
of  culture  and  refinement  and  may  have  been  chosen  pro- 
consul of  Achaia  for  this  reason.  Statius  calls  him  ^'dulcis 
Gallio."  Seneca  says  of  him:  Nemo  enim  mortalium  uni  tarn 
dulcis  quam  hie  omnibus  (No  one  of  mortals  is  so  pleasant 
to  one  person  as  he  is  to  all).  Luke  alone  among  writers  says 
that  he  was  proconsul,  but  Seneca  speaks  of  his  being  in 
Achaia  where  he  caught  fever,  a   coi  roboration  of  Luke. 


300      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

But  now  a  whitish  grey  limestone  inscription  from  the 
Hagios  Elias  quarries  near  Delphi  (a  letter  of  Claudius  to 
Delphi)  has  been  found  which  definitely  names  Gallio  as  pro- 
consul of  Achaia  (authupatos  Us  Achaias).  The  province  of 
Achaia  after  various  shifts  (first  senatorial,  then  imperial) 
back  and  forth  with  Macedonia,  in  a.d.  44  Claudius  gave 
back  to  the  Senate  with  proconsul  as  the  title  of  the  governor. 
It  is  amazing  how  Luke  is  confirmed  whenever  a  new  dis- 
covery is  made.  The  discovery  of  this  inscription  has  thrown 
light  also  on  the  date  of  Paul's  work  in  Corinth  as  it  says 
that  Gallio  came  in  the  26th  acclamation  of  Claudius  as 
Emperor  in  a.d.  51,  that  would  definitely  fix  the  time  of 
Paul  in  Corinth  as  a.d.  50  and  51  (or  51  and  52).  Deiss- 
mann  has  a  full  and  able  discussion  of  the  whole  matter  in 
Appendix  I  to  his  St.  Paul.  -Rose  up  {katepestesan).  Second 
aorist  active  of  kat-eph-istemi,  intransitive,  to  take  a  stand 
against,  a  double  compound  verb  found  nowliere  else.  They 
took  a  stand  (estesan)  against  {kata,  down  on,  epi,  upon), 
they  made  a  dash  or  rush  at  Paul  as  if  they  would  stand  it 
no  longer.  Before  the  judgment  seat  {epi  to  bema).  See  on 
12:21.  The  proconsul  was  sitting  in  the  basilica  in  the  forum 
or  agora.  The  Jews  had  probably  heard  of  his  reputation 
for  moderation  and  sought  to  make  an  impression  as  they 
had  on  the  praetors  of  Philippi  by  their  rush  (sunepeste, 
16:22).  The  new  proconsul  was  a  good  chance  also  (25:2). 
So  for  the  second  time  Paul  faces  a  Roman  proconsul  (Sergius 
Paulus,  13:7)  though  under  very  different  circumstances. 
13.  Contrary  to  the  lazv  {para  ton  nomon).  They  did  not 
accuse  Paul  of  treason  as  in  Thessalonica,  perhaps  Paul 
had  been  more  careful  in  his  language  here.  They  bring 
the  same  charge  here  that  the  owners  of  the  slave-girl  brought 
in  Philippi  (16:21).  Perhaps  they  fear  to  go  too  far  with 
Gallio,  for  they  are  dealing  with  a  Roman  proconsul,  not 
with  the  politarchs  of  Thessalonica.  The  Jewish  religion  was 
a  religio  licita  and  they  were  allowed  to  make  proselytes, 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  301 

but  not  among  Roman  citizens.  To  prove  that  Paul  was 
acting  contrary  to  Roman  law  (for  Jewish  law  had  no  stand- 
ing with  Gallio  though  the  phrase  has  a  double  meaning) 
these  Jews  had  to  show  that  Paul  was  making  converts  in 
ways  that  violated  the  Roman  regulations  on  that  subject. 
The  accusation  as  made  did  not  show  it  nor  did  they  pro- 
duce any  evidence  to  do  it.  The  verb  used  anapeithei  means 
to  stir  up  by  persuasion  (old  verb  here  only  in  the  N.T.), 
a  thing  that  he  had  a  right  to  do. 

14.  When  Paul  was  about  to  open  his  mouth  {mellontos  tou 
Paulou  anoigein  to  stoma).    Genitive  absolute  again.  ^Before 

*aul  could  speak,  Gallio  cut  in  and  ended  the  whole  matter. 
Accord  ingto~their  own  statement  Paul  needed  no  defence. 
Wrong  (adikema).  Injuria.  Old  word,  a  wrong  done  one. 
In  N.T.  only  here,  Acts  24:20;  Rev.  18:5.  Here  it  may 
mean  a  legal  wrong  to  the  state.  Wicked  villainy  (rhdidiour- 
gema).  A  crime,  act  of  a  criminal,  from  rhdidiour gos  {rhdidios, 
easy,  ergon,  work),  one  who  does  a  thing  with  ease,  adroitly,  a 
"slick  citizen."  Reason  would  that  I  should  hear  with  you 
{kata  logon  an  aneschomen  humon).  Literally,  "according  to 
reason  I  should  have  put  up  with  you  (or  held  myself  back 
from  you)."  This  condition  is  the  second  class  (determined 
as  unfulfilled)  and  means  that  the_j£ws_had_jKL.case  against 
Paul  in  a  Roman  court.  The  verb  in  the  conclusion  {anes- 
chomen) is  second  aorist  middle  indicative  and  means  with 
the  ablative  humon  "I  should  have  held  myself  back  (direct 
middle)  from  you  (ablative).  The  use  of  an  makes  the  form 
of  the  condition  plain. 

15.  Questions  {zetemata).  Plural,  contemptuous,  "a 
parcel  of  questions"  (Knowling).  About  words  {peri  logon). 
Word,  singular,  talk,  not  deed  or  fact  {ergon,  factum).  Ayid 
names  {kai  onomaton).  As  to  whether  "Jesus"  should  also 
be  called  "Christ"  or  "Messiah."  The  Jews,  Gallio  knew, 
split  hairs  over  words  and  names.  And  your  own  law  {kai 
nomou  tou  kath'  humds).   Literally,  "And  law  that  according 


302      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

to  you."  Gallio  had  not  been  caught  in  the  trap  set  for  him. 
What  they  had  said  concerned  Jewish  law,  not  Roman  law 
at  all.  Look  to  it  yourselves  {opsesthe  autoi).  The  volitive 
future  middle  indicative  of  horao  often  used  (cf.  Matt.  27:4) 
where  an  imperative  could  be  employed  (Robertson,  Gram- 
mar ^  p.  874).  The  use  of  autoi  (yourselves)  turns  it  all  over 
to  them.  /  am  not  minded  {ou  boulomai).  I  am  not  willing,  I 
do  not  wish.  An  absolute  refusal  to  allow  a  religious  question 
to  be  brought  before  a  Roman  civil  court.  This  decision  of 
Gallio  does  not  establish  Christianity  in  preference  to 
Judaism.  It  simply  means  that  the  case  was  plainly  that 
Christianity  was  a  form  of  Judaism  and  as  such  was  not 
opposed  to  Roman  law.  This  decision  opened  the  door  for 
Paul's  preaching  all  over  the  Roman  Empire.  Later  Paul 
himself  argues  (Rom.  9  to  11)  that  in  fact  Christianity  is 
the  true,  the  spiritual  Judaism. 

16.  lie  drave  them  {apelasen  autous).  First  aorist  active 
indicative  of  apelauno,  old  word,  but  here  alone  in  the  N.T. 
The  Jews  were  stunned  by  this  sudden  blow  from  the  mild 
proconsul  and  wanted  to  linger  to  argue  the  case  further, 
but  they  had  to  go. 

17.  They  all  laid  hold  on  Sosthenes  {epilabomenoi  pantes 
S  OS  then  en).  See  16:19;  17:19  for  the  same  form.  Here  is 
violent  hostile  reaction  against  their  leader  who  had  failed  so 
miserably.  Beat  him  {etupto7j).  Inchoative  imperfect  active, 
began  to  beat  him,  even  if  they  could  not  beat  Paul.  Sos- 
thenes succeeded  Crispus  (verse  8)  when  he  went  over  to 
Paul.  The  beating  did  Soslhenes  good  for  he  too  finally  is  a 
Christian  (I  Cor.  i:i),  a  co-worker  with  Paul  whom  he  had 
sought  to  persecute.  Jnd  Gallio  cared  for  none  of  these  things 
{kai  ouden  touton  toi  Gallioni  emelen).  Literally,  "no  one  of 
these  things  was  a  care  to  Gallio."  The  usually  impersonal 
verb  (melei,  emelen,  imperfect  active)  here  has  the  nominative 
as  in  Luke  10:40.  These  words  have  been  often  misunder- 
stood as  a  description  of  Gallic's  lack  of  interest  in  Christian- 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  303 

ity,  a  religious  indifferentist.  But  that  is  quite  beside  the 
mark.  Gallic  looked  the  other  way  with  a  blind  eye  while 
Sosthenes  got  the  beating  which  he  richly  deserved.  That 
was  a  small  detail  for  the  police  court,  not  for  the  proconsul's 
concern.  Gallio  shows  up  well  in  Luke's  narrative  as  a  clear 
headed  judge  who  would  not  be  led  astray  by  Jewish  sub- 
terfuges and  with  the  courage  to  dismiss  a  mob. 

18.  Having  tarried  after  this  yet  many  days  {eti  prosmeinas 
hemeras  hikanas).  First  aorist  (constative)  active  participle 
of  prosmeno,  old  verb,  to  remain  besides  (pros  as  in  I  Tim. 
1:3)  and  that  idea  is  expressed  also  in  eti  (yet).  The  accusa- 
tive is  extent  of  time.  On  Luke's  frequent  use  of  hikanos 
see  8:11.  It  is  not  certain  that  this  period  of  "considerable 
days"  which  followed  the  trial  before  Gallio  is  included  in 
the  year  and  six  months  of  verse  11  or  is  in  addition  to  it 
which  is  most  likely.  Vindicated  as  Paul  was,  there  was  no 
reason  for  haste  in  leaving,  though  he  usually  left  after  such 
a  crisis  was  passed.  7*00^  his  leave  {apotaxamenos).  First 
aorist  middle  (direct),  old  verb,  to  separate  oneself,  to  bid 
farewell  (Vulgate  valefacio),  as  in  verse  21  and  Mark  6:46. 
Sailed  thence  (exeplei).  Imperfect  active  of  ekpleo,  old  and 
common  verb,  inchoative  imperfect,  started  to  sail.  Only 
Priscilla  and  Aquila  are  mentioned  as  his  companions  though 
others  may  have  been  in  the  party.  Having  shorn  his  head 
(keiramenos  ten  kephalen).  First  aorist  middle  (causative) 
of  keiro^  old  verb  to  shear  (sheep)  and  the  hair  as  also  in 
I  Cor.  1 1 :6.  The  participle  is  masculine  and  so  cannot  r^er 
to  Priscilla.  Aquila  comes  next  to  the  participle,  but  since 
mention  of  Priscilla  and  Aquila  is  parenthetical  and  the  two 
other  participles  (prosmeinaSy  apotaxamenos)  refer  to  Paul 
it  seems  clear  that  this  one  does  also.  For  he  had  a  vow 
{eichen  gar  euchen).  Imperfect  active  showing  the  continu- 
ance of  the  vow  up  till  this  time  in  Cenchreae,  the  port  of 
Corinth  when  it  expired.  It  was  not  a  Nazarite  vow  which 
could  be  absolved  only  in  Jerusalem.   It  is  possible  that  the 


304      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

hair  was  only  polled  or  trimmed,  cut  shorter,  not  "shaved" 
{xurao  as  in  21  '.24)  for  there  Is  a  distinction  as  both  verbs  are 
contrasted  in  I  Cor.  11:6  {keirdsthai  e  xurdsthai).  It  is  not 
clear  what  sort  of  a  vow  Paul  had  taken  nor  why  he  took  it. 
It  may  have  been  a  thank  offering  for  the  outcome  at  Corinth 
(Hackett).  Paul  as  a  Jew  kept  up  his  observance  of  the 
ceremonial  law,  but  refused  to  impose  it  on  the  Gentiles. 

19.  Came  {katentesan).  Came  down,  as  usual  in  speaking 
of  coming  to  land  (16:1).  To  Ephesus  (eis  Epheson).  This 
great  city  on  the  Cayster,  the  capital  of  the  Province  of 
Asia,  the  home  of  the  worship  of  Diana  (Artemis)  with  a 
wonderful  temple,  Paul  at  last  had  reached,  though  forbidden 
to  come  on  the  way  out  on  this  tour  (16:6).  Here  Paul  will 
spend  three  years  after  his  return  from  Jerusalem.  He  left 
them  there  {kakeinous  katelipen  autou).  That  is,  Priscilla  and 
Aquila  he  left  (second  aorist  active  indicative)  here  {autou). 
But  Luke  mentions  the  departure  by  way  of  anticipation 
before  he  actually  went  away  (verse  21).  But  he  himself  {au- 
tos  de).  Paul  again  the  leading  person  in  the  narrative.  On 
this  occasion  he  may  have  gone  alone  into  the  synagogue.  He 
reasoned  (dielexato).  Luke's  favourite  word  for  Paul's  syna- 
gogue discourses  (17:2,  17;  18:4  which  see)  as  also  19:8,  9. 

20.  fVhen  they  asked  him  {erbtdnton  auton).  Genitive 
absolute  of  present  participle  of  erotady  old  verb  to  ask  a 
question,  common  in  Koine  to  make  a  request  as  here.  He 
consented  not  (ouk  epeneusen).  First  aorist  active  indicative 
of  epineud,  old  verb  to  express  approval  by  a  nod,  only  here 
in  the  N.T. 

21.  I  shall  return  {anakampso).  Future  active  indicative  of 
anakamptOj  old  verb  to  bend  back,  turn  back  (Matt.  2:2). 
//  God  will  {tou  theou  thelontos).  Genitive  absolute  of  present 
active  participle.  This  expression  {ean  with  subjunctive) 
occurs  also  in  I  Cor.  4:19;  16:7;  James  4:15.  Such  phrases 
were  common  among  Jews,  Greeks,  and  Romans,  and  are 
today.   It  is  simply  a  recognition  that  we  are  in  God's  hands. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  305 

The  Textus  Receptus  has  here  a  sentence  not  in  the  best 
MSB.:  "I  must  by  all  means  keep  this  feast  that  cometh  in 
Jerusalem."  This  addition  by  D  and  other  documents  may- 
have  been  due  to  a  desire  to  give  a  reason  for  the  language 
in  verse  22  about  "going  up"  to  Jerusalem.  Whether 
Paul  said  it  or  not,  it  was  in  the  spring  when  he  made  this 
journey  with  a  company  of  pilgrims  probably  going  to  the 
feast  of  Pentecost  in  Jerusalem.  We  know  that  later  Paul 
did  try  to  reach  Jerusalem  for  Pentecost  (20:16)  and  suc- 
ceeded. As  the  ship  was  leaving,  Paul  had  to  go,  but  with 
the  hope  of  returning  soon  to  Ephesus  as  he  did. 

22.  He  went  up  and  saluted  the  church  {anabas  kai  aspasame- 
nos  ten  ekklesian).  The  language  could  refer  to  the  church  in 
Caesarea  where  Paul  had  just  landed,  except  for  several 
things.  The  going  up  {anabas,  second  aorist  active  participle 
of  anabaino)  is  the  common  way  of  speaking  of  going  to 
Jerusalem  which  was  up  from  every  direction  save  from 
Hebron.  It  was  the  capital  of  Palestine  as  people  in  England 
today  speaking  of  going  up  to  London.  Besides  "he  went 
down  to  Antioch"  (katebe  eis  Jntiocheian,  second  aorist 
active  indicative  of  katabainb)  which  language  suits  better 
leaving  Jerusalem  than  Caesarea.  Moreover,  there  was  no 
special  reason  for  this  trip  to  Caesarea,  but  to  Jerusalem  it 
was  different.  Here  Paul  saluted  the  church  in  the  fourth 
of  his  five  visits  after  his  conversion  (9:26;  11:30;  15:4; 
18:22;  21:17).  The  apostles  may  or  may  not  have  been  in 
the  city,  but  Paul  had  friends  in  Jerusalem  now.  Apparently 
he  did  not  tarry  long,  but  returned  to  Antioch  to  make  a 
report  of  his  second  mission  tour  as  he  had  done  at  the 
close  of  the  first  when  he  and  Barnabas  came  back  (14:26- 
28).  He  had  started  on  this  tour  with  Silas  and  had  picked 
up  Timothy  and  Luke,  but  came  back  alone.  He  had  a 
great  story  to  tell. 

23.  Having  spent  some  time  (poiesas  chronon  tina).  Liter- 
ally, having  done  some  time.    How  long  we  do  not  know, 


3o6     WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

probably  not  long.  There  are  those  who  place  the  visit  of 
Peter  here  to  which  Paul  alludes  in  Gal.  2:1  iff.  and  which 
we  have  located  while  Paul  was  here  the  last  time  (Acts 
15:35).  He  departed  {exelthen).  Thus  simply  and  alone 
Paul  began  the  third  mission  tour  without  a  Barnabas  or  a 
Silas.  Went  through  {dierchomenos).  Present  middle  parti- 
ciple, going  through.  The  region  of  Galatia  and  Phrygia  {ten 
Galatiken  choran  kai  Phrygian).  See  on  Acts  16:6  for  discus- 
sion of  this  phrase,  here  in  reverse  order,  passing  through  the 
Galatic  region  and  then  Phrygia.  Does  Luke  mean  Lyca- 
onia  (Derbe  and  Lystra)  and  Phrygia  (Iconium  and  Pisidian 
Antioch)  ?  Or  does  he  mean  the  route  west  through  the  old 
Galatia  and  the  old  Phrygia  on  west  into  Asia  ."*  The  same  con- 
flict exists  here  over  the  South  Galatian  and  the  North 
Galatian  theories.  Phrygia  is  apparently  distinguished  from 
the  Galatic  region  here.  It  is  apparently  a.d.  52  when  Paul 
set  out  on  this  tour.  In  order  ikathexes).  In  succession  as  in 
114,  though  the  names  of  the  cities  are  not  given.  Stahlish' 
ing  (sterizon).  As  he  did  in  the  second  tour  (15  41,  episteri- 
ton,  compound  of  this  same  verb)  which  see. 

24.  Apollos  {Apollds).  Genitive -0  Attic  second  declension. 
Probably  a  contraction  of  Apollonios  as  D  has  it  here.  An 
Alexandrian  {Alexandreus) .  Alexander  the  Great  founded 
this  city  B.C.  332  and  placed  a  colony  of  Jews  there  which 
flourished  greatly,  one-third  of  the  population  at  this  time. 
There  was  a  great  university  and  library  there.  The  Jewish- 
Alexandrian  philosophy  developed  here  of  which  Philo  was 
the  chief  exponent  who  was  still  living.  Apollos  was  un- 
doubtedly a  man  of  the  schools  and  a  man  of  parts.  A 
learned  man  {aner  logios).  Or  eloquent,  as  the  word  can 
mean  either  a  man  of  words  (like  one  "wordy,"  verbose) 
or  a  man  of  ideas,  since  logos  Avas  used  either  for  reason  or 
speech.  Apollos  was  doubtless  both  learned  (mighty  in  the 
Scriptures)  and  eloquent,  though  eloquence  varies  greatly 
in  people's  ideas.    Mighty  in  the  Scriptures  (dunatos  on  en 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  307 

tats  graphais).  Being  powerful  (dunatos  verbal  of  dunamai 
and  same  root  as  dunamis,  dynamite,  dynamo)  in  the  Scrip- 
tures (in  the^owledge  and  _die,_us^^  as 
should  be  true  of  every  preacher.  There  is  no  excuse  for  ig- 
norance of  the  Scriptures  on  the  part  of  preachers,  the  pro- 
fessed interpreters  of  the  word  of  God.  The  last  lecture 
made  to  the  New  Testament  English  class  in  Southern 
Baptist  Theological  Seminary  by  John  A.  Broadus  was  on 
this  passage  with  a  plea  for  his  students  to  be  mighty  in  the 
Scriptures.  In  Alexandria  Clement  of  Alexandria  and  Origen 
taught  in  the  Christian  theological  school. 

25.  Had  been  instructed  in  the  way  of  the  Lord  {en  kateche- 
menos  ten  hodon  tou  kuriou).  Periphrastic  past  perfect  passive 
of  katecheOf  rare  in  the  old  Greek  and  not  in  the  LXX  from 
kata  and  echeo  {echo,  sound)  as  in  Luke  1 4,  to  re-sound,  to 
re-echo,  to  teach  by  repeated  dinning  into  the  ears  as  the 
Arabs  do  now,  to  teach  orally  by  word  of  mouth  (and  ear). 
Here  the  accusative  of  the  thing  (the  word)  is  retained  in 
the  passive  like  with  didasko,  to  teach  (Robertson,  Grammar, 
p.  485).  Being  fervent  in  spirit  {ze on  toi  pneumati).  Boiling 
(from  zed,  to  boil,  old  and  common  verb,  in  N.T.  only  here 
and  Rom.  12:11)  like  boiling  water  or  yeast.  The  Latin 
verb  ferveo  means  to  boil  or  ferment.  Locative  case  after  it. 
Taught  carefully  {edidasken  akribos).  Imperfect  active,  was 
teaching  or  inchoative,  began  teaching,  accurately.  He 
taught  accurately  what  he  knew,  a  fine  gift  for  any  preacher. 
Only  the  baptism  of  John  {monon  to  baptisma  loanou).  It  was 
a  baptism  of  repentance  (marked  by  repentance)  as  Paul  said 
(13:24;  19*4),  as  Peter  said  (2:38)  and  as  the  Gospels  tell 
(Mark  i  :4,  etc.).  That  is  to  say,  ApoUos  knew  only  what  the 
Baptist  knew  when  he  died,  but  John  had  preached  the  com- 
ing of  the  Messiah,  had  baptized  him,  had  identified  him  as 
the  Son  of  God,  had  proclaimed  the  baptism  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  but  had  not  seen  the  Cross,  the  Resurrection  of  Jesus, 
nor  the  great  Day  of  Pentecost. 


3o8      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

26.  They  took  him  unto  them  (proselabonto) .  Second  aorist 
middle  (indirect)  indicative  of  proslambano,  old  verb,  to 
their  home  and  heart  as  companion  (cf.  the  rabbis  and  the 
ruffians  in  17:5).  Probably  for  dinner  after  service.  Ex- 
pounded (exethento).  Second  aorist  (effective)  middle  indica- 
tive of  ektithemi  seen  already  in  11:4,  to  set  forth.  More 
carefully  (akribesteron) .  Comparative  adverb  of  akribos. 
More  accurately  than  he  already  knew.  Instead  of  abusing 
the  young  and  brilliant  preacher  for  his  ignorance  they 
(particularly  Priscilla)  gave  him  the  fuller  story  of  the  life 
and  work  of  Jesus  and  of  the  apostolic  period  to  fill  up  the 
gaps  in  his  knowledge.   It  is  a  needed  and  delicate  task,  this 

-sy/  thing  of  teaching  gifted  young  ministers.  They  do  not  learn 
it  all  in  schools.  More  of  it  comes  from  contact  with  men 
and  women  rich  in  grace  and  in  the  knowledge  of  God's  ways. 
He  was  not  rebaptized,  but  only  received  fuller  information. 

27.  Encouraged  him  (protrepsamenoi).  First  aorist  middle 
participle  of  protrepo,  old  verb,  to  urge  forward,  to  push  on, 
only  here  in  the  N.T.  Since  Apollos  wanted  {boulomenou 
autou,  genitive  absolute)  to  go  into  Achaia,  the  brethren 
(including  others  besides  Priscilla  and  Aquila)  wrote  {egrap- 
san)  a  letter  of  introduction  to  the  disciples  in  Corinth  to 
receive  him  {apodexasthai  auton),  a  nice  letter  of  recommen- 
dation and  a  sincere  one  also.  But  Paul  will  refer  to  this 
very  letter  later  (II  Cor.  3:1)  and  observe  that  he  himself 
needed  no  such  letter  of  commendation.  The  Codex  Bezae 
adds  here  that  certain  Corinthians  who  had  come  to  Ephesus 
heard  Apollos  and  begged  him  to  cross  over  with  them  to 
Corinth.  This  may  very  well  be  the  way  that  Apollos  was 
led  to  go.  Preachers  often  receive  calls  because  visitors  from 
other  places  hear  them.  Priscilla  and  Aquila  were  well 
known  in  Corinth  and  their  approval  would  carry  weight. 
But  they  did  not  urge  Apollos  to  stay  longer  in  Ephesus. 
Helped  them  much  (sunebaleto  polu).  Second  aorist  middle  in- 
dicative of  sunballo  used  in  17:18  for  "dispute,"  old  verb  to 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  309 

throw  together,  in  the  N.T.  always  in  the  active  save  here 
in  the  middle  (common  in  Greek  writers)  to  put -together, 
to  help.  Through  grace  {dia  tes  charitos).  This  makes  sense 
if  taken  with  "believed,"  as  Hackett  does  (cf.  13:48;  16:14) 
or  with  "helped"  (I  Cor.  3:10;  15:10;  11  Cor.  1:12).  Both 
are  true  as  the  references  show. 

28.  Powerfully  (eutonos).  Adverb  from  eutonos  (eu,  well, 
teino,  to  stretch),  well-strung,  at  full  stretch.  Confuted  {dia- 
katelegcheto).  Imperfect  middle  of  the  double  compound 
verb  dia-kat-elegchomai,  to  confute  with  rivalry  in  a  contest, 
here  alone.  The  old  Greek  has  dielegcho,  to  convict  of  false- 
hood, but  not  this  double  compound  which  means  to  argue 
down  to  a  finish.  It  is  the  imperfect  tense  and  does  not 
mean  that  Apollos  convinced  these  rabbis,  but  he  had  the 
last  word.  Publicly  {demosidi).  See  5:18;  16:37.  In  open 
meeting  where  all  could  see  the  victory  of  Apollos.  Shewing 
(epideiknus).  Present  active  participle  of  epideiknumi,  old 
verb  to  set  forth  so  that  all  see.  By  the  Scriptures  {dia  ton 
graphon).  In  which  Apollos  was  so  "mighty"  (verse  24) 
and  the  rabbis  so  weak  for  they  knew  the  oral  law  better 
than  the  written  (Mark  7:8-12).  That  Jesus  was  the  Christ 
{einai  ton  Christon  lesoun).  Infinitive  and  the  accusative 
in  indirect  assertion.  Apollos  proclaims  the  same  message 
that  Paul  did  everywhere  (17:3).  He  had  not  yet  met  Paul, 
but  he  had  been  instructed  by  Priscilla  and  Aquila.  He  is 
in  Corinth  building  on  the  foundation  laid  so  well  by  Paul 
(I  Cor.  3:4-17).  Luke  has  here  made  a  brief  digression  from 
the  story  of  Paul,  but  it  helps  us  understand  Paul  better. 
There  are  those  who  think  that  Apollos  wrote  Hebrews, 
a  guess  that  may  be  correct. 


CHAPTER   XIX 

I .  While  /^polios  was  at  Corinth  {en  tbi  ton  Apollo  einai  en 
Korinthoi).  Favourite  idiom  with  Luke,  en  with  the  locative 
of  the  articular  infinitive  and  the  accusative  of  general 
reference  (Luke  i:8;  2:27,  etc.).  Having  passed  through  the 
upper  country  {dielthonta  ta  anoterika  mere).  Second  aorist 
active  participle  of  dierchomai,  accusative  case  agreeing  with 
Paulon,  accusative  of  general  reference  with  the  infinitive 
elthein,  idiomatic  construction  with  egeneto.  The  word  for 
"upper"  {anoterika)  is  a  late  form  for  anotera  (Luke  14:10) 
and  occurs  in  Hippocrates  and  Galen.  It  refers  to  the  high- 
lands (cf.  Xenophon's  Anabasis)  and  means  that  Paul  did 
not  travel  the  usual  Roman  road  west  by  Colossae  and 
Laodicea  in  the  Lycus  Valley,  cities  that  he  did  not  visit 
(Col.  2:1).  Instead  he  took  the  more  direct  road  through  the 
Cayster  Valley  to  Ephesus.  Codex  Bezae  says  here  that 
Paul  wanted  to  go  back  to  Jerusalem,  but  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  bade  him  to  go  into  Asia  where  he  had  been  forbidden 
to  go  in  the  second  tour  (16:6).  Whether  the  upper  "parts" 
{mere)  here  points  to  North  Galatia  is  still  a  point  of  dis- 
pute among  scholars.  So  he  came  again  to  Ephesus  as  he  had 
promised  to  do  (18:21).  The  province  of  Asia  included  the 
western  part  of  Asia  Minor.  The  Romans  took  this  country 
B.C.  130.  Finally  the  name  was  extended  to  the  whole  con- 
tinent. It  was  a  jewel  in  the  Roman  empire  along  with 
Africa  and  was  a  senatorial  province.  It  was  full  of  great 
cities  like  Ephesus,  Smyrna,  Pergamum,  Thyatira,  Sardis, 
Philadelphia,  Laodicea  (the  seven  churches  of  Rev.  2  and  3), 
Colossae,  Hierapolis,  Apamea,  to  go  no  further.  Hellenism 
had  full  sway  here.  Ephesus  was  the  capital  and  chief 
city  and  was  a  richer  and  larger  city  than  Corinth.    It  was 

310 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  311 

located  at  the  entrance  to  the  valley  of  the  Maeander  to  the 
east.  Here  was  the  power  of  Rome  and  the  splendour  of 
Greek  culture  and  the  full  tide  of  oriental  superstition  and 
magic.  The  Temple  of  Artemis  was  one  of  the  seven  wonders 
of  the  world.  While  in  Ephesus  some  hold  that  Paul  at  this 
time  wrote  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians  after  his  recent  visit 
there,  some  that  he  did  it  before  his  recent  visit  to  Jerusalem. 
But  it  is  still  possible  that  he  wrote  it  from  Corinth  just  be- 
fore writing  to  Rome,  a  point  to  discuss  later.  Certain  dis- 
ciples {tinas  mathetas).  Who  were  they  .^  Apollos  had  already 
gone  to  Corinth.  They  show  no  connection  with  Priscilla 
and  Aquila.  Luke  calls  them  "disciples"  or  "learners" 
(mathetas)  because  they  were  evidently  sincere  though 
crude  and  ignorant.  There  is  no  reason  at  all  for  connecting 
these  uninformed  disciples  of  the  Baptist  with  Apollos. 
They  were  floating  followers  of  the  Baptist  who  drifted  into 
Ephesus  and  whom  Paul  found.  Some  of  John's  disciples 
clung  to  him  till  his  death  (John  3:22-25;  Luke  7:19;  Matt. 
14:12).  Some  of  them  left  Palestine  without  the  further 
knowledge  of  Jesus  that  came  after  his  death  and  some  did 
not  even  know  that,  as  turned  out  to  be  the  case  with  the 
group  in  Ephesus. 

2.  Did  ye  receive  the  Holy  Spirit  when  ye  believed?  {ei 
pneuma  hagion  elahete  pisteus antes?).  This  use  of  ei  in  a  di- 
rect question  occurs  in  i  :6,  is  not  according  to  the  old  Greek 
idiom,  but  is  common  in  the  LXX  and  the  N.T.  as  in  Luke 
13:23  which  see  (Robertson,  Grammar^  p.  916).  Apparently 
Paul  was  suspicious  of  the  looks  or  conduct  of  these  professed 
disciples.  The  first  aorist  active  participle  pisteusantes  is 
simultaneous  with  the  second  aorist  active_indicative  elahete 
and  refers  to  the  same  event.  Nay^  we  did  not  so  much  as 
hear  whether  the  Holy  Spirit  was  {AlV  oude  ei  pneuma  hagion 
estin  ekousamen).  The  reply  of  these  ignorant  disciples  is 
amazing.  They  probably  refer  to  the  time  of  their  baptism 
and  mean  that,  when  baptized,  they  did  not  hear  whether 


312      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

(ei  in  indirect  question)  the  Holy  Spirit  was  (estin  retained  as 
in  John  7:39).  Plain  proof  that  they  knew  John's  message 
poorly. 

3.  Into  what  {eis  ti).  More  properly.  Unto  what  or  on  what 
basil. (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  592).  Clearly,  Paul  felt  they 
had  received  a  poor  baptism  with  no  knowledge  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  John^s  baptism  (to  loanou  baptisma).  Last  mention 
of  John  the  Baptist  in  the  N.T.  They  had  been  dipped  in 
other  words,  but  they  had  not  grasped  the  significance  of 
the  ordinance. 

4.  With  the  baptism  of  repentance  {baptisma  metanoias). 
Cognate  accusative  with  ebaptisen  and  the  genitive  metanoias 
describing  the  baptism  as  inarked  by  (case  of  species  or 
genus),  not  as  conveying,  repentance  just  as  in  Mark  1:4 
and  that  was  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  But  John  preached 
also  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit  which  the  Messiah  was 
to  bring  (Mark  i-.yi.  =  Matt.  3:1  if.  =  Luke  3:16).  If  they 
did  not  know  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  they  had  missed  the  point 
of  John's  baptism.  That  they  should  believe  on  him  that 
should  come  after  him,  that  is  on  Jesus  {eis  ton  erchomenon 
met"  auton  hina  pisteusosin,  tout*  estin  eis,  ton  lesoun).  Note 
the  emphatic  prolepsis  of  eis  ton  erchomenon  meV  auton 
before  hina  pisteusosin  with  which  it  is  construed.  This 
is  John's  identical  phrase,  "the  one  coming  after  me"  as 
seen  in  Mark  1:7  =  Matt.  3:11  =  Luke  3:16  =  John  1:15. 
It  is  not  clear  that  these  "disciples"  believed  in  a  Messiah, 
least  of  all  in  Jesus.  They  were  wholly  unprepared  for  the 
baptism  of  John.  Paul  does  not  mean  to  say  that  John's 
baptism  was  inadequate,  but  he  simply  explains  what  John 
really  taught  and  so  what  his  baptism  signified. 

5.  The  7iame  of  the  Lord  Jesus  {to  onoma  ton  kuriou  lesou). 
Apollos  was  not  rebaptized.  The  twelve  apostles  were  not 
rebaptized.  Jesus  received  no  other  baptism  than  that  of 
John.  The  point  here  is  simply  that  these  twelve  men  were 
grossly  ignorant  of  the  meaning  of  John's  baptism  as  regards 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  313 

repentance,  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus,  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Hence  Paul  had  them  baptized,  not  so  much  again,  as  really 
baptized  this  time,  in  the  name  or  on  the  authority  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  as  he  had  himself  commanded  (Matt.  28:19) 
and  as  was  the  universal  apostolic  custom.  Proper  under- 
standing of  "Jesus"  involved  all  the  rest  including  the 
Trinity  (Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit).  Luke  does  not  give 
a  formula,  but  simply  explains  that  now  these  men  had  a 
proper  object  of  faith  Qesus)  and  were  now  really  baptized. 
6.  When  Paul  had  laid  his  hands  upon  them  {epithentos 
autois  tou  Paulou  cheiras).  Genitive  absolute  of  second 
aorist  active  participle  of  epitithemi.  This  act  of  laying  on 
of  the  hands  was  done  in  Samaria  by  Peter  and  John  (8:16) 
and  in  Damascus  in  the  case  of  Paul  (9:17)  and  was  followed 
as  here  by  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  supernatural 
power.  They  spake  with  tongues  {elaloun  glossais).  Inchoa- 
tive imperfect,  began  to  speak  with  tongues  as  in  Jerusalem 
at  Pentecost  and  as  in  Caesarea  before  the  baptism.  Proph- 
esied (epropheteuon).  Inchoative  imperfect  again,  began  to 
prophesy.  The  speaking  with  tongues  and  prophesying  was 
external  and  indubitable  proof  that  the  Holy  Spirit  had 
come  on  these  twelve  uninformed  disciples  now  fully  won  to 
the  service  of  Jesus  as  Messiah.  But  this  baptism  in  water 
did  not  "convey"  the  Holy  Spirit  nor  forgiveness  of  sins. 
Paul  was  not  a  sacramentalist. 

8.  Spake  boldly  (eparresiazeto).  Imperfect  middle,  kept  on 
at  it  for  three  months.  Cf.  same  word  in  18:26.  Persuading 
(peithon).  Present  active  conative  participle  of  peitho, 
trying  to  persuade  (28:23).  Paul's  idea  of  the  Kingdom  of 
God  wag  tVip  rhnrrh  of  God  which  he  (Tesus.  God's  Son)  had 
purchased  with  his  own  blood  (Acts  ,20j28,  calling  Christ 
God).  Nowhere  else  had  Paul  apparently  been  able  to  speak 
so  long  in  the  synagogue  without  interruption  unless  it  was 
so  at  Corinth.    These  Jews  were  already  interested  (18:30). 

9.  But  zvhen  some  were  hardened  {hos  de  tines  esklerunonto). 


314      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Imperfect  passive  of  skleruno^  causative  like  hiphil  in  He- 
brew, tojnakejiard  (skleros)  ojirough  or  ha  rah  (Matt.  25:24). 
In  LXX  and  Hippocrates  and  Galen  (in  medical  writings). 
In  N.T.  only  here  and  Rom.  9:18  and  4  times  in  Heb.  (3:8, 
I3>  '5;  47»  8)  quoting  and  referring  to  Psa.  95:8  about  hard- 
ening the  heart  lijceagristle.  The  inevitable  reaction  against 
Paul  went  on  even  in  Ephesus  though  slowly.  Disobedient 
{epeithoun).  InvBgrfect  again,  showing  the  growing  disbelief 
and  disobedience  (apeithes)^  both  ideas  as  in  14:2;  17:5, 
first  refusal  to  hflieve  and  then  refusal  to  obev.  Both  skle- 
runo  and  apeithed  occur  together,  as  here,  in  Ecclus.  30:12. 
Speaking  evil  of  the  Way  {kakologountes  ten  hodon).  Late 
verb  from  kakologos  (speaker  of  evil)  for  the  old  kakos  lego. 
Already  in  Mark  7:10;  9:39;  Matt.  154.  Now  these  Jews 
are  aggressive  opponents  of  Paul  and  seek  to  injure  his 
influence  with  the  crowd.  Note  "the  Way"  as  in  9:2  for 
Christianity.  He  departed  from  them  {apostas  ap*  auton). 
Second  aorist  active  participle  of  aphistemi,  made  an  "apos- 
tasy" (standing  off,  cleavage)  as  he  did  at  Corinth  (18:7, 
metabaSy  making  a  change).  Separated  the  disciples  {aphor- 
isen  tous  mathetas).  First  aorist  active  indicative  of  aphorizo, 
old  verb  to  mark  limits  (horizon)  as  already  in  13:2.  Paul 
himself  was  a  spiritual  Pharisee  "separated"  to  Christ 
(Rom.  I  :i).  The  Jews  regarded  this  withdrawal  as  apostasy, 
like  separating  the  sheep  from  the  goats  (Matt.  25:32). 
Paul  now  made  a  separate  church  as  he  had  done  at  Thes- 
salonica  and  Corinth.  In  the  school  of  Tyrannus  (en  tei 
scholei  Turannou).  Schole  (our  school)  is  an  old  word  from 
schein  (echo)  to  hold  on,  leisure  and  then  in  later  Greek 
(Plutarch,  etc.)  a  place  where  there  is  leisure  as  here.  Only 
this  example  in  the  N.T.  This  is  the  Greek  notion  of 
"school,"  the  Jewish  being  that  of  "yoke"  as  in  Matt.  1 1 :29. 
The  name  Tyrannus  (our  tyrant)  is  a  common  one.  It  is  an 
inscription  in  the  Columbarium  of  the  Empress  Livia  as 
that  of  a  physician  in  the  court.     Furneaux  suggests  the 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  315 

possibility  that  a  relative  of  this  physician  was  lecturing 
on  medicine  in  Ephesus  and  so  as  a  friend  of  Luke,  the 
physician,  would  be  glad  to  help  Paul  about  a  place  to 
preach.  It  was  probably  a  public  building  or  lecture  hall 
with  this  name  whether  hired  by  Paul  or  loaned  to  him. 
The  pagan  sophists  often  spoke  in  such  halls.  The  Codex 
Bezae  adds  "from  the  fifth  hour  to  the  tenth"  as  the  time 
allotted  Paul  for  his  work  in  this  hall,  which  is  quite  possible, 
from  just  before  midday  till  the  close  of  the  afternoon  (from 
before  the  noon  meal  till  two  hours  before  sunset)  each  day. 
Here  Paul  had  great  freedom  and  a  great  hearing.  As  the 
church  grows  there  will  be  other  places  of  meeting  as  the 
church  in  the  house  of  Aquila  and  Priscilla  (I  Cor.  16:19). 
10.  For  two  years  (epi  ete  duo).  Note  epi  with  accusative 
for  extent  of  time  as  in  verse  8,  epi  menas  treis  and  often.  But 
in  20:31  Paul  said  to  the  Ephesian  elders  at  Miletus  that  he 
laboured  with  them  for  the  space  of  "three  years."  That  may 
be  a  general  expression  and  there  was  probably  a  longer 
period  after  the  "two  years"  in  the  school  of  Tyrannus 
besides  the  six  months  in  the  synagogue.  Paul  may  have 
preached  thereafter  in  the  house  of  Aquila  and  Priscilla  for 
some  months,  the  "for  a  while"  of  verse  22.  So  that  all  they 
which  dwelt  in  Asia  heard  {hoste  pantas  tous  katoikountas  ten 
Asian  akousai).  Actual  result  with  hoste  and  the  infinitive 
with  accusative  of  general  reference  as  is  common  (also 
verse  11)  in  the  Koine  (Robertson,  Grammar ^  pp.  999f.). 
Paul  apparently  remained  in  Ephesus,  but  the  gospel  spread 
all  over  the  province  even  to  the  Lycus  Valley  including  the 
rest  of  the  seven  churches  of  Rev.  i  :i  i  and  chapters  2  and  3. 
Demetrius  in  verse  26  will  confirm  the  tremendous  influence 
of  Paul's  ministry  in  Ephesus  on  Asia.  Forty  years  after  this 
Pliny  in  his  famous  letter  to  Trajan  from  Bithynia  will 
say  of  Christianity:  "For  the  contagion  of  this  superstition 
has  not  only  spread  through  cities,  but  also  through  villages 
and  country  places."    It  was  during  these  years  in  Ephesus 


'l6      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

that  Paul  was  greatly  disturbed  over  the  troubles  In  the 
Corinthian  Church.  He  apparently  wrote  a  letter  to  them 
now  lost  to  us  (I  Cor.  5:9),  received  messages  from  the  house- 
hold of  Chloe,  a  letter  from  the  church,  special  messengers, 
sent  Timothy,  then  Titus,  may  have  made  a  hurried  trip 
himself,  wrote  our  First  Corinthians,  was  planning  to  go 
after  the  return  of  Titus  to  Troas  where  he  was  to  meet  him 
after  Pentecost,  when  all  of  a  sudden  the  uproar  raised  by 
Demetrius  hurried  Paul  away  sooner  than  he  had  planned. 
Meanwhile  Apollos  had  returned  from  Corinth  to  Ephesus 
and  refused  to  go  back  (I  Cor.  16:12).  Paul  doubtless  had 
helpers  like  Epaphras  and  Philemon  who  carried  the  mes- 
sage over  the  province  of  Asia,  Tychicus,  and  Trophimus  of 
Asia  who  were  with  him  on  the  last  visit  to  Jerusalem  (verses 
22,  29;  20:4).  Paul's  message  reached  Greeks,  not  merely 
Hellenists  and  God-fearers,  but  some  of  the  Greeks  in  the 
upper  circles  of  life  in  Ephesus. 

1 1.  Special  miracles  {dunameis  ou  tas  tuchousas).  "Powers 
not  the  ones  that  happen  by  chance,"  "not  the  ordinary 
ones,"  litotes  for  "the  extraordinary."  All  "miracles"  or 
"powers"  {dunameis)  are  supernatural  and  out  of  the  or- 
dinary, but  here  God  regularly  wrought  {epoiei,  imperfect 
active)  wonders  beyond  those  familiar  to  the  discipjes  and 
completely  different  from  the  deeds  of  the  Jewish  exorcists. 
This  phrase  is  peculiar  to  Luke  in  the  N.T.  (also  28 :2),  but  it 
occurs  in  the  classical  Greek  and  in  the  Koine  as  in  III  Mace. 
3:7  and  in  papyri  and  inscriptions  (Deissmann,  Bible  Studies, 
p.  255).  In  Samaria  Philip  wrought  miracles  to  deliver  the 
people  from  the  influence  of  Simon  Magus.  Here  in  Ephesus 
exorcists  and  other  magicians  had  built  an  enormous  vogue 
of  a  false  spiritualism  and  Paul  faces  unseen  forces  of  evil. 
His  tremendous  success  led  some  people  to  superstitious 
practices  thinking  that  there  was  power  in  Paul's  person. 

12.  Handkerchiefs  (soudaria).  Latin  word  for  sudor 
(sweat).    Used  in  Luke  19:20  and  John  11:44;  20:7.    In  two 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  317 

papyri  marriage-contracts  this  word  occurs  among  the  toilet 
articles  in  the  dowry  (Deissmann,  Bihle  Studies,  p.  223). 
Aprons  {simikinthid) .  Latin  word  also,  semicinctium  (semi, 
cingo).  Only  here  in  the  N.T.  Linen  aprons  used  by  servants 
or  artisans  (Martial  XIV.  153).  Paul  did  manual  work  at 
Ephesus  (20:34)  ^^^  so  wore  these  aprons.  Departed  {apal- 
lassethai).  Present  passive  infinitive  with  hbste  for  actual 
result  as  in  verse  10.  If  one  wonders  how  God  could  honour 
such  superstitious  faith,  he  should  remember  that  there  is 
no  power  in  superstition  or  in  magic,  but  in  God.  If  God 
never  honoured  any  faith  save  that  entirely  free  from  super- 
stition, how  about  Christian  people  who  are  troubled  over 
the  number  13,  over  the  moon,  the  rabbit's  foot?  The  poor 
woman  with  an  issue  of  blood  touched  the  hem  of  Christ's 
garment  and  was  healed  (Luke  8:44-46)  as  others  sought  to 
do  (Matt.  14:36).  God  condescends  to  meet  us  in  our  igno- 
rance and  weakness  where  he  can  reach  us.  Elisha  had  a 
notion  that  some  of  the  power  of  Elijah  resided  in  his  mantle 
(II  Kings  2:13).  Some  even  sought  help  from  Peter's  shadow 
(Acts  5:15). 

13.  Of  the  strolling  Jews,  exorcists  {ton  perierchomenon 
loudaion  exorkistbn).  These  exorcists  travelled  around 
{peri)  from  place  to  place  like  modem  Gypsy  fortune-tellers. 
The  Jews  were  especially  addicted  to  such  practices  with 
spells  of  sorcery  connected  with  the  name  of  Solomon 
(Josephus,  Ant.  VIII.  2.5).  See  also  Tobit  8:1-3.  Jesus 
alludes  to  those  in  Palestine  (Matt.  12:27  =  Luke  11:19). 
The  exorcists  were  originally  those  who  administered  an 
oath  (from  exorkizo,  to  exact  an  oath),  then  to  use  an  oath 
as  a  spell  or  charm.  Only  instance  here  in  the  N.T.  These 
men  regarded  Paul  as  one  of  their  own  number  just  as  Simon 
Magus  treated  Simon  Peter.  Only  here  these  exorcists  paid 
Paul  the  compliment  of  imitation  instead  of  offering  money 
as  Magus  did.  To  name  over  {onomazein  epi).  They  heard 
what  Paul  said  and  treated  his  words  as  a  magic  charm  or 


3l8      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

spell  to  drive  the  evil  spirits  out.  /  adjure  you  by  Jesus  whom 
Paul  preacheth  (Horkizo  humas  ton  lesoun  hon  Paulas  kerus- 
sei).  Note  two  accusatives  with  the  verb  of.  swearing  (cf. 
Mark  57)  as  a  causative  verb  (Robertson,  Grammar^  p.  483). 
The  papyri  furnish  numerous  instances  of  horkizo  in  such 
constructions  (Deissmann,  Bible  Studies,  p.  281).  Note  also 
the  article  with  Jesus,  "the  Jesus,"  as  if  to  identify  the 
magic  word  to  the  demons  with  the  addition  "whom  Paul 
preaches."  They  thought  that  success  turned  on  the  correct 
use  of  the  magical  formula.  The  Ephesian  mysteries  in- 
cluded Christianity,  so  they  supposed. 

14.  Seven  sons  of  Sceva  (Skeud  hepta  huioi).  Who  this 
Sceva  was  we  do  not  know.  If  a  high  priest,  he  was  highly 
connected  in  Jerusalem  (cf.  5:24).  Some  MSS.  have  ruler 
instead  of  priest.  His  name  may  be  Latin  in  origin.  Skeud 
has  Doric  form  of  genitive.  But  that  he  had  seven  sons  in 
this  degraded  business  shows  how  Judaism  had  fared  poorly 
in  this  superstitious  city.  Did  they  imagine  there  was 
special  power  in  the  number  seven  ^ 

15.  Jesus  I  know  {ton  lesoun  ginosko).  "The  (whom  you 
mention)  Jesus  I  recognize  (ginosko)"  and  "the  (whom  you 
mentioned)  Paul  I  ainacguainted  with  {ton  Paulon  epis- 
tamai)y  Clear  distinction  between  ginosko  and  epistamai. 
But  who  are  ye?  {humeis  de  tines  este?).  But  you,  who  are 
you.?    Emphatic  prolepsis. 

16.  Leaped  on  them  {ephalomenos  ep*  autous).  Second 
aorist  (ingressive)  middle  participle  of  ephallomai,  old  verb 
to  spring  upon  likeapanther,  here  only  in  the  N.T.  Mas- 
tered {katakurieusas).  First  aorist  (effective)  active  participle 
of  katakurieuo,  late  verb  from  kata  and  kurios,  to  become  lord 
or  master  of.  Both  {amphoteron).  Papyri  examples  exist 
where  amphoteroi means  "all"  or  more  than  "two"  (Robert- 
son, Grammar,  p.  745).  So  here  amphoteroi  includes  all 
seven.  "Both"  in  old  English  was  used  for  more  than  two. 
So  that  {hoste).  Another  example  (verses  10,  11)  of  hoste  with 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  319 

the  infinitive  for  result.  Naked  (gumnous).  Probably  with 
torn  garments.  Wounded  (tetraumatismenous).  Perfect 
passive  participle  of  traumatizo,  old  verb  to  wound,  from 
trauma  (a  wound).    In  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Luke  20:12. 

17.  Was  magnified  (emegaluneto).  Imperfect  passive.  To 
make  great.  It  was  a  notable  victory  over  the  powers  of 
evil  in  Ephesus. 

18.  Came  (erchonto).  Imperfect  middle,  kept  coming,  one 
after  another.  Even  some  of  the  believers  were  secretly  under 
the  spell  of  these  false  spiritualists  just  as  some  Christians 
todavcherish  private  contacts  with  so-called  occult  powers 
fKfn^gh  mediums,  seances,  of  which  they  are  ashamed . 
Confessing  (exomologoumenot).  It  was  time  to  make  a  clean 
breast  of  it  all,  to  turn  on  the  light,  to  unbosom  their  secret 
habits.  Declaring  their  deeds  {anaggellontes  tas  praxeis 
auton).  Judgment  was  beginning  at  the  house  of  God.  The 
dupes  (professing  believers,  alas)  of  these  jugglers  or  exorcists 
now  had  their  eyes  opened  when  they  saw  the  utter  defeat 
of  the  tricksters  who  had  tried  to  use  the  name  of  Jesus 
without  his  power.  The  boomerang  was  tremendous.  The 
black  arts  were  now  laid  bare  in  their  real  character.  Gentile 
converts  had  a  struggle  to  shake  off  their  corrupt  environ- 
ment. 

19.  Not  a  few  of  them  that  practised  curious  arts  {hikanoi 
ton  ta  perierga  praxanton).  Considerable  number  of  the  per- 
formers or  exorcists  themselves  who  knew  that  they  were 
humbugs  were  led  to  renounce  their  evil  practices.  The  word 
perierga  (curious)  is  an  old  word  {peri,  erga)  originally  a 
piddler  about  trifles,  a  busybody  (I  Tim.  5:13),  then  im- 
pertinent and  magical  things  as  here.  Only  two  examples  in 
the  N.T.  It  is  a  technical  term  for  magic  at  the  papyri  and 
inscriptions  show.  Deissmann  {Bible  Studies,  p.  323)  thinks 
that  these  books  here  burned  were  just  like  the  Magic 
Papyri  now  recovered  from  Egypt.  Burned  them  in  the  si^t 
of  all  {katekaion  endpion  panton).     Imperfect  active  of  kata- 


320      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

kaid.  It  probably  took  a  good  while  to  do  it,  burned  them 
completely  (up,  we  say;  down,  the  Greeks  say,  perfective 
use  of  kata).  These  Magical  Papyri  or  slips  of  parchment 
with  symbols  or  magical  sentences  written  on  them  called 
Ephesia  Grammata  (Ephesian  Letters).  These  Ephesian 
Letters  were  worn  as  amulets  or  charms.  They  brought 
them  together  {sunenegk antes).  Second  aorist  active  par- 
ticiple of  sunphero.  What  a  glorious  conflagration  it  would 
be  if  in  every  city  all  the  salacious,  blasphemous,  degrading 
books,  pamphlets,  magazines,  and  papers  could  be  piled 
together  and  burned.  They  counted  (sunepsephisan).  First 
aorist  active  indicative  of  sunpsephizo,  to  reckon  together. 
In  LXX  (Jer.  29:49).  Only  here  in  N.T.  Sunkatapsephizo 
in  1 :26.  Fifty  thousand  pieces  of  silver  (arguriou  muriadas 
pente).  Five  ten  thousand  {muriadas)  pieces  of  silver. 
Ephesus  was  largely  Greek  and  probably  the  silver  pieces 
were  Greek  drachmae  or  the  Latin  denarius,  probably  about 
ten  thousand  dollars  or  two  thousand  English  pounds. 

20.  Mightily  {kata  kratos).  According  to  strength.  Only 
here  in  N.T.,  common  military  term  in  Thucydides.  Such 
proof  of  a  change  counted.  Grew  and  prevailed  {euxanen  kai 
ischuen).  Imperfect  actives,  kept  growing  and  gaining 
strength.  It  was  a  day  of  triumph  for  Christ  in  Ephesus, 
this  city  of  vast  wealth  and  superstition.  Ephesus  for  cen- 
turies will  be  one  of  the  centres  of  Christian  power.  Timothy 
will  come  here  and  John  the  Apostle  and  Polycarp  and 
Irenaeus. 

21.  Purposed  in  the  spirit  {etheto  en  toi  pneumati) .  Second 
aorist  middle  indicative  for  mental  action  and  "spirit" 
expressed  also.  A  new  stage  In  Paul's  career  begins  here, 
a  new  division  of  the  Acts.  Passed  through  {dielthbn).  Word 
{dierchomai)  used  ten  times  in  Acts  (cf.  19:1)  of  missionary 
journeys  (Ramsay).  Macedonia  and  Achaia  {ten  Makedonian 
kai  Achaian).  This  was  the  way  that  he  actually  went,  but 
originally  he  had  planned   to  go  to  Achaia   (Corinth)  and 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  321 

then  to  Macedonia,  as  he  says  in  II  Cor.  1:1  sf.,  but  he  had 
now  changed  that  purpose,  perhaps  because  of  the  bad  news 
from  Corinth.  Already  when  he  wrote  I  Corinthians  he  pro- 
posed to  go  first  to  Macedonia  (I  Cor.  16:5-7).  He  even 
hoped  to  spend  the  winter  in  Corinth  "if  the  Lord  permit" 
and  to  remain  in  Ephesus  till  Pentecost,  neither  of  which 
things  he  did.  /  must  also  see  Rome  {dei  me  kai  Rom  en  idein). 
This  section  of  Acts  begins  with  Rome  in  the  horizon  of 
Paul's  plans  and  the  book  closes  with  Paul  in  Rome  (Rack- 
ham).  Here  he  feels  the  necessity  of  going  as  in  Rom.  1:15 
he  feels  himself  "debtor"  to  all  including  "those  in  Rome" 
(verse  16).  Paul  had  long  desired  to  go  to  Rome  (Rom.  i  :io), 
but  had  been  frequently  hindered  (1:13),  but  he  has  def- 
initely set  his  face  to  go  to  Rome  and  on  to  Spain  (15 :23-29). 
Paley  calls  sharp  attention  to  this  parallel  between  Acts  19:21 
and  Rom.  1:10-15  ^^^  15:23-29.  Rome  h^  a  fascination 
for  Paul  as  the  home  of  Aquila  and  Priscilla  and  numerous 
other  friends  (Rom.  16),  but  chiefly  as  the  capital  of  the 
Roman  Empire  and  a  necessary  goal  in  Paul's  ambition  to 
win  it  to  Jesus  Christ.  His  great  work  in  Asia  had  stirred 
afresh  in  him  the  desire  to  do  his  part  for  Rome.  He  wrote 
to  Rome  from  Corinth  not  long  after  this  and  in  Jerusalem 
Jesus  in  vision  will  confirm  the  necessity  (dei)  that  Paul  see 
Rome  (Acts  23:11). 

22.  Timothy  and  Erastus  (Timotheon  kai  Eraston).  Paul 
had  sent  Timothy  to  Corinth  (I  Cor.  4:17)  and  had  requested 
kindly  treatment  of  this  young  minister  in  his  difficult  task 
of  placating  the  divided  church  (16:10-11)  that  he  might 
return  to  Paul  as  he  evidently  had  before  Paul  leaves  Ephe- 
sus. He  then  despatched  Titus  to  Corinth  to  finish  what 
Timothy  had  not  quite  succeeded  in  doing  with  instructions 
to  meet  him  in  Troas.  Now  Timothy  and  Erastus  (cf.  Rom. 
16:23;  II  Tim.  4:20)  go  on  to  Macedonia  to  prepare  the  way 
for  Paul  who  will  come  on  later.  He  himself  stayed  in  Asia 
for  a  while  {autos  e-peschen  chronon  eis  ten  Asian).    Literally, 


322      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

He  himself  had  additional  time  in  Asia.  Second  aorist 
active  indicative  of  ep^cho,  old  and  common  idiom,  only 
here  in  the  N.T.  in  this  sense  and  the  verb  only  in  Luke  and 
Paul.  The  reason  for  Paul's  delay  is  given  by  him  in  I  Cor. 
l6:8f.,  the  great  door  wide  open  in  Ephesus.  Here  again 
Luke  and  Paul  supplement  each  other.  Pentecost  came  to- 
wards the  end  of  May  and  May  was  the  month  of  the  festival 
of  Artemis  (Diana)  when  great  multitudes  would  come  to 
Ephesus.  But  he  did  not  remain  till  Pentecost  as  both  Luke 
and  Paul  make  plain. 

23.  No  small  stir  {tarachos  ouk  oligos).  Same  phrase  in 
12:18  and  nowhere  else  in  the  N.T.  Litotes.  Concerning  the 
Way  {peri  tes  hodou).  See  this  phrase  for  Christianity  in  9:2; 
19:9;  24:22  which  see,  like  the  "Jesus  Way"  of  the  Indians. 
There  had  already  been  opposition  and  "stir"  before  this 
stage  (cf.  19:11-20).  The  fight  with  wild  beasts  in  I  Cor. 
15:32  (whatever  it  was)  was  before  that  Epistle  was  written 
and  so  before  this  new  uproar.  Paul  as  a  Roman  citizen 
could  not  be  thrown  to  wild  beasts,  but  he  so  pictured  the 
violent  opponents  of  Christ  in  Ephesus. 

24.  DemetriuSj  a  silversmith  {Demetrios  argurokopos).  The 
name  is  common  enough  and  may  or  may  not  be  the  man 
mentioned  in  III  John  12  who  was  also  from  the  neighbour- 
hood of  Ephesus.  There  is  on  an  inscription  at  Ephesus  near 
the  close  of  the  century  a  Demetrius  called  neopoios  Artemidos 
a  temple  warden  of  Artemis  (Diana).  Zoeckler  suggests  that 
Luke  misunderstood  this  word  neopoios  and  translated  it 
into  argurokopos,  a  beater  (kopto,  to  beat)  of  silver  (arguros, 
silver),  "which  made  silver  shrines  of  Artemis"  [poion  naous 
(argurous)  Artemidos].  It  is  true  that  no  silver  shrines  of 
the  temple  have  been  found  in  Ephesus,  but  only  numerous 
terra-cotta  ones.  Ramsay  suggests  that  the  silver  ones 
would  naturally  be  melted  down.  The  date  is  too  late  any- 
how to  identify  the  Demetrius  who  was  neopoios  with  the 
Demetrius   argurokopos  who  made   little  silver  temples  of 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  323 

Artemis,  though  B  does  not  have  the  word  argurous.  The 
poor  votaries  would  buy  the  terra-cotta  ones,  the  rich  the 
silver  shrines  (Ramsay,  Paul  the  Traveller^  p.  278).  These 
small  models  of  the  temple  with  the  statue  of  Artemis  in- 
side would  be  set  up  ih  the  houses  or  even  worn  as  amulets. 
It  is  a  pity  that  the  Revised  Version  renders  Artemis  here. 
Diana  as  the  Ephesian  Artemis  is  quite  distinct  from  the 
Greek  Artemis,  the  sister  of  Apollo,  the  Diana  of  the  Romans. 
This  temple,  built  in  the  6th  century  B.C.,  was  burnt  by 
Herostratus  Oct.  13  b.c.  356,  the  night  when  Alexander  the 
Great  was  born.  It  was  restored  and  was  considered  one  of 
the  seven  wonders  of  the  world.  Artemis  was  worshipped 
as  the  goddess  of  fertility,  like  the  Lydian  Cybele,  a  figure 
with  many  breasts.  The  great  festival  in  May  would  offer 
Demetrius  a  golden  opportunity  for  the  sale  of  the  shrines. 
Brought  no  little  business  {pareicheto  ouk  oligen  ergasian). 
Imperfect  middle,  continued  to  bring  (furnish,  provide). 
The  middle  accents  the  part  that  Demetrius  played  as  the 
leader  of  the  guild  of  silversmiths,  work  for  himself  and  for 
them.  Unto  the  craftsmen  {tais  technitais).  The  artisans  from 
techne  (craft,  art).  Trade  guilds  were  common  in  the  ancient 
world.  Demetrius  had  probably  organized  this  guild  and 
provided  the  capital  for  the  enterprise. 

25.  Whom  he  gathered  together  (hous  sunathroisas).  First 
aorist  active  participle  of  sunathroizOj  old  verb  to  assemble 
together  {athroos,  a  crowd),  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Acts 
12:12.  With  the  workmen  of  like  occupation  (kai  tous  peri  ta 
toiauta  ergatas).  "And  the  workmen  concerning  such  things," 
apparently  those  who  made  the  marble  and  terra-cotta 
shrines  who  would  also  be  affected  in  the  same  way.  It  was 
a  gathering  of  the  associated  trades,  not  for  a  strike,  for 
employer  and  employees  met  together,  but  in  protest  against 
the  preaching  of  Paul.  We  have  our  wealth  {he  euporia  hemin 
estin).  The  wealth  is  to  us  (dative  of  possession).  This  old 
word  for  wealth  occurs  here  alone  in  the  N.T.   It  is  from  eu 


324      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

and  poros,  easy  to  pass  through,  easy  to  accomplish,  to  be 
well  off,  wealthy,  welfare,  weal,  well-being,  rich.  Demetrius 
appeals  to  this  knowledge  and  self-Interest  of  the  artisans 
as  the  basis  for  their  zeal  for  Artemis,  piety  for  revenue. 

26.  At  Ephesus  {Ephesou).  Genitive  of  place  as  also  with 
Asias  (Asia).  Cf.  Robertson,  Grammar,  pp.  494f.  This  Paul 
{ho  Paulos  houtos).  Contemptuous  use  of  houtos.  Hath 
turned  away  {metestesen).  Changed,  transposed.  First  aorist 
active  indicative,  did  change.  Tribute  to  Paul's  powers  as  a 
preacher  borne  out  by  Luke's  record  in  19:10,  There  may 
be  an  element  of  exaggeration  on  the  part  of  Demetrius  to 
incite  the  workmen  to  action,  for  the  worship  of  Artemis 
was  their  wealth.  Paul  had  cut  the  nerve  of  their  business. 
There  had  long  been  a  Jewish  colony  in  Ephesus,  but  their 
protest  against  idolatry  was  as  nothing  compared  with  Paul's 
preaching  (Furneaux).  Which  are  made  with  hands  {hoi  dia 
cheiron  ginomenoi).  Note  the  present  tense,  made  from  time 
to  time.  No  doubt  Paul  had  put  the  point  sharply  as  in 
Athens  (Acts  17:29).  Isaiah  (44:9-17)  had  pictured  graphic- 
ally the  absurdity  of  worshipping  stocks  and  stones,  flatly 
forbidden  by  the  Old  Testament  (Ex.  20:4;  Psa.  135:15-18). 
The  people  identified  their  gods  with  the  images  of  them  and 
Demetrius  reflects  that  point  of  view.  He  was  jealous  of  the 
brand  of  gods  turned  out  by  his  factory.  The  artisans  would 
stand  by  him  on  this  point.  It  was  a  reflection  on  their  work. 

27.  This  our  trade  {touto  to  meros).^  Part,  share,  task, 
job,  trade.  Come  into  disrepute  {eis  apelegmon  elthein).  Not 
in  the  old  writers,  but  In  LXX  and  Koine.  Literally,  reputa- 
tion, exposure,  censure,  rejection  after  examination,  and  so 
disrepute.  Their  business  of  making  gods  would  lose  caste 
as  the  liquor  trade  (still  called  the  trade  in  England)  has  done 
in  our  day.  They  felt  this  keenly  and  so  Demetrius  names  it 
first.  They  felt  it  in  their  pockets.  Of  the  great  goddess 
Artemis  {tes  megales  theas  Artemidos).  She  was  generally 
known  as  the  Great  {he  Megale).    An  inscription  found  at 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  325 

Ephesus  calls  her  "the  greatest  god"  {he  megiste  theos).  The 
priests  were  eunuchs  and  there  were  virgin  priestesses  and 
a  lower  order  of  slaves  known  as  temple-sweepers  (nedkoroiy 
verse  35).  They  had  wild  orgiastic  exercises  that  were  dis- 
graceful with  their  Corybantic  processions  and  revelries. 
Be  made  of  no  account  {eis  outhen  logisthenai).  Be  reckoned 
as  nothing,  first  aorist  passive  infinitive  of  logizomai  and  eis. 
Should  even  he  deposed  of  her  magnificence  {mellein  te  kai  kath- 
aireisthai  tes  megaleiotetos  autes).  Note  the  present  infinitive 
after  mellein,  ablative  case  (so  best  MSS.)  after  kathaired,  to 
take  down,  to  depose,  to  deprive  of.  The  word  megaleiotes 
occurs  also  in  Luke  9:43  (the  majesty  of  God)  and  in  II  Peter 
I  :i6  of  the  transfiguration  of  Christ.  It  is  already  in  the  LXX 
and  Deissmann  {Light  from  the  Ancient  East,  p.  363)  thinks 
that  the  word  runs  parallel  with  terms  used  in  the  emperor- 
cult.  All  Asia  and  the  world  [hole  {he)  Asia  kai  {he)  oikou- 
mene].  See  1 1 :28  for  same  use  of  oikoumene.  An  exaggera- 
tion, to  be  sure,  but  Pausanias  says  that  no  deity  was  more 
widely  worshipped.  Temples  of  Artemis  have  been  found 
in  Spain  and  Gaul.  Multitudo  errantium  non  efficit  veritatem 
(Bengel).  Even  today  heathenism  has  more  followers  than 
Christianity.  To  think  that  all  this  splendour  was  being  set 
at  naught  by  one  man  and  a  despised  Jew  at  that! 

28.  They  were  filled  with  wrath  {genomenoi  plereis  thumou). 
Having  become  full  of  wrath.  Cried  out  {ekrazon).  Inchoative 
imperfect,  began  to  cry  out  and  kept  it  up  continuously. 
Reiteration  was  characteristic  of  the  orgiastic  exercises.  The 
Codex  Bezae  adds  after  thumou  (wrath) :  Dramontes  eis  ten 
amphodon  (running  into  the  street),  which  they  certainly 
did  after  the  speech  of  Demetrius.  Great  is  Artemis  of  the 
Ephesians  {Megale  he  Artemis  Ephesion).  D  (Codex  Bezae) 
omits  he  (the)  and  makes  it  read:  "Great  Artemis  of  the 
Ephesians."  This  was  the  usual  cry  of  the  votaries  in  their 
orgies  as  the  inscriptions  show,  an  ejaculatory  outcry  or 
prayer  instead  of  an  argument  as  the  other  MSS.  have  it. 


326     WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

That  is  vivid  and  natural  (Ranisay,  Church  in  the  Roman 
Empire y  pp.  i35fF.)'  Yet  on  this  occasion  the  artisans  were 
making  an  argumentative  protest  and  plea  against  Paul. 
An  inscription  at  Dionysopolis  has  "Great  is  Apollo." 

29.  With  the  confusion  {tes  sugchuseos).  Genitive  case 
after  eplesthe.  An  old  word,  but  in  the  N.T.  only  here,  from 
verb  sugched,  to  pour  together  like  a  flood  (only  in  Acts  in  the 
N.T.).  Vivid  description  of  the  inevitable  riot  that  followed 
"the  appearance  of  such  a  body  in  the  crowded  agora  of  an 
excitable  city"  (Rackham)  "vociferating  the  city's  watch- 
word." They  rushed  (hormesan).  Ingressive  aorist  active 
indicative  of  hormad,  old  verb  for  impetuous  dashing,  a  case 
of  mob  psychology  (mob  mind),  with  one  accord  {homo- 
ihumadon  as  in  Acts  1:14,  etc.).  Into  the  theatre  {eis  to  theon 
iron).  A  place  for  seeing  {theaomai)  spectacles,  originally 
for  dramatic  representation  (Thucydides,  Herodotus),  then 
for  the  spectators,  then  for  the  spectacle  or  show  (I  Cor. 
4:9).  The  theatre  (amphitheatre)  at  Ephesus  can  still  be 
traced  in  the  ruins  (Wood,  Ephesus)  and  shows  that  it  was 
of  enormous  size  capable  of  seating  fifty-six  thousand  per- 
sons (some  estimate  it  only  24,500).  It  was  the  place  for 
large  public  gatherings  of  any  sort  out  of  doors  like  our  foot- 
ball and  baseball  parks.  In  particular,  gladiatorial  shows 
were  held  in  these  theatres.  Having  seized  Gaius  and  Aristar- 
chus  men  of  Macedonia  {sunarpasantes  Gaion  kai  Aristarchon 
Makedonas).  See  6:12  for  this  same  verb.  They  wanted  some 
victims  for  this  "gladiatorial"  show.  These  two  men  were 
"Paul's  companions  in  travel"  {sunekdemous  Paulou), 
together  (sun)  with  Paul  in  being  abroad,  away  from  home 
or  people  {ek-demous^  late  word,  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and 
II  Cor.  8:19).  How  the  mob  got  hold  of  Gaius  (Acts  204) 
and  Aristarchus  (20-4;  27:2;  Col.  4:10;  Philemon  24)  we  do 
not  know  whether  by  accidental  recognition  or  by  search 
after  failure  to  get  Paul.  In  Rom.  164  Paul  speaks  of 
Priscilla  and  Aquila  as  those  "who  for  my  life  laid  down  their 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  327 

own  necks."  Paul  lived  with  them  in  Ephesus  as  in  Corinth. 
It  is  possible  that  Demetrius  led  the  mob  to  their  house  and 
that  they  refused  to  allow  Paul  to  go  or  to  be  seized  at  the 
risk  of  their  own  lives.  Paul  himself  may  have  been  desper- 
ately ill  at  this  time  as  we  know  was  the  case  once  during  his 
stay  in  Ephesus  when  he  felt  the  answer  of  death  in  himself 
(II  Cor.  I  :g)  and  when  God  rescued  him.  That  may  mean 
that,  ill  as  he  was,  Paul  wanted  to  go  and  face  the  mob  in 
the  theatre,  knowing  that  it  meant  certain  death. 

30.  And  when  Paul  was  minded  to  enter  in  unto  the  people 
{Paulou  de  boulomenou  eiselthein  eis  ton  demon).  Genitive 
absolute.  Plainly  Paul  wanted  to  face  the  howling  mob, 
whether  it  was  the  occasion  pictured  in  II  Cor.  1 19  or  not. 
"St.  Paul  was  not  the  man  to  leave  his  comrades  in  the 
lurch"  (Knowling).  Suffered  him  not  (auk  eion  auton).  Im- 
perfect of  eaOf  common  verb  to  allow,  what  Gildersleeve  called 
the  negative  imperfect  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  885),  denot- 
ing resistance  to  pressure.  The  more  Paul  insisted  on  going 
the  more  the  disciples  refused  to  agree  to  it  and  they  won. 

31.  Certain  also  of  the  chief  officers  of  Asia  {tines  de  kai  ton 
Asiarchbn).  These  "Asiarchs"  were  ten  officers  elected  by 
cities  in  the  province  who  celebrated  at  their  own  cost  public 
games  and  festivals  (Page).  Each  province  had  such  a  group 
of  men  chosen,  as  we  now  know  from  inscriptions,  to  super- 
vise the  funds  connected  with  the  worship  of  the  emperor, 
to  preside  at  games  and  festivals  even  when  the  temple 
services  were  to  gods  like  Artemis.  Only  rich  men  could 
act,  but  the  position  was  eagerly  sought.  Being  his  friends 
(pntes  autbi  philoi).  Evidently  the  Asiarchs  had  a  high 
opinion  of  Paul  and  were  unwilling  for  him  to  expose  his 
life  to  a  wild  mob  during  the  festival  of  Artemis.  They  were 
at  least  tolerant  toward  Paul  and  his  preaching.  "It  was  an 
Asiarch  who  at  Smyrna  resisted  the  cry  of  the  populace  to 
throw  Polycarp  to  the  lions"  (Furneaux).  Besought  him 
(parekaloun  auton).      Imperfect  active,  showing  that  the 


328      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

messengers  sent  had  to  Insist  over  Paul's  protest.  ^^Not  to 
adventure  himself^''  {me  dounai  heauton).  It  was  a  hazard,  a 
rash  adventure  "to  give  himself"  (second  aorist  active  in- 
finitive of  didomi).  Just  this  sense  of  "adventure"  with 
the  idiom  occurs  only  here  in  the  N.T.,  though  in  Polybius 
v.,  14,  9.  But  the  phrase  itself  Paul  uses  of  Jesus  who  gave 
himself  for  our  sins  (Gal.  i  :4;  I  Tim.  2:6;  Titus  2:14).  It  is 
not  the  first  time  that  friends  had  rescued  Paul  from  peril 
(Acts  9:25,  30;  17:10,  14).  The  theatre  was  no  place  for  Paul. 
It  meant  certain  death. 

32.  Some  therefore  cried  one  thing  and  some  another  (alloi 
men  oun  alio  ti  ekrazon).  This  classical  use  of  alios  alio 
(Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  747)  appears  also  in  2:12;  21:34. 
Literally,  "others  cried  another  thing."  The  imperfect 
shows  the  repetition  (kept  on  crying)  and  confusion  which 
is  also  distinctly  stated.  For  the  assembly  was  in  confusion 
{en  gar  he  ekklesia  sunkechumene) .  The  reason  for  the  pre- 
vious statement.  Periphrastic  past  perfect  passive  of  sug- 
cheo,  sugchuno  {-unno),  to  pour  together,  to  commingle  as  in 
verse  29  {sugchuseos).  It  was  not  an  "assembly"  {ekklesia, 
ek,  kaleo,  to  call  out),  but  a  wholly  Irregular,  disorganized 
mob  in  a  state  (perfect  tense)  of  confusion.  There  was  "a 
lawful  assembly"  (verse  39),  but  this  mob  was  not  one. 
Luke  shows  his  contempt  for  this  mob  (Furneaux).  Had  come 
together  {sunelelutheisan) .  Past  perfect  active  of  sunerchomai. 
It  was  an  assembly  only  in  one  sense.  For  some  reason  De- 
metrius who  was  responsible  for  the  mob  preferred  now  to 
keep  In  the  background,  though  he  was  known  to  be  the 
ring-leader  of  the  gathering  (verse  38).  It  was  just  a  mob 
that  shouted  because  others  did. 

33.  And  they  brought  Alexander  out  of  the  crowd  {ek  de  tou 
ochlou  sunebibasan  Alexandron).  The  correct  text  (Aleph 
A  B)  has  this  verb  sunebibasan  (from  sunbibazb,  to  put  to- 
gether) instead  of  proebibasan  (from  probibazo,  to  put  for- 
ward).  It  is  a  graphic  word,  causal  of  baino,  to  go,  and  occurs 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  329 

in  Acts  16:10;  Col.  2:19;  Eph.  4:16.  Evidently  some  of  the 
Jews  grew  afraid  that  the  mob  would  turn  on  the  Jews  as  well 
as  on  the  Christians.  Paul  was  a  Jew  and  so  was  Aristarchus, 
one  of  the  prisoners.  The  Jews  were  as  strongly  opposed  to 
idolatry  as  were  the  Christians.  The  Jews  putting  him  for- 
ward (probalonton  anion  ton  loudaion).  Genitive  absolute 
of  the  second  aorist  active  participle  of  proballo,  old  verb 
to  push  forward  as  leaves  in  the  spring  (Luke  21:30).  In 
the  N.T.  only  in  these  two  passages.  Alexandria  had  already 
disgraceful  scenes  of  Jew-baiting  and  there  was  real  peril 
now  in  Ephesus  with  this  wild  mob.  So  Alexander  was 
pushed  forward  as  the  champion  to  defend  the  Jews  to  the 
excited  mob.  He  may  be  the  same  Alexander  the  copper- 
smith who  did  Paul  much  evil  (II  Tim.  4:14),  against  whom 
Paul  will  warn  Timothy  then  in  Ephesus.  "The  Jews  were 
likely  to  deal  in  the  copper  and  silver  required  for  the  shrines, 
so  he  may  have  had  some  trade  connexion  with  the  craftsmen 
which  would  give  him  influence"  (Furneaux).  Beckoned  with 
the  hand  {kataseisas  ten  cheira).  Old  verb  kataseio,  to  shake 
down,  here  the  hand,  rapidly  waving  the  hand  up  and  down 
to  get  a  hearing.  In  the  N.T.  elsewhere  only  in  Acts  12:17; 
13:16;  2i.:40  where  "with  the  hand"  {tei  cheiri,  instrumental 
case)  is  used  instead  of  ten  cheira  (the  accusative).  Would 
have  made  a  defence  unto  the  people  (ethelen  apologeisthai  toi 
dembi).  Imperfect  active,  wanted  to  make  a  defence,  tried 
to,  started  to,  but  apparently  never  got  out  a  word.  Apolo- 
geisthai (present  middle  infinitive,  direct  middle,  to  defend 
oneself),  regular  word  for  formal  apology,  but  in  N.T.  only 
by  Luke  and  Paul  (twice  in  Gospel,  six  times  in  Acts,  and 
in  Rom.  2:15;  II  Cor.  12:19). 

34.  When  they  perceived  (epignontes) .  Recognizing,  coming 
to  know  fully  and  clearly  (epi-),  second  aorist  (ingressive) 
active  participle  of  epiginosko.  The  masculine  plural  is 
left  as  nominative  absolute  or  pendens  without  a  verb.  The 
rioters  saw  at  once  that  Alexander  was  (estin,  present  tense 


330      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

retained  in  indirect  assertion)  a  Jew  by  his  features.  J II  with 
om  voice  cried  out  {phone  egeneto  mia  ek  panton  krazonton). 
Anacoluthon  or  construction  according  to  sense.  Literally, 
"one  voice  arose  from  all  crying."  Krazonton  agrees  in  case 
(ablative)  with  panton,  but  Aleph  A  have  krazontes.  This 
loose  construction  is  not  uncommon  (Robertson,  Grammar^ 
pp.  436f.).  Now  at  last  the  crowd  became  unanimous  (one 
voice)  at  the  sight  of  a  hated  Jew  about  to  defend  their 
attacks  on  the  worship  of  Artemis.  The  unanimity  lasted 
"about  the  space  of  two  hours"  (hosei  epi  horas  duo),  "as  if 
for  two  hours."  Their  creed  centred  in  this  prolonged  yell: 
"Great  is  Artemis  of  the  Ephesians"  with  which  the  dis- 
turbance started  (verse  28). 

35.  The  town-clerk  (ho  grammateus) .  Ephesus  was  a  free 
city  and  elected  its  own  officers  and  the  recorder  or  secretary 
was  the  chief  magistrate  of  the  city,  though  the  proconsul  of 
the  province  of  Asia  resided  there.  This  officer  is  not  a  mere 
secretary  of  another  officer  or  like  the  copyists  and  students 
of  the  law  among  the  Jews,  but  the  most  influential  person 
in  Ephesus  who  drafted  decrees  with  the  aid  of  the  strati- 
goi,  had  charge  of  the  city's  money,  was  the  power  in  control 
of  the  assembly,  and  communicated  directly  with  the  pro- 
consul. Inscriptions  at  Ephesus  give  frequently  this  very 
title  for  their  chief  officer  and  the  papyri  have  it  also.  The 
precise  function  varied  in  different  cities.  His  name  ap- 
peared on  the  coin  at  Ephesus  issued  in  his  year  of  office. 
Had  quieted  the  multitude  {katasteilas  ton  ochlon).  First 
aorist  active  participle  of  katastello,  to  send  down,  arrange 
dress  (Euripides),  lower  (Plutarch),  restrain  (papyrus 
example),  only  twice  in  the  N.T.  (here  and  verse  36,  be 
quiet),  but  in  LXX  and  Josephus.  He  evidently  took  the 
rostrum  and  his  very  presence  as  the  city's  chief  officer  had 
a  quieting  effect  on  the  billowy  turmoil  and  a  semblance  of 
order  came.  He  waited,  however,  till  the  hubbub  had  nearly 
exhausted  itself  (two  hours)  and  did  not  speak  till  there  was 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  331 

a  chance  to  be  heard.  Saith  (phesin).  Historical  present  for 
vividness.  Hozv  that.  Merely  participle  ousan  and  accusative 
polin  in  indirect  discourse,  no  conjunction  at  all  (Robert- 
son, Grammar,  pp.  i04off.),  common  idiom  after  ginosko,  to 
know.  Temple-keeper  (neokoron).  Old  word  from  neos  {naos), 
temple,  and  koreo,  to  sweep.  Warden,  verger,  cleaner  of  th  - 
temple,  a  sacristan.  So  in  Xenophon  and  Plato.  Inscriptions 
so  describe  Ephesus  as  neokoron  tes  Artemidos  as  Luke  has 
it  here  and  also  applied  to  the  imperial  cultus  which  finally 
had  several  such  temples  in  Ephesus.  Other  cities  claimed 
the  same  honour  of  being  neokoros,  but  it  was  the  peculiar 
boast  of  Ephesus  because  of  the  great  temple  of  Artemis. 
A  coin  of  A.D.  65  describes  Ephesus  as  neokoros.  There  are 
papyri  examples  of  the  term  applied  to  individuals,  one  to 
Priene  as  neokoros  of  the  temple  in  Ephesus  (Moulton  and 
Milligan,  Vocabulary).  And  of  the  image  which  fell  down  from 
Jupiter  (kai  tou  diopetous).  Supply  agalma  (image),  "the 
from  heaven-fallen  image."  From  Zeus  (Dios)  and  peto 
(pipto,  pipeto)j  to  fall.  Zeus  Qupiter)  was  considered  lord 
of  the  sky  or  heaven  and  that  is  the  idea  in  diopetous  here. 
The  legend  about  a  statue  fallen  from  heaven  occurs  con- 
cerning the  statue  of  Artemis  at  Tauris,  Minerva  at  Athens, 
etc.  Thus  the  recorder  soothed  the  vanity  (Rackham)  of 
the  crowd  by  appeal  to  the  world-wide  fame  of  Ephesus  as 
sacristan  of  Artemis  and  of  her  heaven-fallen  image. 

36.  Cannot  be  gainsaid  {anantireton  oun  onton).  Genitive 
absolute  with  oun  (therefore).  Undeniable  (an,  anii,  retos), 
verbal  adjective.  Occasionally  in  late  Greek  (Polybius, 
etc.),  only  here  in  N.T.,  but  adverb  anantiretos  in  Acts 
10:29.  These  legends  were  accepted  as  true  and  appeased  the 
mob.  Ye  ought  {deon  estin).  It  is  necessary.  Periphrastic 
present  indicative  instead  oidei  like  I  Peter  i  :6;  I  Tim.  5:i3f. 
Be  quiet  (katestalmenous) .  Perfect  passive  participle  of 
katastello  (see  verse  35).  Rash  (propetes).  Old  adjective 
from  pro  and  peto,  to  fall  forward,  headlong,  precipitate.    In 


332      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

the  N.T.  only  here  and  II  Tim.  3:4,  though  common  in  the 
Koine.    Better  look  before  you  leap. 

37.  Neither  robbers  of  temples  {cute  hierosulous).  Common 
word  in  Greek  writers  from  hieron,  temple,  and  sulao,  to  rob, 
be  guilty  of  sacrilege.  The  word  is  found  also  on  inscriptions 
in  Ephesus.  The  Jews  were  sometimes  guilty  of  this  crime 
(Rom.  2:22),  since  the  heathen  temples  often  had  vast 
treasures  like  banks.  The  ancients  felt  as  strongly  about 
temple-robbing  as  westerners  used  to  feel  about  a  horse- 
thief.  Nor  blasphemers  of  our  goddess  {oute  blasphemountas 
ten  theon  hemon).  Nor  those  who  blasphemed  our  goddess. 
That  is  to  say,  these  men  (Gaius  and  Aristarchus)  as  Chris- 
tians had  so  conducted  themselves  (Col.  4:5)  that  no  charge 
could  be  placed  against  them  either  in  act  (temple-robbery) 
or  word  (blasphemy).  They  had  done  a  rash  thing  since 
these  men  are  innocent.  Paul  had  used  tact  in  Ephesus  as 
in  Athens  in  avoiding  illegalities. 

38.  Have  a  matter  against  any  one  (echousin  pros  tina 
logon).  For  this  use  of  echo  logon  with  pros  see  Matt.  5:32 
and  Col.  3:13.  The  town-clerk  names  Demetrius  and  the 
craftsmen  (technitai)  as  the  parties  responsible  for  the  riot. 
The  courts  are  open  {agoraioi  agontai).  Supply  hemerai 
(days),  court  days  are  kept,  or  sunodoi,  court-meetings  are 
now  going  on,  Vulgate  conventus  forenses  aguntur.  Old 
adjective  from  agora  (forum)  marketplace  where  trials  were 
held.  Cf.  Acts  17:4.  There  were  regular  court  days  whether 
they  were  in  session  then  or  not.  And  there  are  proconsuls 
{kai  anthupatoi  eisin).  Asia  was  a  senatorial  province  and  so 
had  proconsuls  (general  phrase)  though  only  one  at  a  time, 
"a  rhetorical  plural"  (Lightfoot).  Page  quotes  from  an 
inscription  of  the  age  of  Trajan  on  an  aqueduct  at  Ephesus 
in  which  some  of  Luke's  very  words  occur  (neokoros,  an- 
thupatos,  grammateus,  demos).  Let  them  accuse  one  another 
(egkaleitosan  allelois).  Present  active  imperative  of  egkaleo 
{en,  kaled)y  old  verb  to  call  in  one's  case,  to  bring  a  charge 


I 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  333 

against,  with  the  dative.  Luke  uses  the  verb  six  times  in 
Acts  for  judicial  proceedings  (19:38,  40;  23:28,  29;  26:2,  7). 
The  town-clerk  makes  a  definite  appeal  to  the  mob  for 
orderly  legal  procedure  as  opposed  to  mob  violence  in  a 
matter  where  money  and  religious  prejudice  unite,  a  striking 
rebuke  to  so-called  lynch-law  proceedings  in  lands  today 
where  Christianity  is  supposed  to  prevail. 

39.  Anything  about  other  matters  (ti  per aitero).  Most  MSB. 
here  have  ti  peri  heteron^  but  B  b  Vulgate  read  ti  peraitero  as 
in  Plato's  Phaedo.  Several  papyri  examples  of  it  also.  It  is 
comparative  peraiteros  of  pera^  beyond.  Note  also  epi  in  epi- 
zeteite.  Charges  of  illegal  conduct  (Page)  should  be  settled 
in  the  regular  legal  way.  But,  if  you  wish  to  go  further  and 
pass  resolutions  about  the  matter  exciting  you,  "it  shall  be 
settled  in  the  regular  assembly"  {en  toi  ennomoi  ekklesidi). 
"In  the  lawful  assembly,"  not  by  a  mob  like  this.  Wood 
{Ephesus)  quotes  an  inscription  there  with  this  very  phrase 
"at  every  lawful  assembly"  {kata  pdsan  ennomon  ekklesian). 
The  Roman  officials  alone  could  give  the  sanction  for  calling 
such  a  lawful  or  regular  assembly.  The  verb  epiluo  is  an 
old  one,  but  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Mark  4:34  (which 
see)  where  Jesus  privately  opened  or  disclosed  the  parables 
to  the  disciples.  The  papyri  give  examples  of  the  verb  in 
financial  transactions  as  well  as  of  the  metaphorical  sense. 
The  solution  will  come  in  the  lawful  assembly,  not  in  a  riot 
like  this.  See  also  II  Peter  1:20  where  the  substantive 
epilusis  occurs  for  disclosure  or  revelation  (prophecy). 

40.  For  indeed  we  are  in  danger  to  he  accused  concerning 
this  day's  riot  {kai  gar  kinduneuomen  egkaleisthai  staseos  peri 
tes  semeron).  The  text  is  uncertain.  The  text  of  Westcott  and 
Hort  means  "to  be  accused  of  insurrection  concerning  to- 
day's assembly."  The  peril  was  real.  Kinduneuomen^  from 
kindunos,  danger,  peril.  Old  verb,  but  in  the  N.T.  only  here 
and  Luke  8:23;  I  Cor.  15:30.  There  being  no  cause  for  it 
{medenos    aitiou    huparchontos) .       Genitive    absolute    with 


334      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

aitios,  common  adjective  (cf.  aitiay  cause)  though  in  N.T. 
only  here  and  Heb.  5:9;  Luke  23:4,  14,  22.  And  as  touching 
it  {peri  hou).  "Concerning  which."  But  what?  No  clear 
antecedent,  only  the  general  idea.  Give  an  account  of  this 
concourse  (apodounai  logon  peri  tes  sustrophes  tautes).  Ratio- 
nem  reddere.  They  will  have  to  explain  matters  to  the  pro- 
consul. Sustrophe  (from  sun,  together,  strepho,  to  turn) 
is  a  late  word  for  a  conspiracy  (Acts  23:12)  and  a  disorderly 
riot  as  here  (Polybius).  In  Acts  28:12  sustrepho  is  used  of 
gathering  up  a  bundle  of  sticks  and  of  men  combining  in 
Matt.  17:22.  Seneca  says  that  there  was  nothing  on  which 
the  Romans  looked  with  such  jealousy  as  a  tumultuous 
meeting. 

41.  Dismissed  the  assembly  [apelusen  ten  ekklesian).  The 
town-clerk  thus  gave  a  semblance  of  law  and  order  to  the 
mob  by  formally  dismissing  them,  this  much  to  protect 
them  against  the  charge  to  which  they  were  liable.  This 
vivid,  graphic  picture  given  by  Luke  has  all  the  earmarks 
of  historical  accuracy.  Paul  does  not  describe  the  incidents 
in  his  letters,  was  not  in  the  theatre  in  fact,  but  Luke  ev- 
idently obtained  the  details  from  one  who  was  there.  Aris- 
tarchus,  we  know,  was  with  Luke  in  Caesarea  and  in  Rome 
and  could  have  supplied  all  the  data  necessary.  Certainly 
both  Gaius  and  Aristarchus  were  lively  witnesses  of  these 
events  since  their  own  lives  were  involved. 


CHAPTER  XX 

1.  After  the  uproar  was  ceased  (meta  to  pausasthai  ton 
thorubon).  Literally,  after  the  ceasing  (accusative  of  artic- 
ular aorist  middle  infinitive  of  paud^  to  make  cease)  as  to  the 
uproar  (accusative  of  general  reference).  Noise  and  riot,  al- 
ready in  Matt.  26:5;  27:24;  Mark  5:38;  14:2;  and  see  in 
Acts  21 :34;  24:18.  Pictures  the  whole  incident  as  bustle  and 
confusion.  Took  leave  (aspamenos) .  First  aorist  middle 
participle  of  aspazomai,  old  verb  from  a  intensive  and  spaOj 
to  draw,  to  draw  to  oneself  in  embrace  either  in  greeting  or 
farewell.  Here  it  is  in  farewell  as  in  21 :6.  Salutation  in  21 :/, 
19.  Departed  for  to  go  into  Macedonia  {exelthen  poreuesthai 
eis  Makedonian).  Both  verbs,  single  act  and  then  process. 
Luke  here  condenses  what  was  probably  a  whole  year  of 
Paul's  life  and  work  as  we  gather  from  H  Corinthians,  one 
of  Paul's  "weighty  and  powerful"  letters  as  his  enemies 
called  them  (H  Cor.  10:10).  "This  epistle  more  than  any 
other  is  a  revelation  of  S.  Paul's  own  heart:  it  is  his  spiritual 
autobiography  and  apologia  pro  vita  sua^ 

2.  Those  parts  {ta  mere  ekeina).  We  have  no  way  of  know- 
ing why  Luke  did  not  tell  of  Paul's  stay  in  Troas  (H  Cor. 
2:i2f.)  nor  of  meeting  Titus  in  Macedonia  (H  Cor.  2:13  to 
7:16)  nor  of  Paul's  visit  to  Illyricum  (Rom.  I5:i9f.)  to  give 
time  for  H  Corinthians  to  do  its  work  (H  Cor.  13),  one  of 
the  most  stirring  experiences  in  Paul's  whole  career  when 
he  opened  his  heart  to  the  Corinthians  and  won  final  victory 
in  the  church  by  the  help  of  Titus  who  also  helped  him 
round  up  the  great  collection  in  Achaia.  He  wrote  H  Corin- 
thians during  this  period  after  Titus  arrived  from  Corinth. 
The  unity  of  H  Corinthians  is  here  assumed.  Paul  probably 
met  Luke  again  in  Macedonia,  but  all  this  is  passed  by 

335 


336      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

except  by  the  general  phrase:  "had  given  them  much  exhor- 
tation" {parakalesas  autous  logbi  polloi).  Literally,  "having 
exhorted  them  (the  Macedonian  brethren)  with  much  talk" 
(instrumental  case).  Into  Greece  (eis  ten  Hellada).  That  is, 
Achaia  (18:12;  19:21),  and  particularly  Corinth,  whither 
he  had  at  last  come  again  after  repeated  attempts,  pauses, 
and  delays  (II  Cor.  13:1).  Now  at  last  the  coast  was  clear 
and  Paul  apparently  had  an  open  door  in  Corinth  during 
these  three  months,  so  completely  had  Titus  at  last  done 
away  with  the  opposition  of  the  Judaizers  there. 

3.  When  he  had  spent  three  months  there  (poiesas  menas 
treis).  Literally,  "having  done  three  months," the  same  idiom 
in  Acts  14:33;  18:23;  James  5:13.  During  this  period  Paul 
may  have  written  Galatians  as  Lightfoot  argued  and  certainly 
did  Romans.  We  do  not  have  to  say  that  Luke  was  ignorant 
of  Paul's  work  during  this  period,  only  that  he  did  not 
choose  to  enlarge  upon  it.  And  a  plot  was  laid  against  him 
by  the  Jews  (genomenes  epiboules  autoi  hupo  ton  loudaion). 
Genitive  absolute,  "a  plot  by  the  Jews  having  come  against 
him."  Epiboule  is  an  old  word  for  a  plot  against  one.  In 
the  N.T.  only  in  Acts  (9:24;  20:3,  19;  23:30).  Please  note 
that  this  plot  is  by  the  Jews,  not  the  Judaizers  whom  Paul 
discusses  so  vehemently  in  II  Cor.  10-13.  They  had  given 
Paul  much  anguish  of  heart  as  is  shown  in  I  Cor.  and  in  II 
Cor.  1-7,  but  that  trouble  seems  now  past.  It  is  Paul's  old 
enemies  in  Corinth  who  had  cherished  all  these  years  their 
defeat  at  the  hands  of  Gallio  (Acts  18:5-17)  who  now  took 
advantage  of  Paul's  plans  for  departure  to  compass  his 
death  if  possible.  As  he  was  about  to  set  sail  for  Syria  (mel- 
lonti  anagesthai  eis  ten  Surian).  The  participle  mellonti 
agrees  in  case  (dative)  with  autoi.  For  the  sense  of  intending 
see  also  verse  13.  Anagesthai  (present  middle  infinitive) 
is  the  common  word  for  putting  out  to  sea  (going  up,  they 
said,  from  land)  as  in  13:13.  He  determined  (egeneto  gnomes). 
The   best   MSS.   here   read   gnomes   (predicate   ablative   of 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  337 

source  like  epiluseos,  II  Peter  i  :20,  Robertson,  Grammar^ 
p.  514),  not  gnome  (nominative).  "He  became  of  opinion." 
The  Jews  had  heard  of  Paul's  plan  to  sail  for  Syria  and  in- 
tended in  the  hurly-burly  either  to  kill  him  at  the  docks  in 
Cenchreae  or  to  push  him  overboard  from  the  crowded 
pilgrim  ship  bound  for  the  passover.  Fortunately  Paul 
learned  of  their  plot  and  so  eluded  them  by  going  through 
Macedonia.  The  Codex  Bezae  adds  here  that  "the  Spirit 
bade  him  return  into  Macedonia." 

4.  Accompanied  him  (suneipeto  autoi).  Imperfect  of  sun- 
epomai,  old  and  common  verb,  but  only  here  in  the  N.T. 
The  singular  is  used  agreeing  with  the  first  name  men- 
tioned Sopatros  and  to  be  supplied  with  each  of  the  others. 
Textus  Receptus  adds  here  "into  Asia"  (achri  tes  Asias^ 
as  far  as  Asia),  but  the  best  documents  (Aleph  B  Vulg.  Sah 
Boh)  do  not  have  it.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  Trophimus  went 
as  far  as  Jerusalem  (Acts  21:29)  ^^'^  Aristarchus  as  far  as 
Rome  (27:2;  Col.  4:10).  The  phrase  could  apply  only  to 
Sopatros.  It  is  not  clear  though  probable  that  Luke  means 
to  say  that  these  seven  brethren,  delegates  of  the  various 
churches  (II  Cor.  8:19-23)  started  from  Corinth  with  Paul. 
Luke  notes  the  fact  that  they  accompanied  Paul,  but  the 
party  may  really  have  been  made  up  at  Philippi  where  Luke 
himself  joined  Paul,  the  rest  of  the  party  having  gone 
on  to  Troas  (20:5f.).  These  were  from  Roman  provinces 
that  shared  in  the  collection  (Galatia,  Asia,  Macedonia, 
Achaia).  In  this  list  three  were  from  Macedonia,  Sopater 
of  Beroea,  Aristarchus  and  Secundus  of  Thessalonica;  two 
from  Galatia,  Gains  of  Derbe  and  Timothy  of  Lystra;  two 
from  Asia,  Tychicus  and  Trophimus.  It  is  a  bit  curious  that 
none  are  named  from  Achaia.  Had  Corinth  failed  after  all 
(II  Cor.  8,  9)  to  raise  its  share  of  the  collection  after  such 
eager  pledging.^  Rackham  suggests  that  they  may  have 
turned  their  part  over  directly  to  Paul.  Luke  joined  Paul 
in  Philippi  and  could  have  handled  the  money  from  Achaia. 


338      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

It  was  an  important  event  and  Paul  took  the  utmost  pains 
to  remove  any  opportunity  for  scandal  in  the  handling 
of  the  funds. 

5.  fFere  waiting  for  us  in  Troas  {emenon  hemds  en  Troiadi). 
Here  again  we  have  "us"  for  the  first  time  since  chapter  16 
where  Paul  was  with  Luke  in  Philippi.  Had  Luke  remained 
all  this  time  in  Philippi?  We  do  not  know,  but  he  is  with 
Paul  now  till  Rome  is  reached.  The  seven  brethren  of  verse 
4  went  on  ahead  from  Philippi  to  Troas  while  Paul  remained 
with  Luke  in  Philippi. 

6.  After  the  days  of  unleavened  bread  {meta  tas  hemeras  ton 
azumon).  Paul  was  a  Jew,  though  a  Christian,  and  observed 
the  Jewish  feasts,  though  he  protested  against  Gentiles  being 
forced  to  do  it  (Gal.  4:10;  Col.  2:16).  Was  Luke  a  proselyte 
because  he  notes  the  Jewish  feasts  as  here  and  in  Acts  27:9.' 
He  may  have  noted  them  merely  because  Paul  observed 
them.  But  this  passover  was  a  year  after  that  in  Ephesus 
when  Paul  expected  to  remain  there  till  Pentecost  (I  Cor. 
16:  8).  He  was  hoping  now  to  reach  Jerusalem  by  Pentecost 
(Acts  20:16)  as  he  did.  We  do  not  know  the  precise  year, 
possibly  A.D.  56  or  57.  In  five  days  {achri  hemeron  pente). 
Up  to  five  days  (cf.  Luke  2:37).  D  has  pemptaioi^  "fifth  day 
men,"  a  correct  gloss.  Cf.  deuteraioi,  second-day  men  (Acts 
28:13).  ^^  Acts  16:11  they  made  the  voyage  in  two  days. 
Probably  adverse  winds  held  them  back  here.  Seven  days 
{hepta  hemeras).  To  atone  for  the  short  stay  in  Troas  be- 
fore (II  Cor.  2:i2f.)  when  Paul  was  so  restless.  Now  he 
preaches  a  week  to  them. 

7.  Upon  the  first  day  of  the  week  {en  de  midi  ton  sabbaton). 
The  cardinal  midi  used  here  for  the  ordinal  protei  (Mark 
16:9)  like  the  Hebrew  ehadh  as  in  Mark  16:2;  Matt.  28:1; 
Luke  24:1;  John  20:1  and  in  harmony  with  the  Koine  idiom 
(Robertson,  Grammar^  p.  671).  Either  the  singular  (Mark 
16 :ci)sabbatou  or  the  plural  sabbaton  as  here  was  used  for  the 
week  (sabbath  to  sabbath).   For  the  first  time  here  we  have 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  339 

services  mentioned  on  the  first  day  of  the  week  though  in 
I  Cor.  16:2  it  is  implied  by  the  collections  stored  on  that 
day.  In  Rev.  1:10  the  Lord's  day  seems  to  be  the  day  of 
the  week  on  which  Jesus  rose  from  the  grave.  Worship  on 
the  first  day  of  the  week  instead  of  the  seventh  naturally 
arose  in  Gentile  churches,  though  John  20:26  seems  to  mean 
that  from  the  very  start  the  disciples  began  to  meet  on  the 
first  (or  eighth)  day.  But  liberty  was  allowed  as  Paul  makes 
plain  in  Rom.  I4:5f.  When  we  were  gathered  together  {sun- 
egmenon  hemon).  Genitive  absolute,  perfect  passive  parti- 
ciple of  sunagOj  to  gather  together,  a  formal  meeting  of  the 
disciples.  See  this  verb  used  for  gatherings  of  disciples  in 
Acts  4:31;  11:26;  14:2^;  15:6,  30;  19:7,  8;  I  Cor.  5^..  InHeb. 
10:25  the  substantive  episunagogen  is  used  for  the  regular 
gatherings  which  some  were  already  neglecting.  It  is  im- 
possible for  a  church  to  flourish  without  regular  meetings 
even  if  they  have  to  meet  in  the  catacombs  as  became  neces- 
sary in  Rome.  In  Russia  today  the  Soviets  are  trying  to 
break  up  conventicles  of  Baptists.  They  probably  met  on 
our  Saturday  evening,  the  beginning  of  the  first  day  at  sun- 
set. So  these  Christians  began  the  day  (Sunday)  with  wor- 
ship. But,  since  this  is  a  Gentile  community,  it  is  quite 
possible  that  Luke  means  our  Sunday  evening  as  the  time 
when  this  meeting  occurs,  and  the  language  in  John  20:19 
"it  being  evening  on  that  day  the  first  day  of  the  week" 
naturally  means  the  evening  following  the  day,  not  the 
evening  preceding  the  day.  To  break  bread  (klasai  arton). 
First  aorist  active  infinitive  of  purpose  of  klao.  The  language 
naturally  bears  the  same  meaning  as  in  2:42,  the  Eucharist 
or  the  Lord's  Supper  which  usually  followed  the  Agape.  See 
I  Cor.  10:16.  The  time  came,  when  the  Agape  was  no  longer 
observed,  perhaps  because  of  the  abuses  noted  in  I  Cor. 
ii:2ofF.  Rackham  argues  that  the  absence  of  the  article 
with  bread  here  and  its  presence  {ton  arton)  in  verse  1 1  shows 
that  the  Agape  is  referred  to  in  verse  7  and  the  Eucharist 


340      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

in  verse  ii,  but  not  necessarily  so  because  ton  arton  may 
merely  refer  to  arton  in  verse  7.  At  any  rate  it  should  be 
noted  that  Paul,  who  conducted  this  service,  was  not  a 
member  of  the  church  in  Troas,  but  only  a  visitor.  Discour- 
sed (dielegeto).  Imperfect  middle  because  he  kept  on  at 
length.  Intending  (mello).  Being  about  to,  on  the  point  of. 
On  the  morrow  {tei  epaurion).  Locative  case  with  hemerdi 
understood  after  the  adverb  epaurion.  If  Paul  spoke  on  our 
Saturday  evening,  he  made  the  journey  on  the  first  day 
of  the  week  (our  Sunday)  after  sunrise.  If  he  spoke  on  our 
Sunday  evening,  then  he  left  on  our  Monday  morning.  Pro- 
longed his  speech  {Pareteinen  ton  logon).  Imperfect  active 
(same  form  as  aorist)  of  parateinOy  old  verb  to  stretch  beside 
or  lengthwise,  to  prolong.  Vivid  picture  of  Paul's  long  ser- 
mon which  went  on  and  on  till  midnight  {mechri  mesonuk- 
tiou).  Paul's  purpose  to  leave  early  next  morning  seemed  to 
justify  the  long  discourse.  Preachers  usually  have  some 
excuse  for  the  long  sermon  which  is  not  always  clear  to  the 
exhausted  audience. 

8.  Many  lights  {lampades  hikanai).  It  was  dark  at  night 
since  the  full  moon  (passover)  was  three  weeks  behind. 
These  lamps  were  probably  filled  with  oil  and  had  wicks  that 
flickered  and  smoked.  They  would  not  meet  in  the  dark. 
In  the  upper  room  {en  tbi  huperbibi).   As  in  1:13  which  see. 

9.  Sat  (kathezomenos) .  Sitting  (present  middle  participle 
describing  his  posture).  In  the  window  {epi  tes  thuridos). 
Old  word  diminutive  from  thura,  door,  a  little  door.  Lat- 
ticed window  (no  glass)  opened  because  of  the  heat  from 
the  lamps  and  the  crowd.  Our  window  was  once  spelt 
windore  (Hudibras),  perhaps  from  the  wrong  idea  that  it  was 
derived  from  wind  and  door.  Eutychus  (a  common  slave 
name)  was  sitting  on  (epi)  the  window  sill.  Ahaziah  "fell 
down  through  a  lattice  in  his  upper  chamber"  (II  Kings  i  :2). 
In  the  N.T.  thuris  only  here  and  II  Cor.  11 133  {dia  thuridos) 
through   which   Paul   was    let    down    through    the    wall    in 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  341 

Damascus.  Borne  down  with  deep  sleep  {katapheromenos 
hupnoi  bathei).  Present  passive  participle  of  kataphero, 
to  bear  down,  and  followed  by  instrumental  case 
(hupnoi).  Describes  the  gradual  process  of  going  into  deep 
sleep.  Great  medical  writers  use  bathus  with  hupnos  as  we 
do  today  (deep  sleep).  D  here  has  basei  (heavy)  for  bathei 
(deep).  As  Paul  discoursed  yet  longer  {dialegomenou  tou 
Paulou  epi  pleion).  Genitive  absolute  of  present  middle 
participle  of  dialegomai  (cf.  verse  7).  with  epi  pleion.  Euty- 
chus  struggled  bravely  to  keep  awake,  vainly  hoping  that 
Paul  would  finish.  But  he  went  on  "for  more."  Being  borne 
down  by  his  sleep  {katenechtheis  apo  tou  hupnou).  First  aorist 
(effective)  passive  showing  the  final  result  of  the  process 
described  by  katapheromenos y  finally  overcome  as  a  result  of 
{apo)  the  (note  article  tou)  sleep  (ablative  case).  These 
four  participles  (kathezomenos,  katapheromenos j  dialegomenou, 
katenechtheis)  have  no  connectives,  but  are  distinguished 
clearly  by  case  and  tense.  The  difference  between  the 
present  katapheromenos  and  the  aorist  katenechtheis  of  the 
same  verb  is  marked.  Fell  down  (epesen  koto).  Effective 
aorist  active  indicative  of  pipto  with  the  adverb  kato,  though 
katapipto  (compound  verb)  could  have  been  used  (Acts  26: 
14;  28:6).  Hobart  {Medical  Language  of  St.  Luke)  thinks 
that  Luke  shows  a  physician's  interest  in  the  causes  of  the 
drowsiness  of  Eutychus  (the  heat,  the  crowd,  the  smell  of 
the  lamps,  the  late  hour,  the  long  discourse).  Cf.  Luke 
22:45.  Ffom  the  third  story  {apo  tou  tristegou).  From  treis 
(three)  and  stege  (roof),  adjective  tristegos  having  three 
roofs.  fFas  taken  up  dead  {erthe  nekros).  First  aorist  passive 
indicative  of  airb.  Luke  does  not  say  hbs  (as)  or  hbsei  (Mark 
9:26  as  if).  The  people  considered  him  dead  and  Luke  the 
physician  seems  to  agree  with  that  view. 

10.  Fell  on  him  {epepesen  autbi).  Second  aorist  active  in- 
dicative of  epipipto  with  dative  case  as  Elijah  did  (I  Kings 
17:21)  and  Elisha  (II  Kings  4:34).  Embracing  {sunperilabbn). 


342      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Second  aorist  active  participle  of  sunperilambano,  old  verb 
to  embrace  completely  (take  hold  together  round),  but 
only  here  in  the  N.T.  In  Ezra  5:3.  Make  ye  no  ado  {me 
thoruheisthe).  Stop  {me  and  present  middle  imperative  of 
thorubeo)  making  a  noise  {thorubos)  as  the  people  did  on  the 
death  of  Jairus's  daughter  (Matt.  9:23  thoruboumenou  and 
Mark  5:38  thorubou)  when  Jesus  asked  Ti  thorubeisthe?  For 
his  life  is  in  him  {he  gar  psuche  autou  en  autoi  estin).  This 
language  is  relied  on  by  Ramsay,  Wendt,  Zoeckler  to  show 
that  Eutychus  had  not  really  died,  but  had  merely  swooned. 
Paul's  language  would  suit  that  view,  but  it  suits  equally  well 
the  idea  that  he  had  just  been  restored  to  life  and  so  is  in- 
decisive. Furneaux  urges  also  the  fact  that  his  friends  did 
not  bring  him  back  to  the  meeting  till  morning  (verse  12) 
as  additional  evidence  that  it  was  a  case  of  swooning  rather 
than  of  death.  But  this  again  is  not  conclusive  as  they  would 
naturally  not  take  him  back  at  once.  One  will  believe  here 
as  the  facts  appeal  to  him. 

II.  When  he  was  gone  up  {anabas).  Second  aorist  active 
participle  in  sharp  contrast  to  katabas  (went  down)  of  verse 
10,  Had  broken  bread  {klasas  ton  arton).  Probably  the 
Eucharist  to  observe  which  ordinance  Paul  had  come  and 
tarried  (verse  7),  though  some  scholars  distinguish  between 
what  took  place  in  verse  7  and  verse  11,  needlessly  so  as  was 
stated  on  verse  7.  And  eaten  {kai  geusamenos).  The  word  is 
used  in  10:10  of  eating  an  ordinary  meal  and  so  might  apply 
to  the  Agape,  but  it  suits  equally  for  the  Eucharist.  The 
accident  had  interrupted  Paul's  sermon  so  that  it  was  ob- 
served now  and  then  Paul  resumed  his  discourse.  And  had 
talked  with  them  a  long  while  {epW  hikanon  te  homilesas). 
Luke,  as  we  have  seen,  is  fond  of  hikanos  for  periods  of  time, 
for  a  considerable  space  of  time,  "even  till  break  of  day" 
{achri  auges).  Old  word  for  brightness,  radiance  like  German 
Auge,  English  eye:,  only  here  in  the  N.T.  Occurs  in  the 
papyri  and  in  modern  Greek  for  dawn.  This  second  discourse 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  343 

lasted  from  midnight  till  dawn  and  was  probably  more  in- 
fonnal  (as  in  10:27)  and  conversational  {homilesas,  though 
our  word  homiletics  comes  from  homileo)  than  the  discourse 
before  midnight  {dialegomaij  verses  7,  9).  He  had  much  to 
say  before  he  left.  So  he  departed  {houtos  exelthen).  Thus 
Luke  sums  up  the  result.  Paul  left  (went  forth)  only  after 
all  the  events  narrated  by  the  numerous  preceding  participles 
had  taken  place.  Effective  aorist  active  indicative  exelthen. 
Houtos  here  equals  turn  demum,  now  at  length  (Acts  27:7)  as 
Page  shows. 

12.  They  brought  the  lad  alive  (egagon  ton  paida  zonta). 
Second  aorist  active  indicative  of  ago.  Evidently  the  special 
friends  of  the  lad  who  now  either  brought  him  back  to  the 
room  or  (Rendall)  took  him  home  to  his  family.  Knowling 
holds  that  zonta  (living)  here  is  pointless  unless  he  had  been 
dead.  He  had  been  taken  up  dead  and  now  they  brought 
him  living.  Not  a  little  (ou  metrios).  Not  moderately,  that 
is  a  great  deal.  Luke  is  fond  of  this  use  of  the  figure  litotes 
(use  of  the  negative)  instead  of  the  strong  positive  (i  15,  etc.). 
D  (Codex  Bezae)  has  here  instead  of  egagon  these  words: 
aspazomenon  de  auton  egagen  ton  neaniskon  zonta  (while 
they  were  saying  farewell  he  brought  the  young  man  alive). 
This  reading  pictures  the  joyful  scene  over  the  lad's  restora- 
tion as  Paul  was  leaving. 

13.  To  the  ship  {epi  to  ploion).  Note  article.  It  is  possible 
that  Paul's  party  had  chartered  a  coasting  vessel  from 
Philippi  or  Troas  to  take  them  to  Patara  in  Lycia.  Hence  the 
boat  stopped  when  and  where  Paul  wished.  That  is  possible, 
but  not  certain,  for  Paul  could  simply  have  accommodated 
himself  to  the  plans  of  the  ship's  managers.  To  take  in  Paul 
{analambanein  ton  Paulon).  So  in  verse  14.  Same  use  in  \\ 
Tim.  4:11:  "Picking  up  Mark"  {Markon  analahon).  Assos 
was  a  seaport  south  of  Troas  in  Mysia  in  the  province  of 
Asia.  He  had  appointed  {diatetagmenos  en).  Past  perfect 
periphrastic   middle   of  diatasso,   old   verb   to  give   orders 


344     WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

(military  in  particular).  To  go  by  land  {pezeuein).  Present 
active  infinitive  of  pezeuo,  old  verb  to  go  on  foot,  not  on 
horse  back  or  in  a  carriage  or  by  ship.  Here  only  in  the  N.T. 
It  was  about  twenty  miles  over  a  paved  Roman  road,  much 
shorter  (less  than  half)  than  the  sea  voyage  around  Cape 
Lectum.  It  was  a  beautiful  walk  in  the  spring-time  and  no 
doubt  Paul  enjoyed  it  whatever  his  reason  was  for  going  thus 
to  Assos  while  the  rest  went  by  sea.  Certainly  he  was  en- 
titled to  a  little  time  alone,  this  one  day,  as  Jesus  sought 
the  Father  in  the  night  watches  (Matt.  14:23). 

14.  Met  us  {suneballen  hemin).  Imperfect  active  where  the 
aorist  {sunebalen,  as  C  D  have  it)  would  seem  more  natural. 
It  may  mean  that  as  soon  as  (hos)  Paul  "came  near  or  began 
to  meet  us"  (inchoative  imperfect),  we  picked  him  up.  Luke 
alone  in  the  N.T.  uses  sunballb  to  bring  or  come  together 
either  in  a  friendly  sense  as  here  or  as  enemies  (Luke  14:31). 
To  Mitylene  {eis  Mitulenen).  The  capital  of  Lesbos  about 
thirty  miles  from  Assos,  an  easy  day's  sailing. 

15.  We  came  over  against  Chios  {katentesamen  antikrus 
Chiou).  Luke  uses  this  Koine  verb  several  times  (16:1; 
18:19),  meaning  to  come  right  down  in  front  of  and  the 
notion  of  anta  is  made  plainer  by  antikrus,  face  to  face  with, 
common  "improper"  preposition  only  here  in  the  N.T. 
They  probably  lay  off  the  coast  (anchoring)  during  the 
night  instead  of  putting  into  the  harbour.  The  Island  of 
Chios  is  about  eight  miles  from  the  mainland.  The  next  day 
(tei  heterdi).  The  third  day  in  reality  from  Assos  (the  fourth 
from  Troas),  in  contrast  with  tei  epiousei  just  before  for 
Chios.  fVe  touched  at  Samos  {parebalomen  eis  Samon).  Second 
aorist  active  of  paraballo,  to  throw  alongside,  to  cross  over, 
to  put  in  by.  So  Thucydides  III.  32.  Only  here  in  the  N.T. 
though  in  Textus  Receptus  in  Mark  4:30.  The  word  parable 
(parabole)  is  from  this  verb.  The  Textus  Receptus  adds  here 
kai  meinantes  en  Trogullioi  (and  remaining  at  Trogyllium), 
but  clearly  not  genuine.    In  passing  from  Chios  to  Samos 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  345 

they  sailed  past  Ephesus  to  save  time  for  Pentecost  in 
Jerusalem  (verse  16),  if  in  control  of  the  ship,  or  because 
the  captain  allowed  Paul  to  have  his  way.  The  island  of 
Samos  is  still  further  down  the  coast  below  Chios.  It  is  not 
stated  whether  a  stop  was  made  here  or  not.  The  day  after 
(tei  echomenei) .  The  day  holding  itself  next  to  the  one  be- 
fore. Note  Luke's  three  terms  in  this  verse  {iei  epiousei, 
tei  heterdi,  tei  echomenei) .  This  would  be  the  fourth  from 
Assos.  To  Miletus  {eis  Mileton).  About  28  miles  south  of 
Ephesus  and  now  the  site  is  several  miles  from  the  sea  due 
to  the  silt  from  the  Maeander.  This  city,  once  the  chief 
city  of  the  Ionian  Greeks,  was  now  quite  eclipsed  by  Ephe- 
sus. 

16.  For  Paul  had  determined  {kekrikei  gar  ho  Paulos). 
Past  perfect  active  (correct  text)  of  krino  and  not  the 
aorist  ekrine.  Either  Paul  controlled  the  ship  or  the  captain 
was  willing  to  oblige  him.  To  sail  past  Ephesus  {parapleusai 
ten  Epheson).  First  aorist  active  infinitive  of  parapled,  old 
verb  to  sail  beside,  only  here  in  the  N.T.  That  he  might  not 
have  {hop  OS  me  genetai  autbi).  Final  clause  (negative)  with 
aorist  middle  subjunctive  of  ginomai  and  dative  "that  it 
might  not  happen  to  him."  To  spend  time  (chronotribesai). 
First  aorist  active  of  the  late  compound  verb  chronotribeo 
{chronos,  time,  tribo,  to  spend),  only  here  in  the  N.T.  The 
verb  tribo,  to  rub,  to  wear  out  by  rubbing,  lends  itself  to  the 
idea  of  wasting  time.  It  was  only  a  year  ago  that  Paul  had 
left  Ephesus  in  haste  after  the  riot.  It  was  not  expedient 
to  go  back  so  soon  if  he  meant  to  reach  Jerusalem  by  Pente- 
cost. Paul  clearly  felt  (Rom.  15)  that  the  presentation  of 
this  collection  at  Pentecost  to  the  Jewish  Christians  would 
have  a  wholesome  influence  as  it  had  done  once  before 
(Acts  II  :3o).  He  was  hastening  (espeuden).  Imperfect  active 
of  speudo,  old  verb  to  hasten  as  in  Luke  2:16;  19:56.  //  it 
were  possible  for  him  {ei  dunaton  eie  autbi).  Condition  of 
the  fourth  class  (optative  mode),  if  it  should  be  possible  for 


346     WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

him.  The  form  is  a  remote  possibility.  It  was  only  some 
thirty  days  till  Pentecost.  The  day  of  Pentecost  {ten  hemeran 
tes  pentekostes).  Note  the  accusative  case.  Paul  wanted  to 
be  there  for  the  whole  -day.  See  Acts  2:1  for  this  very  phrase. 
17.  Called  to  him  (metekalesato).  Aorist  middle  (indirect) 
indicative  of  metakaleo,  old  verb  to  call  from  one  place  to 
another  (meta  for  "change"),  middle  to  call  to  oneself,  only 
in  Acts  in  the  N.T.  (7:14;  10:32;  20:17;  24:25).  Ephesus  was 
1/  some  thirty  miles,  a  stiff  day's  journey  each  way.  They 
would  be  with  Paul  the  third  day  of  the  stay  in  Miletus. 
The  elders  of  the  church  {tous  preshuterous  tes  ekklesias).  The 
very  men  whom  Paul  terms  "bishops"  (episkopous)  in 
I  verse  28  just  as  in  Titus  i  :5  and  7  where  both  terms  (presbu- 
j  terous,  ton  episkopon)  describe  the  same  office.  The  term 
"elder"  applied  to  Christian  ministers  first  appears  in 
Acts  11:30  in  Jerusalem  and  reappears  in  154,  6,  22  in 
connection  with  the  apostles  and  the  church.  The  "elders" 
are  not  "apostles"  but  are  "bishops"  (cf.  Phil.  1:1)  and 
with  "deacons"  constitute  the  two  classes  of  officers  in  the 
early  churches.  Ignatius  shows  that  in  the  early  second 
century  the  office  of  bishop  over_the  elders  had  developed, 
but  Lightfoot  has  shown  that  it  was  not  so  in  the  first  cen- 
tury. Each  church,  as  in  Jerusalem,  Philippi,  Ephesus, 
had  a  number  of  "elders"  ("bishops")  in  the  one  great 
city  church.  Hackett  thinks  that  other  ministers  from  the 
neighbourhood  also  came.  It  was  a  noble  group  of  preachers 
and  Paul,  the  greatest  preacher  of  the  ages,  makes  a  remark- 
able talk  to  preachers  with  all  the  earmarks  of  Pauline 
originality  (Spitta,  Apostelgeschichte^  p.  252)  as  shown  by  the 
characteristic  Pauline  words,  phrases,  ideas  current  in  all 
his  Epistles  including  the  Pastoral  (testify,  course,  pure, 
take  heed,  presbyter,  bishop,  acquire,  apparel).  Luke  heard 
this  address  as  he  may  and  probably  did  hear  those  in 
Jerusalem  and  Caesarea  (Acts  21  to  26).  Furneaux  suggests 
that  Luke  probably  took  shorthand  notes  of  the  address 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  347 

since  Galen  says  that  his  students  took  down  his  medical 
lectures  in  shorthand:  "At  any  rate,  of  all  the  speeches  in 
the  Acts  this  contains  most  of  Paul  and  least  of  Luke.  .  .  . 
It  reveals  Paul  as  nothing  else  does.  The  man  who  spoke 
it  is  no  longer  a  man  of  eighteen  centuries  ago:  he  is  of  yester- 
day; of  today.  He  speaks  as  we  speak  and  feels  as  wejeel; 
or  rather  as  we  fain  would  speak  and  feel."  We  have  seen 
and  listened  to  Paul  speak  to  the  Jews  in  Antioch  in  Pisidia 
as  Luke  pictures  the  scene,  to  the  uneducated  pagans  at 
Lystra,  to  the  cultured  Greeks  in  Athens.  We  shall  hear 
him  plead  for  his  life  to  the  Jewish  mob  in  Jerusalem,  to 
the  Roman  governor  Felix  in  Caesarea,  to  the  Jewish  "King" 
Herod  Agrippa  H  in  Caesarea,  and  at  last  to  the  Jews  in 
Rome.  But__here  Pan!  nnhnsnms  himself  to  the  ministers 
of  the  church  in  Ephesus  where  he  had  spent  three  years 
(longer  than  with  any  other  church)  and  where  he  had  such 
varied  experiences  of  prowess  and  persecution.  He  opens 
his  heart  to  these  men  as  he  does  not  to  the  average  crowd 
even  of  believers.  It  is  Paul's  Apologia  pro  sua  Vita.  He  will 
probably  not  see  them  again  and  so  the  outlook  and  attitude 
is  similar  to  the  farewell  discourse  of  Tesus  to  the  disciples 
in  the  upper  room  (John  13-17).  He  warns  them  about 
future  perils  as  Jesus  had  done.  Paul's  words  here  will  repay 
any  preacher's  study  today.  There  is  the  same  high  concep- 
tion of  the  ministry  here  that  Paul  had  already  elaborated 
in  II  Cor.  2:12-6:10  (see  my  Glory  of  the  Ministry).  It  is  a 
fitting  time  and  occasion  for  Paul  to  take  stock  of  his 
ministry  at  the  close  of  the  third  mission  tour.  What  wonders 
had  God  wrought  already. 

18.  Ye  yourselves  know  {humeis  epistasthe).  Pronoun  ex- 
pressed and  emphatic.  He  appeals  to  their  person  a  I  knowl- 
edge  of  his  life  in  Ephesus.  From  the  first  day  that  {apo  protes 
hemeras  aph^  hes).  "From  first  day  from  which."  He  had 
first  "set  foot"  {epehen^  second  aorist  active  indicative  of 
old  verb  epibaino,  to  step  upon  or  step  into)  in  Ephesus  four 


348      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

years  ago  in  the  spring  of  51  or  52,  but  had  returned  from 
Antioch  that  autumn.  It  is  now  spring  of  54  or  55  so  that 
his  actual  ministry  in  Ephesus  was  about  two  and  a  half 
years,  roughly  three  years  (verse  31). 

After  what  manner  I  was  with  you  {pos  meth'  humon 

egenomen).    Literally,  "How  I  came  (from  Asia  and  so  was) 

/  with  you."    Cf.  I  Thess.  1:5  and  II  Thess.  2:1-10  where 

/    Paul  likewise  dares  to  refer  boldly  to  his  life  while  with  them 

/  "all  the  time"  {ton  panta  chronon).  Accusative  of  duration 
of  time.  So  far  as  we  know,  Paul  stuck  to  Ephesus  the  whole 
period.  He  had  devoted  himself  consecratedly  to  the  task 
in  Ephesus.  Each  pastor  is  bishop  of  his  field  and  has  a 
golden  opportunity  to  work  it  for  Christ.  One  of  the  saddest 
things  about  the  present  situation  is  the  restlessness  of 
preachers  to  go  elsewhere  instead  of  devoting  themselves 
wholly  to  the  task  where  they  are.  19.  Serving  the  Lord  [dou- 
leuon  tbi  kuridi).  It  was  Paul's  glory  to  be  the  doulos  (bond- 
slave) as  in  Rom.  1:1;  Phil.  i:i.  Paul  alone,  save  Jesus 
in  Matt.  6:24  and  Luke  16:13,  uses  douleub  six  times  for 
serving  God  (Page).  With  all  lowliness  of  mind  {meta  pases 
tapeinophrosunes) .  Lightfoot  notes  that  heathen  writers  use 
this  word  for  a  grovelling,  abject  state  of  mind,  but  Paul 
follows  Christ  in  using  it  for  humility,  humble-mindedness 
that  should  mark  every  Christian  and  in  particular  the 
preacher.   With  tears  {dakruon).   Construed  with  w^i^a.   Paul 

J  was  a  man  of  the  deepest  emotion  along  with  his  high  intel- 
lectuality. He  mentions  his  tears  again  in  verse  31,  tears  of 
sorrow  and  of  anxiety.  He  refers  to  his  tears  in  writing  the 
sharp  letter  to  the  church  in  Corinth  (II  Cor.  2:4)  and  in 
denouncing  the  sensual  apostates  in  Phil.  3:18.  Adolphe 
Monod  has  a  wonderful  sermon  on  the  tears  of  Paul.  Con- 
sider also  the  tears  of  Jesus.  Trials  which  befell  me  (peiras- 
tnon  ton  sumhanton  moi).  Construed  also  with  meta.  Second 
aorist  active  participle  of  sunbaino,  to  walk  with,  to  go  with, 
to  come  together,  to  happen,  to  befall.     Very  common  in 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  349 

this  sense  in  the  old  Greek  (cf.  Acts  3:10).  By  the  plots  of 
the  Jews  {en  tais  epihoulais  ton  loudaion).  Like  the  plot  {epi- 
boule)  against  him  in  Corinth  (20:3)  as  well  as  the  earlier 
trial  before  Gallio  and  the  attacks  in  Thessalonica.  In  Acts 
19:9  Luke  shows  the  hostile  attitude  of  the  Jews  in  Ephesus 
that  drove  Paul  out  of  the  synagogue  to  the  school  of  Tyran- 
nus.  He  does  not  describe  in  detail  these  "plots"  which  may 
easily  be  imagined  from  Paul's  own  letters  and  may  be  even 
referred  to  in  I  Cor.  4:10;  15:301?.;  16:9;  H  Cor.  1:4-10;  7:5; 
11:23.  I^  fact,  one  has  only  to  dwell  on  the  allusions  in  H 
Cor.  II  to  picture  what  Paul's  life  was  in  Ephesus  during 
these  three  years.  Luke  gives  in  Acts  19  the  outbreak  of 
Demetrius,  but  Paul  had  already  fought  with  "wild-beasts" 
there. 

20.  How  that  I  shrank  not  (hos  ouden  hupesteilamen).  Still 
indirect  discourse  (question)  after  epistasthe  (ye  know)  with 
hos  Hke  pos  in  verse  18.  First  aorist  middle  of  hupostello,  old 
verb  to  draw  under  or  back.  It  was  so  used  of  drawing  back 
or  down  sails  on  a  ship  and,  as  Paul  had  so  recently  been  on 
the  sea,  that  may  be  the  metaphor  here.  But  it  is  not  neces- 
sarily so  as  the  direct  middle  here  makes  good  sense  and  is 
frequent,  to  withdraw  oneself,  to  cowjer^to  shrink,  to  con- 
ceal, to  dissemble  as  in  Hab.  2:4  (Heb.  10:38).  Demosthenes 
so  used  it  to  shrink  from  declaring  out  of  fear  for  others. 
This  open  candour  of  Paul  is  supported  by  his  Epistles  (I 
Thess.  2:4,  II;  II  Cor.  4:2;  Gal.  i:io).  From  declaring  unto 
you  {tou  me  anaggeilai  humin).  Ablative  case  of  the  articular 
first  aorist  active  infinitive  of  anaggellb  with  the  redundant 
negative  after  verbs  of  hindering,  etc.  (Robertson,  Grammary 
p.  1094).  Anything  that  was  profitable  {ton  sumpheronton) . 
Partitive  genitive  after  ouden  of  the  articular  present  active 
participle  of  sumphero,  to  bear  together,  be  profitable. 
Publicly  {demosidi,  adverb)  and  from  house  to  house  {kai  kat* 
oikous).  By  (according  to)  houses.  It  is  worth  noting  that 
this  greatest  of  preachers  preached  from  house  to  house  and 


350      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

did  not  make  his  visits  merely  social  calls.  He  was  doing 
kingdom  business  all  the  while  as  in  the  house  of  Aquila  and 
Priscilla  (I  Cor.  16:19). 

21.  Testifying  (diamarturomenos) .  As  Peter  did  (Acts 
2:40)  where  Luke  uses  this  same  word  thoroughly  Lucan 
and  Pauline.  So  again  in  verses  23  and  24.  Paul  here  as  in 
Rom.  1:16  includes  both  Jews  and  Greeks,  to  the  Jew  first. 
Repentance  toward  God  {ten  eis  theon  metanoian)  and  faith 
toward  our  Lord  Jesus  {kai  pistin  eis  ton  kurion  hemon 
lesoun).  These  two  elements  run  through  the  Epistle  to 
the  Romans  which  Paul  had  recently  written  and  sent  from 
Corinth.  These  two  elements  appear  in  all  Paul's  preaching 
whether  "to  Jews  or  Gentiles,  to  philosophers  at  Athens 
or  to  peasants  at  Lystra,  he  preached  repentance  toward 
God  and  faith  toward  the  Lord  Jesus"  (Knowling). 

22.  Bound  in  the  spirit  {dedemenos  toi  pneumati).  Perfect 
passive  participle  of  deb^  to  bind,  with  the  locative  case. 
"Bound  in  my  spirit"  he  means,  as  in  19:21,  from  a  high 
sense  of  duty.  The  mention  of  "the  Holy  Spirit"  specifically 
in  verse  23  seems  to  be  in  contrast  to  his  own  spirit  here. 
His  own  spirit  was  under  the  control  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
(Rom.  8:16)  and  the  sense  does  not  differ  greatly.  Not  know- 
ing {me  eidos).  Second  perfect  active  participle  of  oida  with 
me.  That  shall  befall  me  {ta  sunantesonta  emoi).  Articular 
future  active  participle  of  sunantad,  to  meet  with  (Acts 
10:25),  to  befall  (with  associative  instrumental  case)  and 
compare  with  sumbanton  (befell)  in  verse  19.  One  of  the 
rare  instances  of  the  future  participle  in  the  N.T. 

23.  Save  that  {plen  hoti).  The  hoti  clause  is  really  in  the 
ablative  case  after  plen^  here  a  preposition  as  in  Phil.  i:l8, 
this  idiom  plen  hoti  occasionally  in  ancient  Greek.  In  every 
city  {kata  polin).  Singular  here  though  plural  in  kaC  oikous 
(verse  20).  Bonds  and  afflictions  {desma  kai  thlipseis).  Both 
together  as  in  Phil.  1:17;  II  Cor.  1:8.  Literal  bonds  and 
actual  pressures.  Abide  me  {me  menousin).  With  the  accusa- 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  351 

tive  as  in  verse  5  (emenon  hemas)  and  nowhere  else  in  the 
N.T. 

24.  But  I  hold  not  my  life  of  any  account  {aW  oudenos  logou 
poioumai  ten  psuchen).  Neat  Greek  idiom,  accusative 
psuchen  and  genitive  logou  and  then  Paul  adds  "dear  unto 
myself"  (timian  emautoi)  in  apposition  with  psuchen  (really 
a  combination  of  two  constructions).  So  that  I  may  accom- 
plish my  course  (hos  teleioso  dromon  mou).  Rather,  "In 
order  that"  (purpose,  not  result).  Aleph  and  B  read  teleioso 
here  (first  aorist  active  subjunctive)  rather  than  teleiosai 
(first  aorist  active  infinitive).  It  is  the  lone  instance  in  the 
N.T.  of  Aoj  as  a  final  particle  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  987). 
Paul  in  Acts  13:25  in  his  sermon  at  Antioch  in  Pisidia  de- 
scribed John  as  fulfilling  his  course  and  in  II  Tim.  4:7  he  will 
say:  "I  have  finished  my  course"  {ton  dromon  teteleka).  He 
will  run  the  race  to  the  end.  Which  I  received  from  the  Lord 
Jesus  {hen  elahon  para  tou  kuriou  lesou).  Of  that  fact  he 
never  had  a  doubt  and  it  was  a  proud  boast  (Gal.  i  :i ;  Rom. 
11:13).  The  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God  {to  euaggelion  tes 
charitos  tou  theou).  To  Paul  the  gospel  consisted  in  the  grace 
of  God.  See  this  word  "grace"  {charis)  in  Romans  and  his 
other  Epistles. 

25.  And  now,  behold  {kai  nun,  idou).  Second  time  and 
solemn  reminder  as  in  verse  22.  /  know  {ego  oida).  Emphasis 
on  ego  which  is  expressed.  Ye  all  {humeis  pantes).  In  very 
emphatic  position  after  the  verb  opsesthe  (shall  see)  and  the 
object  (my  face).  Twice  Paul  will  write  from  Rome  (Phil. 
2:24;  Philemon  22)  the  hope  of  coming  east  again;  but  that 
is  in  the  future,  and  here  Paul  is  expressing  his  personal 
conviction  and  his  fears.  The  Pastoral  Epistles  show  Paul 
did  come  to  Ephesus  again  (I  Tim.  1:3;  3:14;  4:13)  and 
Troas  (II  Tim.  4:13)  and  Miletus  (II  Tim.  4:20).  There 
need  be  no  surprise  that  Paul's  fears  turned  out  otherwise. 
He  had  reason  enough  for  them.  Among  whom  I  went  about 
{en  hois  dielthon).   Apparently  Paul  here  has  in  mind  others 


352      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

beside  the  ministers.   They  represented  the  church  in  Ephe- 
sus  and  the  whole  region  where  Paul  laboured. 

26.  /  testify  (marturomai) .  Elsewhere  in  the  N.T.  only  in 
Paul's  Epistles  (Gal.  5:3;  Eph.  4:17;  I  Thess.  2:12).  It  means 
"I  call  to  witness"  while  martureo  means  "I  bear  witness." 
This  day  {en  tei  semeron  hemerdi).  The  today  day,  the  last 
day  with  you,  our  parting  day.  /  am  pure  from  the  blood  of 
all  men  (katharos  eimi  apo  tou  haimatos  panton).  Paul  was 
sensitive  on  this  point  as  in  Corinth  (Acts  18:6).  It  is  much 
for  any  preacher  to  claim  and  it  ought  to  be  true  of  all.  The 
papyri  also  give  this  use  of  apo  with  the  ablative  rather  than 
the  mere  ablative  after  katharos. 

27.  Paul  here  repeats  the  very  words  and  idioms  used  in 
verse  20,  adding  "the  whole  counsel  of  God"  {pdsan  ten 
boulen  tou  theou).  All  the  counsel  of  God  that  concerned 
Paul's  work  and  nothing  inconsistent  with  the  purpose  of 
God  of  redemption  through  Christ  Jesus  (Page). 

28.  Take  heed  unto  yourselves  {prosechete  heautois).  The 
full  phrase  had  ton  noun,  hold  your  mind  on  yourselves  (or 
other  object  in  the  dative),  as  often  in  old  writers  and  in 
Job  7:17.  But  the  ancients  often  used  the  idiom  with  noun 
understood,  but  not  expressed  as  here  and  Acts  5:35;  Luke 
12:1;  17:3;  21:34;  I  Tim.  1:4;  3:8;  4:13.  Epeche  is  so  used 
in  I  Tim.  4:16.  To  all  the  flock  {panti  toi  poimnidi).  Con- 
tracted form  of  poimenion  =  poimne  (John  10:16)  already 
in  Luke  12:32  and  also  in  Acts  20:29  ^^^  I  P^^-  S'-^j  3- 
Common  in  old  Greek.  Hath  made  (etheto).  Did  make, 
second  aorist  middle  indicative  of  tithemi,  did  appoint. 
Paul  evidently  believed  that  the  Holy  Spirit  calls  and  ap- 
points ministers.  Bishops  {episkopous).  The  same  men 
termed  elders  in  verse  17  which  see.  To  shepherd  {poimai- 
nein).  Present  active  infinitive  of  purpose  of  poimainOy  old 
verb  to  feed  or  tend  the  flock  {poimne,  poimnion),  to  act 
as  shepherd  {poimen).  These  ministers  are  thus  in  Paul's 
speech   called   eiders    (verse    17),   bishops    (verse   28),   and 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  353 

shepherds  (verse  28).  Jesus  had  used  this  very  word  to 
Peter  (John  21  :i6,  twice  boske^  feed,  21 115,  17)  and  Peter  will 
use  it  in  addressing  fellow-elders  (I  Pet.  5 :2)  with  memories, 
no  doubt  of  the  words  of  Jesus  to  him.  The  "elders"  were 
to  watch  over  as  "bishops"  and  "tend  and  feed  as  shep- 
herds" the  flock.  Jesus  is  termed  "the  shepherd  and  bishop 
of  your  souls"  in  I  Peter  2:25  and  "the  great  Shepherd  of 
the  sheep"  in  Heb.  13:20.  Jesus  called  himself  "the  good 
Shepherd"  in  John  10:11.  The  church  of  God  {ten  ekklesian 
tou  theou).  The  correct  text,  not  "the  church  of  the  Lord" 
or  "the  church  of  the  Lord  and  God"  (Robertson,  Introduc- 
tion to  Textual  Criticism  of  the  N.T.,  p.  189).  He  purchased 
(periepoiesato).  First  aorist  middle  of  peripoieo,  old  verb 
to  reserve,  to  preserve  (for  or  by  oneself,  in  the  middle). 
In  the  N.T.  only  in  Luke  17:33;  Acts  20:28;  I  Tim.  3:13. 
The  substantive  peripoiesin  (preservation,  possession)  oc- 
curs in  I  Peter  2:9  ("a  peculiar  people"  =  a  people  for  a  pos- 
session) and  in  Eph.  i  :i^.  With  his  own  blood  {dia  tou  haima- 
tos  tou  idiou).  Through  the  agency  of  (dia)  his  own  blood. 
Whose  blood.?  If  tou  theou  (Aleph  B  Vulg.)  is  correct,  as  it  is, 
then  Jesus  is  here  called  "God"  who  shed  his  own  blood 
for  the  flock.  It  will  not  do  to  say  that  Paul  did  not  call 
Jesus  God,  for  we  have  Rom.  9:5;  Col.  2:9  and  Tit.  2:13 
where  he  does  that  very  thing,  besides  Col.  1:15-20  and 
Phil.  2:5-11. 

29.  After  my  departing  (meta  ten  aphixin  mou).  Not  his 
death,  but  his  departure  from  them.  From  aphikneomai 
and  usually  meant  arrival,  but  departure  in  Herodotus  IX. 
17,  76  as  here.  Grievous  wolves  {lukoi  bareis).  Bareis  is 
heavy,  rapacious,  harsh.  Jesus  had  already  so  described 
false  teachers  who  would  raven  the  fold  (John  10:12). 
Whether  Paul  had  in  mind  the  Judaizers  who  had  given 
him  so  much  trouble  in  Antioch,  Jerusalem,  Galatia,  Corinth 
or  the  Gnostics  the  shadow  of  whose  coming  he  already 
foresaw  is  not  perfectly  clear.     But  it  will  not  be  many 


354     WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

years  before  Epaphras  will  come  to  Rome  from  Colossae 
with  news  of  the  new  peril  there  (Epistle  to  the  Colossians). 
In  writing  to  Timothy  (I  Tim.  i  :2o)  Paul  will  warn  him 
against  some  who  have  already  made  shipwreck  of  their 
faith.  In  Rev.  2:2  John  will  represent  Jesus  as  describing 
false  apostles  in  Ephesus.  Not  sparing  the  flock  {me  pheido- 
menoi  tou  poimniou).  Litotes  again  as  so  often  in  Acts. 
Sparing  the  flock  was  not  the  fashion  of  wolves.  Jesus  sent 
the  seventy  as  lambs  in  the  midst  of  wolves  (Luke  10:3). 
In  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  Jesus  had  pictured  the  false 
prophets  who  would  come  as  ravening  wolves  in  sheep's 
clothing  (Matt.  7:15). 

30.  From  among  your  own  selves  {ex  humon  auton).  In 
sheep's  clothing  just  as  Jesus  had  foretold.  The  outcome 
fully  justified  Paul's  apprehensions  as  we  see  in  Colossians, 
Ephesians,  I  and  II  Timothy,  Revelation.  False  philosophy, 
immorality,  asceticism  will  lead  some  astray  (Col.  2:8,  18; 
Eph.  4:14;  5:6).  John  will  picture  "antichrists"  who  went 
out  from  us  because  they  were  not  of  us  (I  John  2:i8f.). 
There  is  a  false  optimism  that  is  complacently  blind  as  well 
as  a  despondent  pessimism  that  gives  up  the  fight.  Perverse 
things  {diestrammena).  Perfect  passive  participle  of  dia- 
strephoy  old  verb  to  turn  aside,  twist,  distort  as  in  Acts  13:8 
10.  To  draw  away  {tou  apospdin).  Articular  genitive  present 
active  participle  of  purpose  from  apospao,  old  verb  used 
to  draw  the  sword  (Matt.  26:51),  to  separate  (Luke  22:41; 
Acts  21:1).  The  pity  of  it  is  that  such  leaders  of  dissension 
can  always  gain  a  certain  following.  Paul's  long  residence 
in  Ephesus  enabled  him  to  judge  clearly  of  conditions  there. 

31.  Wherefore  watch  ye  {dio  gregoreite).  Paul  has  con- 
cluded his  defence  of  himself  and  his  warning.  Now  he  ex- 
horts on  the  basis  of  it  {dio)  because  of  which  thing.  The 
very  command  of  Jesus  concerning  the  perils  before  his 
return  as  in  Mark  13:35  {gregoreite) ^  the  very  form  (late 
present   imperative   from   the   second   perfect   egregora  of 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  355 

egriroy  to  arouse).  Stay  awake.  /  ceased  not  to  admonish 
{ouk  epausamen  noutheton).  Participle  describes  Paul,  I 
did  not  cease  admonishing,  night  and  day  {nukta  kai  hem- 
eran,  accusative  of  extent  of  time,  for  three  years  trietian, 
accusative  of  extent  of  time  also).  Noutheton  is  from  nouthe- 
teo,  to  put  sense  into  one.  So  Paul  kept  it  up  with  tears  (verse 
19)  if  so  be  he  could  save  the  Ephesians  from  the  impending 
perils.  Forewarned  is  to  be  forearmed.  Paul  did  his  duty  by 
them. 

32.  And  now  {kai  ta  nun).  Same  phrase  as  in  verses  22  and 
25  save  that  idou  (behold)  is  wanting  and  the  article  ta  occurs 
before  nww,  accusative  of  general  reference.  And  as  to  the 
present  things  (or  situation)  as  in  4:29.  /  commend  (parati- 
themai).  Present  middle  indicative  of  paratithemi,  old  verb 
to  place  beside,  middle,  to  deposit  with  one,  to  interest  as  in 
I  Tim.  1:18;  II  Tim.  2:2.  Paul  can  now  only  do  this,  but 
he  does  it  hopefully.  Cf.  I  Pet.  4:19.  The  word  of  his  grace 
{toi  logbi  tes  charitos  autou).  The  instrumentality  through 
preaching  and  the  Holy  Spirit  employed  by  God.  Cf.  Col. 
4:6;  Eph.  4:29.  Which  is  able  to  build  up  (toi  dunamenoi 
oikodomesai).  God  works  through  the  word  of  his  grace  and 
so  it  is  able  to  build  up  (edify);  a  favourite  Pauline  word  (I 
Cor.  3:10-14;  3:9;  II  Cor.  5:1;  Eph.  2:20-22;  II  Tim.  3:15; 
etc.),  and  James  i  :2i.  The  very  words  "build"  and  "inherit- 
ance  an^ong  the  sanctified"  will  occur  in  Eph.  l:il;  2:30; 
3:18  and  which  some  may  recall  on  reading.  Cf.  Col.  1:12. 
Stephen  in  Acts  7:5  used  the  word  "inheritance"  (klerono- 
mian),  nowhere  else  in  Acts,  but  in  Eph.  1:14,  18;  5:5.  In 
Eph.  I  :i8  the  very  expression  occurs  "his  inheritance  among 
the  saints"  {ten  kleronomian  autou  en  tois  hagiois), 

33.  No  man's  silver  or  gold  or  apparel  {arguriou  e  chrusiou 
e  himatismou  oudenos).  Genitive  case  after  epethumesa.  One 
of  the  slanders  against  Paul  was  that  he  was  raising  this 
collection,  ostensibly  for  the  poor,  really  for  himself  (II  Cor. 
I2:i7f.).     He  includes  "apparel"  because  oriental  wealth 


3S6      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

consisted  largely  In  fine  apparel  (not  old  worn  out  clothes). 
See  Gen.  24:53;  II  Kings  5:5;  Psa.  45:i3f.;  Matt.  6:19.  Paul 
did  not  preach  just  for  money. 

34.  Ye  yourselves  (autoi).  Intensive  pronoun.  Certainly 
they  knew  that  the  church  in  Ephesus  had  not  supported 
Paul  while  there.  These  hands  {hai  cheires  hautai).  Paul  was 
not  above  manual  labour.  He  pointed  to  his  hands  with  pride 
as  proof  that  he  toiled  at  his  trade  of  tent-making  as  at 
Thessalonica  and  Corinth  for  his  own  needs  {chreiais)  and 
for  those  with  him  (probably  Aquila  and  Priscilla)  with 
whom  he  lived  and  probably  Timothy  because  of  his  often 
infirmities  (I  Tim.  5:23).  Ministered  {huperetesan).  First 
aorist  active  of  hupereted,  to  act  as  under  rower,  old  verb, 
but  in  the  N.T.  only  in  Acts  13:36;  20:34;  24:23.  While  in 
Ephesus  Paul  wrote  to  Corinth:  *'We  toil,  working  with  our 
own  hands"  (I  Cor.  4:12).  "As  he  held  them  up,  they  saw 
a  tongue  of  truth  in  every  seam  that  marked  them"  (Fur- 
neaux). 

35.  /  gave  you  an  example  (hupedeixa).  First  aorist  active 
indicative  of  hupodeiknumi,  old  verb  to  show  under  one's 
eyes,  to  give  object  lesson,  by  deed  as  well  as  by  word  (Luke 
6:47).  Hupodeigma  means  example  (John  13:15;  James 
5:10).  So  Paul  appeals  to  his  example  in  I  Cor.  ii:i;  Phil. 
3:17.  Panta  is  accusative  plural  of  general  reference  (in  all 
things).  So  labouring  ye  ought  to  help  {houtos  kopiontas  dei 
antilambanesthai) .  So,  as  I  did.  Necessity  {dei).  Toiling 
(kopiontas)  not  just  for  ourselves,  but  to  help  (antilambanes- 
thai), to  take  hold  yourselves  (middle  voice)  at  the  other 
end  (anti).  This  verb  common  in  the  old  Greek,  but  in  the 
N.T.  only  in  Luke  1:54;  Acts  20:35;  ^  '^''^-  ^•^-  T"his  noble 
plea  to  help  the  weak  is  the  very  spirit  of  Christ  (I  Thess. 
5:14;  I  Cor.  12:28;  Rom.  5:6;  14:1).  In  I  Thess.  5:14  ante- 
chesthe  ton  asthenounton  we  have  Paul's  very  idea  again. 
Every  Community  Chest  appeal  today  re-echoes  Paul's 
plea.   He  himself  said  (autos  eipen).   Not  in  the  Gospels,  one 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  357 

of  the  sayings  of  Jesus  in  current  use  that  Paul  had  received 
and  treasured.  Various  other  Agrapha  of  Jesus  have  been 
preserved  in  ancient  writers  and  some  in  recently  discovered 
papyri  which  may  be  genuine  or  not.  We  are  grateful  that 
Paul  treasured  this  one.  This  Beatitude  (on  makarion  see 
on  Matt.  5:3-11)  is  illustrated  by  the  whole  life  of  Jesus 
with  the  Cross  as  the  culmination.  Aristotle  (Eth.  IV.  i) 
has  a  saying  somewhat  like  this,  but  assigns  the  feeling  of 
superiority  as  the  reason  (Page),  an  utterly  different  idea 
from  that  here.  This  quotation  raises  the  question  of  how 
much  Paul  personally  knew  of  the  life  and  sayings  of  Jesus. 

36.  He  kneeled  down  {theis  ta  gonata  autou).  Second  aorist 
active  participle  of  tithemij  to  place.  The  very  idiom  used  in 
7:60  of  Stephen.  Not  in  ancient  writers  and  only  six  times  in 
the  N.T.  (Mark  15:19;  Luke  22:41;  Acts  7:60;  9:40;  20:36; 
21:5).  Certainly  kneeling  in  prayer  is  a  fitting  attitude  (cf. 
Jesus,  Luke  22:41),  though  not  the  only  proper  one  (Matt. 
6:5).     Paul  apparently  prayed  aloud  (proseuxato). 

37.  They  all  wept  sore  {hikanos  klautkmos  egeneto  panton). 
Literally,  There  came  considerable  weeping  of  all  (on  the 
part  of  all,  genitive  case).  Kissed  him  (katephiloun  auton). 
Imperfect  active  of  kataphileo,  old  verb,  intensive  with  kata 
and  repetition  shown  also  by  the  tense :  They  kept  on  kissing 
or  kissed  repeatedly,  probably  one  after  the  other  falling 
on  his  neck.    Cf.  also  Matt.  26:49. 

38.  Sorrowing  {odunomenoi) .  Present  middle  participle  of 
odunao,  old  verb  to  cause  intense  pain,  to  torment  (Luke 
16:24),  middle  to  distress  oneself  (Luke  2:48;  Acts  20:38). 
Nowhere  else  in  N.T.  Which  he  had  spoken  {hoi  eirekei). 
Relative  attracted  to  the  case  of  the  antecedent  logoi  (word). 
Past  perfect  indicative  of  eipon.  They  brought  him  on  his  way 
{proepempon  auton).  Imperfect  active  oi  propempo,  old  verb 
to  send  forward,  to  accompany  as  in  Acts  15:3;  20:38;  21:5;  I 
Cor.  16:6,  II;  II  Cor.  i:i6;  Tit.  3:13;  III  John  6.  Graphic 
picture  of  Paul's  departure  from  this  group  of  ministers. 


CHAPTER  XXI 

1.  Were  parted  from  them  {apospasthentas  ap*  auton). 
First  aorist  passive  participle  of  apospad  same  verb  as  in 
20:30  and  Luke  22-j^i.  Had  set  sail  (anachthenai) .  First 
aorist  passive  of  anago,  the  usual  verb  to  put  out  (up)  to 
sea  as  in  verse  2  (anechthemen) .  We  came  with  a  straight 
course  {euthudromesantes  elthomen).  The  same  verb  (aorist 
active  participle  of  euthudromeo)  used  by  Luke  in  16:11  of 
the  voyage  from  Troas  to  Samothrace  and  Neapolis,  which 
see.  Unto  Cos  (eis  ten  Ko).  Standing  today,  about  forty 
nautical  miles  south  from  Miletus,  island  famous  as  the 
birthplace  of  Hippocrates  and  Apelles  with  a  great  medical 
school.  Great  trading  place  with  many  Jews.  The  next  day 
(tei  hexes).  Locative  case  with  hemerdi  (day)  understood. 
The  adverb  hexes  is  from  echo  (future  hexo)  and  means 
successively  or  in  order.  This  is  another  one  of  Luke's  ways 
of  saying  "on  the  next  day"  (cf.  three  others  in  20:15). 
Unto  Rhodes  {eis  ten  Rhodon).  Called  the  island  of  roses. 
The  sun  shone  most  days  and  made  roses  luxuriant.  The 
great  colossus  which  represented  the  sun,  one  of  the  seven 
wonders  of  the  world,  was  prostrate  at  this  time.  The  island 
was  at  the  entrance  to  the  Aegean  Sea  and  had  a  great 
university,  especially  for  rhetoric  and  oratory.  There  was 
great  commerce  also.  Unto  Patara  {eis  Patara).  A  seaport 
on  the  Lycian  coast  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Xanthus.  It 
once  had  an  oracle  of  Apollo  which  rivalled  that  at  Delphi. 
This  was  the  course  taken  by  hundreds  of  ships  every  season. 

2.  Having  found  a  ship  {heurontes  ploion).  Paul  had  used 
a  small  coasting  vessel  (probably  hired)  that  anchored  each 
night  at  Cos,  Rhodes,  Patara.  He  was  still  some  four  hundred 
miles  from  Jerusalem.    But  at  Patara  Paul  caught  a  large 

3S8 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  359 

vessel  (a  merchantman)  that  could  sail  across  the  open  sea. 
Crossing  over  unto  Phoenicia  (diaper on  eis  Phoiniken). 
Neuter  singular  accusative  (agreeing  with  ploion)  present 
active  participle  of  diaperab,  old  verb  to  go  between  {did) 
and  so  across  to  Tyre.  We  went  aboard  (epibantes).  Second 
aorist  active  participle  of  epibaino, 

3.  When  we  had  come  in  sight  of  Cyprus  (anaphanantes  ten 
Kupron).  First  aorist  active  participle  of  anaphaino  (Doric 
form  -phandntes  rather  than  the  Attic  -phenantes),  old  verb 
to  make  appear,  bring  to  light,  to  manifest.  Having  made 
Cyprus  visible  or  rise  up  out  of  the  sea.  Nautical  terms.  In 
the  N.T.  only  here  and  Luke  19:1 1  which  see.  On  the  left  hand 
(euonumon).  Compound  feminine  adjective  like  masculine. 
They  sailed  south  of  Cyprus.  We  sailed  (epleomen).  Im- 
perfect active  of  common  verb  pleoy  kept  on  sailing  till  we 
came  to  Syria.  Landedat  Tyre  {katelthomen  eis  Turon).  Came 
down  to  Tyre.  Then  a  free  city  of  Syria  in  honour  of  its 
former  greatness  (cf.  the  long  siege  by  Alexander  the  Great). 
There  (ekeise).  Thither,  literally.  Only  one  other  instance 
in  N.T.,  22:5  which  may  be  pertinent  =  ekei  (there).  Was  to 
unlade  (en  apqphoriizomenon).  Periphrastic  imperfect  middle 
of  apophortizOj  late  verb  from  apo  and  phortos,  load,  but  here 
only  in  the  N.T.  Literally,  "For  thither  the  boat  was  un- 
loading her  cargo,"  a  sort  of  "customary"  or  "progressive" 
imperfect  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  884).  Burden  (gomon). 
Cargo,  old  word,  from  gemo,  to  be  full.  Only  here  and  Rev. 
18:1  if.  in  N.T.  Probably  a  grain  or  fruit  ship.  It  took  seven 
days  here  to  unload  and  reload. 

4.  Having  found  (aneurontes).  Second  aorist  active  parti- 
ciple of  aneuriskdj  to  seek  for,  to  find  by  searching  (ana). 
There  was  a  church  here,  but  it  was  a  large  city  and  the  num- 
ber of  members  may  not  have  been  large.  Probably  some  of 
those  that  fled  from  Jerusalem  who  came  to  Phoenicia  (Acts 
11:19)  started  the  work  here.  Paul  went  also  through 
Phoenicia  on  the  way  to  the  Jerusalem  Conference  (15 :3).  As 


360      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

at  Troas  and  Miletus,  so  here  Paul's  indefatigible  energy 
shows  itself  with  characteristic  zeal.  Through  the  Spirit 
{dia  tou  pneumatos).  The  Holy  Spirit  undoubtedly  who 
had  already  told  Paul  that  bonds  and  afflictions  awaited 
him  in  Jerusalem  (20:23).  ^^^^  ^^  should  not  set  foot  in 
Jerusalem  {me  epibainein  eis  lerosoluma).  Indirect  command 
with  me  and  the  present  active  infinitive,  not  to  keep  on 
going  to  Jerusalem  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  1046).  In  spite 
of  this  warning  Paul  felt  it  his  duty  as  before  (20:22)  to  go  on. 
Evidently  Paul  interpreted  the  action  of  the  Holy  Spirit  as 
information  and  warning  although  the  disciples  at  Tyre 
gave  it  the  form  of  a  prohibition.  Duty  called  louder  than 
warning  to  Paul  even  if  both  were  the  calls  of  God. 

5.  That  we  had  accomplished  the  days  {exartisai  hemds  tas 
hemeras).  First  aorist  active  infinitive  of  exartizo,  to  furnish 
perfectly,  rare  in  ancient  writers,  but  fairly  frequent  in  the 
papyri.  Only  twice  in  the  N.T.,  here  and  II  Tim.  3:17. 
Finish  the  exact  number  of  days  (seven)  of  verse  4.  The 
accusative  of  general  reference  hemds  is  the  usual  construc- 
tion and  the  infinitive  clause  is  the  subject  of  egeneto.  We 
departed  and  went  on  our  journey  {exelthontes  eporeuometha). 
Sharp  distinction  between  the  first  aorist  active  participle 
exelthontes  (from  exerchomai,  to  go  out)  and  the  imperfect 
middle  eporeuometha  from  poreuo  (we  were  going  on),  ^nd 
they  all,  with  wives  and  children,  brought  us  on  our  way  {pro- 
pemponton  hemds  panton  sun  gunaixi  kai  teknois).  No  "and" 
in  the  Greek,  simply  genitive  absolute,  "They  all  with  wives 
and  children  accompanying  us,"  just  as  at  Miletus  (20:28), 
same  verb  propempo  which  see.  The  first  mention  of  children 
in  connection  with  the  apostolic  churches  (Vincent).  Vivid 
picture  here  as  at  Miletus,  evident  touch  of  an  eyewitness. 
Till  we  were  out  of  the  city  {heos  exo  tes  poleos).  Note  both 
adverbial  prepositions  {heos  exo)  clear  outside  of  the  city. 

6.  Beach  {aigialon).  As  in  Matt.  13:2  which  see.  This 
scene  is  in  pubHc  as  at  Miletus,  but  they  did  not  care. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  361 

Bade  each  other  farewell  {apespasametha  allelous).  First 
aorist  middle  of  apaspazomai.  Rare  compound,  here  alone 
in  the  N.T.  Tender  scene,  but  "no  bonds  of  long  comrade- 
ship, none  of  the  clinging  love"  (Furneaux)  seen  at  Miletus 
(Acts  20:37f.).  Home  again  {eis  ta  idia).  To  their  own  places 
as  of  the  Beloved  Disciple  in  John  19:27  and  of  Jesus  in  John 
1:1 1.    This  idiom  in  the  papyri  also. 

7.  Had  finished  (dianusantes).  First  aorist  active  parti- 
ciple of  dianuOy  old  verb  to  accomplish  (anuo)  thoroughly 
(did),  only  here  in  the  N.T.  From  Tyre  {apo  Turou).  Page 
takes  (Hackett  also)  with  katentesamen  (we  arrived)  rather 
than  with  "fow  ploun^'  (the  voyage)  and  with  good  reason: 
"And  we,  having  (thereby)  finished  the  voyage,  arrived 
from  Tyre  at  Ptolemais."  Ptolemais  is  the  modern  Acre, 
called  Accho  in  Judges  1:31.  The  harbour  is  the  best  on  the 
coast  of  Palestine  and  is  surrounded  by  mountains.  It  is 
about  thirty  miles  south  of  Tyre.  It  was  never  taken  by 
Israel  and  was  considered  a  Philistine  town  and  the  Greeks 
counted  it  a  Phoenician  city.  It  was  the  key  to  the  road 
down  the  coast  between  Syria  and  Egypt  and  had  suc- 
cessively the  rule  of  the  Ptolemies,  Syrians,  Romans.  Saluted 
{aspasamenoi).  Here  greeting  as  in  21 :  19  rather  than  farewell 
as  in  20:1.  The  stay  was  short,  one  day  {hemeran  mian, 
accusative),  but  "the  brethren"  Paul  and  his  party  found 
easily.  Possibly  the  scattered  brethren  (Acts  11:19)  founded 
the  church  here  or  Philip  may  have  done  it. 

8.  On  the  morrow  (tei  epaurion).  Another  and  the  more 
common  way  of  expressing  this  idea  of  "next  day"  besides 
the  three  in  20:15  ^^^  ^^  ^^^  ^^  21:1.  Unto  Caesarea  {eis 
Kaisariun).  Apparently  by  land  as  the  voyage  (ploun) 
ended  at  Ptolemais  (verse  7).  Caesarea  is  the  political 
capital  of  Judea  under  the  Romans  where  the  procurators 
lived  and  a  city  of  importance,  built  by  Herod  the  Great 
and  named  in  honour  of  Augustus.  It  had  a  magnificent 
harbour  built.    Most  of  the  inhabitants  were  Greeks.    This 


362      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

is  the  third  time  that  we  have  seen  Paul  in  Caesarea,  on  his 
journey  from  Jerusalem  to  Tarsus  (Acts  9:30),  on  his  return 
from  Antioch  at  the  close  of  the  second  mission  tour  (18:22) 
and  now.  The  best  MSS.  omit  hoi  peri  Paulou  (we  that 
were  of  Paul's  company)  a  phrase  like  that  in  13:13.  Into 
the  house  of  Philip  the  evangelist  {eis  ton  oikon  Philippou  tou 
euaggelistou) .  Second  in  the  list  of  the  seven  (6:5)  after 
Stephen  and  that  fact  mentioned  here.  By  this  title  he  is 
distinguished  from  "Philip  the  apostle,"  one  of  the  twelve. 
His  evangelistic  work  followed  the  death  of  Stephen  (Acts 
8)  in  Samaria,  Philistia,  with  his  home  in  Caesarea.  The 
word  "evangelizing"  (eueggelizeto)  was  used  of  him  in  8:40. 
The  earliest  of  the  three  N.T.  examples  of  the  word  "evange- 
list" (Acts  21:8;  Eph.  4:11;  II  Tim.  4:5).  Apparently  a 
word  used  to  describe  one  who  told  the  gospel  story  as  Philip 
did  and  may  have  been  used  of  him  first  of  all  as  John  was 
termed  "the  baptizer"  {ho  baptizon,  Mark  1:4),  then  "the 
Baptist"  {ho  baptistes.  Matt.  3:1).  It  is  found  on  an  in- 
scription in  one  of  the  Greek  islands  of  uncertain  date  and 
was  used  in  ecclesiastical  writers  of  later  times  on  the  Four 
Gospels  as  we  do.  As  used  here  the  meaning  is  a  travelling 
missionary  who  "gospelized"  communities.  This  is  probably 
Paul's  idea  in  II  Tim.  4:5.  In  Eph.  4:11  the  word  seems  to 
describe  a  special  class  of  ministers  just  as  we  have  them 
today.  Men  have  different  gifts  and  Philip  had  this  of 
evangelizing  as  Paul  was  doing  who  is  the  chief  evangelist. 
The  ideal  minister  today  combines  the  gifts  of  evangelist, 
herald,  teacher,  shepherd.  "  fVe  abode  with  him''''  {emeinamen 
par^  autoi).  Constative  aorist  active  indicative.  Par  autoi 
(by  his  side)  is  a  neat  idiom  for  "at  his  house."  What  a  joy- 
ful time  Paul  had  In  conversation  with  Philip.  He  could 
learn  from  him  much  of  value  about  the  early  days  of  the 
gospel  in  Jerusalem.  And  Luke  could,  and  probably  did, 
take  notes  from  Philip  and  his  daughters  about  the  begin- 
nings of  Christian  history.    It  is  generally  supposed  that  the 


i 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  363 

"we"  sections  of  Acts  represent  a  travel  document  by  Luke 
(notes  made  by  him  as  he  journeyed  from  Troas  to  Rome). 
Those  who  deny  the  Lukan  authorship  of  the  whole  book 
usually  admit  this.  So  we  may  suppose  that  Luke  is  already 
gathering  data  for  future  use.  If  so,  these  were  precious 
days  for  him. 

9.  Fir  gins  which  did  prophesy  (parthenoi  propheteusai). 
Not  necessarily  an  "order"  of  virgins,  but  Philip  had  the 
honour  of  having  in  his  home  four  virgin  daughters  with  the 
gift  of  prophecy  which  was  not  necessarily  predicting  events, 
though  that  was  done  as  by  Agabus  here.  It  was  more  than 
ordinary  preaching  (cf.  19:6)  and  was  put  by  Paul  above 
the  other  gifts  like  tongues  (I  Cor.  14:1-33).  The  prophecy 
of  Joel  (2:28f.)  about  their  sons  and  daughters  prophesying 
is  quoted  by  Peter  and  applied  to  the  events  on  the  day  of 
Pentecost  (Acts  2:17).  Paul  in  I  Cor.  11:5  gives  directions 
about  praying  and  prophesying  by  the  women  (apparently 
in  public  worship)  with  the  head  uncovered  and  sharply 
requires  the  head  covering,  though  not  forbidding  the  pray- 
ing and  prophesying.  With  this  must  be  compared  his  de- 
mand for  silence  by  the  women  in  I  Cor.  14:34-40  and  I  Tim. 
2:8-15  which  it  is  not  easy  to  reconcile.  One  wonders  if  there 
was  not  something  known  to  Paul  about  special  conditions 
in  Corinth  and  Ephesus  that  he  has  not  told.  There  was  also 
Anna  the  prophetess  in  the  temple  (Luke  2:36)  besides  the 
inspired  hymns  of  Elizabeth  (Luke  i  :42-45)  and  of  Mary 
(Luke  1 :46-55).  At  any  rate  there  was  no  order  of  women 
prophets  or  official  ministers.  There  were  Old  Testament 
prophetesses  like  Miriam,  Deborah,  Huldah.  Today  in  our 
Sunday  schools  the  women  do  most  of  the  actual  teaching. 
The  whole  problem  is  difficult  and  calls  for  restraint  and 
reverence.  One  thing  is  certain  and  that  is  that  Luke  ap- 
preciated the  services  of  women  for  Christ  as  is  shown  often 
in  his  writings  (Luke  8:1-3,  for  instance)  before  this  incident. 

10.  As  we  tarried  {epimenonton  hembn).  Genitive  absolute. 


364      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Note  epi  (additional)  with  mend  as  in  12:16.  Many  days 
{hemeras  pleious).  More  days  (than  we  expected),  accusative 
of  time.  A  certain  prophet  named  Agabus  (prophetes  onomati 
Agabos).  A  prophet  like  the  daughters  of  Philip,  mentioned 
already  in  connection  with  the  famine  predicted  by  him 
(Acts  11:28),  but  apparently  not  a  man  of  prominence  like 
Barnabas,  and  so  no  allusion  to  that  former  prophecy. 

11.  Coming  {elthon,  second  aorist  active  participle  of  erch- 
omai),  taking  {aras,  first  aorist  active  participle  of  airo,  to 
take  up),  binding  {desas,  first  aorist  active  participle  of  deo, 
to  bind).  Vivid  use  of  three  successive  participles  describing 
the  dramatic  action  of  Agabus.  PauVs  girdle  {ten  zonen  tou 
Paulou).  Old  word  from  zonnumi,  to  gird.  See  on  12:8. 
His  own  feet  and  hands  {heautou  tons  podas  kai  tas  cheiras). 
Basis  for  the  interpretation.  Old  Testament  prophets  often 
employed  symbolic  deeds  (I  Kings  22:11;  James  2:2;  Jer. 
13:1-7;  Ezek.  4:1-6).  Jesus  interpreted  the  symbolism  of 
Peter's  girding  himself  (John  21:18).  So  (houtos).  As  Agabus 
had  bound  himself.  Agabus  was  just  from  Jerusalem  and 
probably  knew  the  feeling  there  against  Paul.  At  any  rate 
the  Holy  Spirit  revealed  it  to  him  as  he  claims.  Shall  de- 
liver (paradosousin).  Like  the  words  of  Jesus  about  himself 
(Matt.  20:19).  He  was  "delivered"  into  the  hands  of  the 
Gentiles  and  it  took  five  years  to  get  out  of  those  hands. 

12.  Both  we  and  they  of  that  place  {hemeis  te  kai  hoi  ento- 
pioi).  Usual  use  of  te  kai  (both — and).  Entopioi,  old  word, 
only  here  in  N.T.  Not  to  go  up  {tou  me  anabainein).  Probably 
ablative  of  the  articular  present  active  infinitive  with  re- 
dundant negative  me  after  parekaloumen  (imperfect  active, 
conative).  We  tried  to  persuade  him  from  going  up.  It 
can  be  explained  as  genitive,  but  not  so  likely:  We  tried  to 
persuade  him  in  respect  to  not  going  up.  Vincent  cites  the 
case  of  Regulus  who  insisted  on  returning  from  Rome  to 
Carthage  to  certain  death  and  that  of  Luther  on  the  way 
to  the  Diet  of  Worms.   Spalatin  begged  Luther  not  to  go  on. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  365 

Luther  said:  "Though  devils  be  as  many  in  Worms  as  tiles 
upon  the  roofs,  yet  thither  will  I  go."  This  dramatic  warning 
of  Agabus  came  on  top  of  that  in  Tyre  (21:4)  and  Paul's 
own  confession  in  Miletus  (20:23).  It  is  small  wonder  that 
Luke  and  the  other  messengers  together  with  Philip  and  his 
daughters  (prophetesses  versus  prophet.^)  joined  in  a  chorus 
of  dissuasion  to  Paul. 

13.  What  are  you  doing  weeping^  (Ti  poieite  klaiontes?) 
Strong  protest  as  in  Mark  11:5.  Breaking  my  heart  {sunthrup^ 
tontes  mou  ten  kardian).  The  verb  sunthrupto,  to  crush  to- 
gether, is  late  Koine  for  apothrupto,  to  break  off,  both  vivid 
and  expressive  words.  So  to  enervate  and  unman  one, 
weakening  Paul's  determination  to  go  on  with  his  duty. 
/  am  ready  {Ego  hetoimos  echo).  I  hold  (myself)  in  readiness 
(adverb,  hetoimos).  Same  idiom  in  II  Cor.  12:14.  Not  only 
to  be  bound  {ou  monon  dethenai).  First  aorist  passive  infinitive 
of  deo  and  note  ou  monon  rather  than  me  monon,  the  usual 
negative  of  the  infinitive  because  of  the  sharp  contrast 
(Robertson,  Grammar^  p.  1095).  Paul's  readiness  to  die, 
if  need  be,  at  Jerusalem  is  like  that  of  Jesus  on  the  way  to 
Jerusalem  the  last  time.  Even  before  that  Luke  (9:51)  said 
that  "he  set  his  face  to  go  on  to  Jerusalem."  Later  the 
disciples  will  say  to  Jesus,  "Master,  the  Jews  were  but  now 
seeking  to  stone  thee;  and  goest  thou  thither?"  (John  1 1 :8). 
The  stature  of  Paul  rises  here  to  heroic  proportions  "for  the 
name  of  the  Lord  Jesus"  (huper  tou  onomatos  tou  kuriou 
lesou). 

14.  When  he  would  not  be  persuaded  {me  peithomenou 
autou).  Genitive  absolute  of  the  present  passive  participle 
of  peitho.  Literally,  "he  not  being  persuaded."  That  was 
all.  Paul's  will  {kardia)  was  not  broken,  not  even  bent,  ffe 
ceased  {hesuchasamen).  Ingressive  aorist  active  indicative 
of  hesuchazo,  old  verb  to  be  quiet,  silent.  The  will  of  the  Lord 
be  done  {tou  kuriou  to  thelema  ginestho).  Present  middle  im- 
perative of  ginomai.    There  Is  a  quaint  naivete  in  this  con- 


366      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

fession  by  the  friends  of  Paul.  Since  Paul  would  not  let 
them  have  their  way,  they  were  willing  for  the  Lord  to  have 
his  way,  acquiescence  after  failure  to  have  theirs. 

15.  We  took  up  our  baggage  {episkeuasamenoi).  First 
aorist  middle  participle  of  episkeuazo,  old  verb  to  furnish 
{skeuos,  epi)  with  things  necessary,  to  pack  up,  saddle  horses 
here  Ramsay  holds.  Here  only  in  the  N.T.  Went  up  [ane- 
hainomen).  Inchoative  imperfect  active  of  anabaino,  we 
started  to  go  up. 

16.  Certain  of  the  disciples  {ton  matheton).  The  genitive 
here  occurs  with  tines  understood  as  often  in  the  Greek 
idiom,  the  partitive  genitive  used  as  nominative  (Robertson, 
Grammar^  p.  502).  Bringing  {agonies).  Nominative  plural 
participle  agreeing  with  tines  understood,  not  with  case  of 
matheton.  One  Mnason  of  Cyprus,  an  early  disciple,  with 
whom  we  should  lodge  {par  hoi  xenisthomen  Mnasoni  tint 
Kupridi  archaibi  mathetei).  A  thoroughly  idiomatic  Greek 
idiom,  incorporation  and  attraction  of  the  antecedent  into 
the  relative  clause  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  718).  Mnasoni 
is  really  the  object  of  agontes  or  the  accusative  with  para  or 
pros  understood  and  should  be  accusative,  but  it  is  placed 
in  the  clause  after  the  relative  and  in  the  same  locative  case 
with  the  relative  hoi  (due  to  par\  beside,  with).  Then  the 
rest  agrees  in  case  with  Mnasoni.  He  was  originally  from 
Cyprus,  but  now  in  Caesarea.  The  Codex  Bezae  adds  eis 
tina  komen  (to  a  certain  village)  and  makes  it  mean  that 
they  were  to  lodge  with  Mnason  at  his  home  there  about 
halfway  to  Jerusalem.  This  may  be  true.  The  use  of  the  sub- 
junctive xenisthomen  (first  aorist  passive  of  xenizo,  to  enter- 
tain strangers  as  in  Acts  10:6,  23,  32  already)  may  be  volitive 
of  purpose  with  the  relative  (Robertson,  Grammar,  pp.  955, 
989).  The  use  of  archaioi  for  "early"  may  refer  to  the  fact 
that  he  was  one  of  the  original  disciples  at  Pentecost  as 
Peter  in  157  uses  hemeron  archaion  (early  days)  to  refer  to 
his  experience  at  Ccasarea  in  Acts  10.    "As  the  number  of 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  367 

the  first  disciples  lessened,  the  next  generation  accorded  a 
sort  of  honour  to  the  survivors"  (Furneaux), 

17.  When  we  were  come  {genomenon  hemon).  Genitive 
absolute  again,  "we  having  come."  Received  {apedexanto). 
Apodechomai,  to  receive  from.  This  old  compound  only  in 
Luke  in  the  N.T.  Gladly  (asmenos).  Old  adverb  hesmenos 
from  hedomaij  to  be  pleased.  Here  only  in  the  N.T.  Perhaps 
this  first  glad  welcome  was  from  Paul's  personal  friends  in 
Jerusalem. 

18.  The  day  following  {tei  epiousei).  As  in  20:15  which  sep. 
Went  in  (eiseiei).  Imperfect  active  of  eiseimi^  old  classic  verb 
used  only  four  times  in  the  N.T.  (Acts  3:3;  21:18,  26;  Heb. 
9:6),  a  mark  of  the  literary  style  rather  than  the  colloquial 
Koine  use  of  eiserchomai.  Together  with  us  to  James  {sun 
hemin  pros  lakobon).  So  then  Luke  is  present.  The  next 
use  of  "we"  is  in  27:1  when  they  leave  Caesarea  for  Rome, 
but  it  is  not  likely  that  Luke  was  away  from  Paul  in  Jeru- 
salem and  Caesarea.  The  reports  of  what  was  done  and 
said  in  both  places  is  so  full  and  minute  that  it  seems  reason- 
able that  Luke  got  first  hand  information  here  whatever 
his  motive  was  for  so  full  an  account  of  these  legal  proceed- 
ings to  be  discussed  later.  There  are  many  details  that 
read  like  an  eye  witness's  story  (21:30,  35,  40;  22:2,  3; 
23:12,  etc.).  It  was  probably  the  house  of  James  {pros  and 
para  so  used  often).  And  all  the  elders  were  present  {pantes  te 
paregenonto  hoi  presbuteroi).  Clearly  James  is  the  leading 
elder  and  the  others  are  his  guests  in  a  formal  reception  to 
Paul.  It  is  noticeable  that  the  apostles  are  not  mentioned, 
though  both  elders  and  apostles  are  named  at  the  Confer- 
ence in  chapter  15.  at  would  seem  that  the  apostles  are  away 
on  preaching  tours./  The  whole  church  was  not  called  to- 
gether probably  Because  of  the  known  prejudice  against 
Paul  created  by  the  Judaizers. 

19.  He  rehearsed  {exegetiof.  Imperfect  middle  of  exegeomai, 
old  verb  to  lead  out,  to  draw  out  in  narrative,  to  recount.  So 


368      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAiMENT 

Paul  is  pictured  as  taking  his  time  for  he  had  a  great  story 
to  tell  of  what  had  happened  since  they  saw  him  last.  One  by 
one  {kath'  hena  hekaston).  According  to_each_one  (item)  and 
the  adverbial  phrase  used  as  an  accusative  after  the  verb 
exegeito  as  Demosthenes  does  (1265),  though  it  could  be  like 
kath'  hena  hekastos  in  Eph.  5:33.  Which  (hon).  Genitive 
attracted  from  ha  (accusative)  into  the  case  of  the  unex- 
pressed antecedent  toutbn.  God  had  wrought  {epoiesen  ho 
theos).  Summary  constative  aorist  active  indicative  that 
gathers  up  all  that  God  did  and  he  takes  pains  to  give  God 
the  glory.  It  is  possible  that  at  this  formal  meeting  Paul 
observed  an  absence  of  warmth  and  enthusiasm  in  contrast 
with  the  welcome  accorded  by  his  friends  the  day  before 
(verse  17).  Furneaux  thinks  that  Paul  was  coldly  received 
on  this  day  in  spite  of  the  generous  offering  brought  from  the 
Gentile  Christians.  "It  looks  as  though  his  misgiving  as  to 
its  reception  (Rom.  15:31)  was  confirmed.  Nor  do  we  hear 
that  the  Christians  of  Jerusalem  later  put  in  so  much  as  a 

word   on^tllS~^half  with   eithf^   ^^^  Jpwigh    r>r   t^p   Roman 

_authorities,.  or  expressed  any  sympathy  with  him  during 
his  long  imprisonment  at  Caesarea"  (Furneaux).  The  most 
that  can  be  said  is  that  the  Judaizers  referred  to  by  James 
do  not  appear  actively  against  him.  The  collection  and  the 
plan  proposed  by  James  accomplished  that  much  at  any 
rate.    It  stopped  the  mouths  of  those  lions. 

20.  Glorified  (edoxazon).  Inchoative  imperfect,  began  to 
glorify  God,  though  without  special  praise  of  Paul.  How 
many  thousands  {posai  muriades).  Old  word  for  ten  thousand 
(Acts  19:19)  and  then  an  indefinite  number  like  our  "my- 
riads" (this  very  word)  as  Luke  12:1;  Acts  21:20;  Jude  14; 
Rev.  5:11;  9:16.  But  it  is  a  surprising  statement  even  with 
allowable  hyperbole,  but  one  may  recall  Acts  4:4  (number 
of  the  men — not  women — about  five  thousand);  5:14  (multi- 
tudes both  of  men  and  women) ;  6  \J.  There  were  undoubtedly 
a  great  many  thousands  of  believers  in  Jerusalem  and  all 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  369 

Jewish  Christians,  some,  alas,  Judaizers  (Acts  11:2;  15:1,  5). 
This  list  may  include  the  Christians  from  neighbouring  towns 
in  Palestine  and  even  some  from  foreign  countries  here  at  the 
Feast  of  Pentecost,  for  it  is  probable  that  Paul  arrived  in 
time  for  it  as  he  had  hoped.  But  we  do  not  have  to  count  the 
hostile  Jews  from  Asia  (verse  27)  who  were  clearly  not 
Christians  at  all.  All  zealous  for  the  law  {pantes  zelotai  tou 
nomou).  Zealots  (substantive)  rather  than  zealous  (adjec- 
tive) with  objective  genitive  {tou  nomou).  The  word  zealot  is 
from  zeloo,  to  burn  with  zeal,  to  boil.  The  Greek  used  zelotes 
for  an  imitator  or  admirer.  There  was  a  party  of  Zealots  (de- 
veloped from  the  Pharisees),  a  group  of  what  would  be  called 
"hot-heads,"  who  brought  on  the  war  with  Rome.  One 
of  this  party,  Simon  Zelotes  (Acts  1:13),  was  in  the  number 
of  the  twelve  apostles.  It  is  important  to  understand  the 
issues  in  Jerusalem.  It  was  settled  at  the  Jerusalem  Con- 
ference (Acts  15  and  Galatians  2)  that  the  Mosaic  ceremonial 
law  was  not  to  be  imposed  upon  Gentile  Christians.  Paul 
won  freedom  for  them,  but  it  vyas  not  said-that  it  was  wrong 
for  JewisjL-Christians  to  go  on  observing  it  if  they  wished. 
We  have  seen  Paul  observing  the  pa';snvpr  in  Philippi  (Acts 
20:6)  and  planning  to  reach  Jerusalem  for  Pentecost  (20:16). 
The  Judaizers  rankled  under  Paul's  victory  and  power  in 
spreading  the  gospel  among  the  Gentiles  and  gave  him  great 
trouble  in  Galatia  and  Corinth.  They  were  busy  against 
him  in  Jerusalem  also  and  it  was  to  undo  the  harm  done  by 
them  in  Jerusalem  that  Paul  gathered  the  great  collection 
from  the  Gentile  Christians  and  brought  it  with  him  and  the 
delegates  from  the  churches.  Clearly  then  Paul  had  real 
ground  for  his  apprehension  of  trouble  in  Jerusalem  while 
still  in  Corinth  (Rom.  15:25)  when  he  asked  for  the  prayers 
of  the  Roman  Christians  (verses  30-32).  The  repeated  warn- 
ings along  the  way  were  amply  justified. 

21.   They  have  been  informed  concerning  thee  {katechethesan 
peri  sou).   First  aorist  passive  indicative  of  katecheo.   A  word 


370      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

in  the  ancient  Greek,  but  a  few  examples  survive  in  the 
papyri.  It  means  to  sound  (echo,  from  echo,  our  word)  down 
(kata),  to  resound^  re-echo,  to  teach  orally.  Oriental  students 
today  (Arabs  learning  the  Koran)  often  study  aloud.  In 
\  the  N.T.  only  in  Luke  1:4  which  see;  Acts  18:25;  21:21;  I 
Cor.  14:19;  Gal.  6:6;  Rom.  2:18.  This  oral  teaching  about 
Paul  was  done  diligently  by  the  Judaizers  who  had  raised 
trouble  against  Peter  (Acts  11:2)  and  Paul  (15:1,  5).  They 
had  failed  in  their  attacks  on  Paul's  world  campaigns. 
Now  they  try  to  undermine  him  at  home.  In  Paul's  long 
absence  from  Jerusalem,  since  18:22,  they  have  had  a  free 
hand,  save  what  opposition  James  would  give,  and  have  had 
great  success  in  prejudicing  the  Jerusalem  Christians  against 
Paul.  So  James,  in  the  presence  of  the  other  elders  and 
probably  at  their  suggestion,  feels  called  upon  to  tell  Paul 
the  actual  situation.  That  thou  teachest  all  the  Jews  which 
are  among  the  Gentiles  to  forsake  Moses  {hoti  apostasian 
didaskeis  apo  Mouse os  tous  kata  ta  ethne  pantas  loudaious). 
Two  accusatives  with  didaskeis  (verb  of  teaching)  according 
to  rule.  Literally,  "That  thou  art  teaching  all  the  Jews 
among  {kata)  the  Gentiles  (the  Jews  of  the  dispersion  as  in 
2:9)  apostasy  from  Moses."  That  is  the  point,  the  dreadful 
word  apostasian  (ouna^ostasy) ,  a  late  form  (I  Mace.  2:15) 
for  the  earlier  apostasis  (cf.  II  Thess.  2:3  for  apostasia). 
"In  the  eyes  of  the  church  at  Jerusalem  this  was  a  far  more 
serious  matter  than  the  previous  question  at  the  Conference 
about  the  status  of  Gentile  converts"  (Furneaux).  Paul  had 
brought  that  issue  to  the  Jerusalem  Conference  because  of 
the  contention  of  the  Judaizers.  But  here  it  is  not  the 
Judaizers,  but  the  elders  of  the  church  with  James  as  their 
spokesman  on  behalf  of  the  church  as  a  whole.  They  do  not 
believe  this  false  charge,  but  they  wish  Paul  to  set  it  straight. 
Paul  had  made  his  position  clear  in  his  Epistles  (I  Corin- 
thians, Galatians,  Romans)  for  all  who  cared  to  know. 
Telling  them  not  to  circumcise  their  children  {legon  me  peritem- 


I 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  371 

nein  autous  ta  tekna).  The  participle  legon  agrees  with  "thou" 
(Paul),  the  subject  of  didaskeis.  This  is  not  indirect  asser- 
tion, but  indirect  command,  hence  the  negative  me  in- 
stead of  Qu  with  the  infinitive  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  1046). 
The  point  is  not^  that  Paul  stated  what  the  Jewish  Chris- 
tian's in  the  dispersion  do,  but  that  he  says  that  they 
{autous  accusative  of  general  reference)  are  not  to  go  on 
circumcising  {periternnein,  present  active  infinitive)  their 
children.  Paul  taught  x\]e  vpry  nppnRitp  (I  Cor.  7:18)  and  had 
Timothy  circumcised  (Acts  16:3)  because  he  was  half  Jew 
and  half  Greek.  His  own  practice  is  stated  in  I  Cor,  9:19 
("to  the  Jews  as  a  Jew").  Neither  to  walk  after  the  customs 
{mede  tois  ethesin  peripatein) .  Locative  case  with  infinitive 
peripatein.  The  charge  was  here  enlarged  to  cover  it  all  and 
to  make  Paul  out  an  enemy  of  Jewish  life  and  teach- 
ings. That  same  charge  had  been  made  against  Stephen 
when  young  Saul  (Pauljwas  the  leader  (6:14):  "Will  change 
the  customs  (ethe  the  very  word  used  here)  which  Moses 
delivered  unto  us."  It  actually  seemed  that  some  of  the 
Jews  cared  more  for  Moses  thaiL-£Qr_God  (Acts  6:11).  So 
much  for  the  charge  of  the  Judaizers. 

22.  What  is  it  therefore?  {Ti  oun  estin?).  See  this  form  of 
question  by  Paul  (I  Cor.  14:15,  26).  What  is  to  be  done 
about  it.''  Clearly  James  and  the  elders  do  not  believe  these 
misrepresentations  of  Paul's  teaching,  but  many  do.  They 
wiUcertainh  hear  {pantos  akousontai).  Pantos  is  old  adverb, 
by  all  means,  altogether,  wholly,  certainly  as  here  and  28:4; 
Luke  4:23;  I  Cor.  9:10.  This  future  middle  of  akoud  is  the 
usual  form  instead  of  akouso.  There  was  np  way  to  conceal 
Paul's  arrival  noi^was  it  wise  to  do  so.  B  C  and  several 
cursives  omit  dei  plethos  sunelthein  (The  multitude  must 
needs  come  together). 

23.  Do  therefore  this  {touto  oun  poieson).  The  elders  had 
thought  out  a  plan  of  procedure  by  which  Paul  could  set 
the  whole  matter  straight.    We  have  {eisin  hemin).    "There 


372      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

are  to  us"  (dative  of  possession  as  in  i8:io).  Apparently 
members  of  the  Jerusalem  church.  Which  have  a  vow  on  them 
(euchen  echontes  aph" — or  eph'  heautbn).  Apparently  a  tem- 
porary Nazarite  vow  like  that  in  Numb.  6:1-21  and  its  com- 
pletion was  marked  by  several  offerings  in  the  temple, 
the  shaving  of  the  head  (Numb.  6:13-15).  Either  Paul 
or  Aquila  had  such  a  vow  on  leaving  Cenchreae  (Acts 
18:18).  "It  was  considered  a  work  of  piety  to  relieve  needy 
Jews  from  the  expenses  connected  with  this  vow,  as  Paul 
does  here"  (Page).  The  reading  aph'  heautbn  would  mean 
that  they  had  taken  the  vow  voluntarily  or  of  themselves 
(Luke  12:57;  II  Cor.  3:5),  while  eph  heauton  means  that 
the  vow  lies  on  them  still. 

24.  These  take  {toutous  paralahbn).  Second  aorist  active 
participle  of  paralambanb.  Taking  these  alone.  Purify  thy- 
self with  them  {hagnistheti  sun  autois).  First  aorist  passive 
imperative  of  hagnizb,  old  verb  to  purify,  to  make  pure 
(hagnos).  See  the  active  voice  in  James  4:8;  I  Peter  1:22; 
I  John  3:3.  It  is  possible  to  see  the  full  passive  force  here, 
"Be  purified."  But  a  number  of  aorist  passives  in  the  Koine 
supplant  the  aorist  middle  forms  and  preserve  the  force  of 
the  middle  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  819).  That  is  possible 
here.  Hence,  "Purify  thyself"  is  allowable.  The  word 
occurs  in  Numb.  67ifortakmg  the  Nazarite  vow.  The  point 
tX  is  that  Paul  takes  the  vow  with  them.  Note  hagnismou  in 
verse  26.  Be  at  charges  for  them  (dapaneson  ep*  autois).  First 
aorist  active  imperative  of  old  verb  dapanab,  to  incur  ex- 
pense, expend.  Spend  (money)  upon  (<?/>')  them.  Ramsay 
{St.  Paul  the  Traveller,  etc.,  p.  310)  argues  that  Paul  had  use 
of  considerable  money  at  this  period,  perhaps  from  his 
father's  estate.  The  charges  for  five  men  would  be  con- 
siderable. "A  poor  man  would  not  have  been  treated  with 
the  respect  paid  him  at  Caesarea,  on  the  voyage,  and  at 
Rome"  (Furneaux).  That  they  may  shave  their  heads  (hina 
xuresontai    ten    kephaleu).      Note    ten    kephalen,    the    head 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  373 

(singular).  Future  middle  indicative  of  xurao,  late  form  for 
the  old  xureo,  to  shave,  middle  to  shave  oneself  or  (causative) 
to  get  oneself  shaved.  This  use  of  hina  with  the  future  in- 
dicative is  like  the  classic  hopos  with  the  future  indicative 
and  is  common  in  the  N.T.  as  in  the  Koine  (Robertson, 
Grammar,  p.  984).  ^nd  all  shall  know  {kai  gnosontai).  This 
future  middle  indicative  of  ginosko  (cf.  akousontai  in  verse 
22)  may  be  independent  of  hina  or  dependent  on  it  like 
xuresontai,  though  some  MSS.  (H  L  P)  have  gnosin  (second 
aorist  subjunctive,  clearly  dependent  on  hina).  Of  which 
(hon).  Genitive  plural  of  the  relative  ha  (accusative)  ob- 
ject of  the  perfect  passive  verb  katechentai  (cf.  verse  21 
katechethesan)  attracted  into  the  case  of  the  omitted  ante- 
cedent touton.  The  instruction  still  in  effect.  But  that  thou 
thyself  walkest  orderly  {alia  stoicheis  kai  autos).  Stoicheis  is  an 
old  verb  to  go  in  ajow  (from  stoichos,  row,  rank,  series),  to 
jtralkJii  a  line  or  bv  rule.  In  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Gal. 
5:25;  Rom.  4:12;  Phil.  3:16.  The  rule  is  the  law  and  Paul 
was  not  a  sidestepper.  The  idea  of  the  verb  is  made  plain  by 
the  participle  phulasson  ton  nomon  (keeping  or  observing  the 
law). 

25.  We  wrote  (epesteilamen).  First  aorist  active  of  epis- 
telloj  to  send  to  and  so  to  write  like  our  epistle  (epistole).  Old 
verb,  but  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Acts  15:20;  Heb.  13:22. 
It  is  the  very  word  used  by  James  in  this  "judgment"  at  the 
Conference  (Acts  15:20,  episteilai).  B  D  here  read  apesteila- 
men  from  apostello,  to  send  away,  to  give  orders.  Wendt  and 
Schuerer  object  to  this  as  a  gloss.  Rather  is  it  an  explanation 
by  James  that  h^  Hopr  not  rpfpr  to  the  Gentile  Christians 
whose  freedom  from  the  Mosaic  ceremonial  law  was  guaran- 
teed at  the  Jerusalem  Conference.  James  himself  presided  at 
that  Conference  and  offered  the  resolution  that  was  unan- 
imously adopted.  James  stands  by  that  agreement  and 
repeats  the  main  items  (four:  anything  sacrificed  to  idols, 
blood,  anything  strangled,  fornication,  for  discussion  see 


374     WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

ch.  15)  from  which  they  are  to  keep  themselves  (direct 
middle  phulassesthai  of  phulasso,  indirect  command  after 
krinantes  with  accusative,  autous,  of  general  reference). 
James  has  thus  again  cleared  the  air  about  the  Gentiles 
who  have  believed  (pepisteukotouy  perfect  active  participle 
genitive  plural  of  pisteud).  He  asks  that  Paul  will  stand 
by  the  right  of  Jewish  Christians  to  keep  on  observing  the 
Mosaic  law.   He  has  put  the  case  squarely  and  fairly. 

26.  7*00^  the  men  {paralabbn  tous  andras).  The  very 
phrase  used  in  verse  24  to  Paul.  The  next  day  {tei  echomenei). 
One  of  the  phrases  in  20:15  for  the  coming  day.  Locative 
case  of  time.  Purifying  himself  with  them  {sun  autois  hagnis- 
theis,  first  aorist  passive  participle  of  hagnizo).  The  precise 
language  again  of  the  recommendation  in  verse  24.  Paul 
w^.^  fj-pnforming  to  the  letter.  Went  into  the  temple  {eiseiei 
eis  to  hieron).  Imperfect  active  of  eiseimi  as  in  verse  18 
which  see.  Went  on  into  the  temple,  descriptive  imperfect. 
Paul  joined  the  four  men  in  their  vow  of  separation.  Declar- 
ing (diaggellon).  To  the  priests  what  day  he  would  report 
the  fulfilment  of  the  vow.  The  priests  would  desire  notice 
of  the  sacrifice.  This  verb  only  used  by  Luke  in  N.T.  except 
Rom.  11:17  (quotation  from  the  LXX).  It  is  not  necessary 
to  assume  that  the  vows  of  each  of  the  five  expired  on  the 
same  day  (Rackham).  Until  the  offering  was  offered  for  every 
one  of  them  {heds  hou  prosenechthe  huper  henos  hekastou  auton 
he  prosphora).  This  use  of  heos  hou  (like  heos,  alone)  with 
the  first  aorist  passive  indicative  prosenechthe  of  prosphero,  to 
offer,  contemplates  the  final  result  (Robertson,  Grammar^ 
pp.  974f.)  and  is  probably  the  statement  of  Luke  added  to 
Paul's  announcement.  He  probably  went  into  the  temple  one 
/  day  for  each  of  the  brethren  and  one  for  himself.  The  ques- 
tion arises  whether  Paul  acted  wisely  or  unwisely  in  agreeing 
to  the  suggestion  of  James.  What  he  did  was  in  perfect  har- 
>J  mony  with  his  principle  of  jxcommodation  in  I  Cor.  9:20 
wheji  nr>  prinripjp  wac  miAclyfj^     It  is  charged  that  here  on 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  375 

this  occasion  Paul  was  undulvinfluenced  by  rnnsirlfratiorLa^ 
expediency  and  was  willing  for  the  Jewish  Christians  to 
believe  him  more  of  a  Jew  than  was  true  in  order  to  placate 
the  situation  in  Jerusalem.  Furneaux  calls  it  a  compromise 
and  a  failure.  I  do  not  so  see  it.  To  say  that  is  to  obscure  the 
whxde-jCQgiplex  situation.  What  Paul  did  was  not  for  the 
purpose  of  conciliating  his  opponents,  the  Judaizers,  who  had 
diligently  spread  falsehoods  about  him  in  Jerusalem  as  in 
Corinth.  It  was  solely  to  break  the  power  of  these  "false 
apostles"  over  the  thousands  in  Jerusalem  who  have  been 
deluded  by  Paul's  accusers.  So  far  as  the  evidence  goes  that 
thing  was  accomplished.  In  the  trouble  that  comes  in 
Jerusalem  and  Caesarea  the  Judaizers  cut  no  figure  at  all. 
The  Jewish  Christians  do  not  appear  in  Paul's  behalf,  but 
there  was  no  opportunity  for  them  to  do  so.  The  explosion 
that  came  on  the  last  day  of  Paul's  appearance  in  the  temple 
was  wholly  disconnected  from  his  offerings  for  the  four 
brethren  and  himself.  It  must  be  remembered  that  Paul  had 
many  kinds  of  enemies.  The  attack  on  him  by  these  Jews 
from  Asia  had  no  connexion  whatever  with  the  slanders 
of  the  Judaizers  about  Paul's  alleged  teachings  that  Jewish 
Christians  in  the  dispersion  should  depart  from  the  Mosaic 
law.  That  slander  was  put  to  rest  forever  by  his  following 
the  advice  of  James  and  justifies  the  wisdom  of  that  advice 
and  Paul's  conduct  about  it. 

27.  The  seven  days  (hai  hepta  h enter ai).  For  which  Paul 
had  taken  the  vow,  though  there  may  be  an  allusion  to  the 
Pentecostal  week  for  which  Paul  had  desired  to  be  present 
(20:16).  There  is  no  necessary  connexion  with  the  vow  in 
18:15.  I^  24-17  Paul  makes  a  general  reference  to  his  purpose 
in  coming  to  Jerusalem  to  bring  alms  and  offerings  (pros- 
pkoras,  sacrifices).  Paul  spent  seven  days  in  Troas  (20:6), 
Tyre  (21:4),  and  had  planned  for  seven  here  if  not  more. 
It  was  on  the  last  of  the  seven  days  when  Paul  was  complet- 
ing his  offerings  about  the  vows  on  all  five  that  the  incident 


376      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

occurred  that  was  to  make  him  a  prisoner  for  five  years. 
When  they  saw  him  in  the  temple  {theasamenoi  auton  en  tbi 
hieroi).  First  aorist  middle  participle  of  theaomai  (from 
thea,  a  view,  cf.  theatre)  to  behold.  In  the  very  act  of  honour- 
ing the  temple  these  Jews  from  Asia  raise  a  hue  and  cry  that 
he  is  dishonouring  it.  Paul  was  not  known  by  face  now  to 
many  of  the  Jerusalem  Jews,  though  once  the  leader  of  the 
persecution  after  the  death  of  Stephen  and  the  outstanding 
young  Jew  of  the  day.  But  the  Jews  in  Ephesus  knew  him 
only  too  well,  some  of  whom  are  here  at  the  pentecostal  feast. 
They  had  plotted  against  him  in  Ephesus  to  no  purpose  (Acts 
19:23-41;  20:19),  t>ut  now  a  new  opportunity  had  come.  It 
is  possible  that  the  cry  was  led  by  Alexander  put  forward 
by  the  Jews  in  Ephesus  (19:33)  who  may  be  the  same  as 
Alexander  the  coppersmith  who  did  Paul  so  much  harm  (II 
Tim.  4:14).  Paul  was  not  in  the  inner  sanctuary  {ho  naos), 
but  only  in  the  outer  courts  {to  hieron).  Stirred  up  all  the  mul- 
titude {sunecheon  panta  ton  ochlon).  Imperfect  (kept  on) 
active  of  suncheb  or  sunchunb  {-unnb),  to  pour  together,  to 
confuse  as  in  Acts  2:6;  9:22;  19:31,  32;  21:31  and  here  to  stir 
up  by  the  same  sort  of  confusion  created  by  Demetrius  in 
Ephesus  where  the  same  word  is  used  twice  (19:31,  32). 
The  Jews  from  Ephesus  had  learned  it  from  Demetrius 
the  silversmith.  Laid  hands  on  him  {epebalan  ep^  auton  tas 
cheiras).  Second  aorist  (ingressive,  with  endings  of  the  first 
aorist,  -an)  active  indicative  of  epiballb,  old  verb  to  lay  upon, 
to  attack  (note  repetition  of  epi).  They  attacked  and  seized 
Paul  before  the  charge  was  made. 

28.  Help  {boetheite).  Present  active  imperative  of  boetheb, 
to  run  {theb)  at  a  cry  {boe),  as  if  an  outrage  had  been  com- 
mitted like  murder  or  assault.  All  men  everywhere  {pantas 
pantachei).  Alliterative.  Pantachei  is  a  variation  in  MSS., 
often  pantachou,  and  here  only  in  the  N.T.  The  charges 
against  Paul  remind  one  of  those  against  Stephen  (Acts 
6:13)  in  which  Paul  had  participated  according  to  his  con- 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  377 

fession  (22:20).  Like  the  charges  against  Stephen  and  Jesus 
before  him  truth  and  falsehood  are  mixed.  Paul  had  said 
that  being  a  Jew  would  not  save  a  man.  He  had  taught  the 
law  of  Moses  was  not  binding  on  Gentiles.  He  did  hold, 
like  Jesus  and  Stephen,  that  the  temple  was  not  the  only 
place  to  worship  God.  But  Paul  gloried  himself  in  being  a 
Jew,  considered  the  Mosaic  law  righteous  for  Jews,  and  was 
honouring  the  temple  at  this  very  moment.  And  moreover  also 
he  brought  Greeks  also  into  the  temple  {eti  te  kai  Hellenas  eisega- 
gen  eis  to  hieron).  Note  the  three  particles  {eti  te  kai),  and  {te) 
still  more  {eti)  also  or  even  {kai).  Worse  than  his  teaching 
{didaskon)  is  his  dreadful  deed:  he  actually  brought  {eisega- 
gen,  second  aorist  active  indicative  of  eisago).  This  he  had 
a  right  to  do  if  they  only  went  into  the  court  of  the  Gentiles. 
But  these  Jews  mean  to  imply  that  Paul  had  brought  Greeks 
beyond  this  court  into  the  court  of  Israel.  An  inscription 
was  found  by  Clermont-Ganneau  in  Greek  built  into  the 
walls  of  a  mosque  on  the  Via  Dolorosa  that  was  on  the  wall 
dividing  the  court  of  Israel  from  the  court  of  the  Gentiles. 
Death  was  the  penalty  to  any  Gentile  who  crossed  over 
into  the  Court  of  Israel  {The  Athenaeum,  July,  1871).  Hath 
defiled  this  holy  place  {kekoinoken  ton  hagion  topon  touton). 
Present  perfect  active  of  koinoo,  to  make  common  (see  on 
10:14).  Note  vivid  change  of  tense,  the  defilement  lasts 
(state  of  completion).  All  this  is  the  substance  of  the  call 
of  these  shrewd  conspirators  from  Ephesus,  Jews  (not 
Jewish  Christians,  not  even  Judaizers)  who  hated  him  for 
his  work  there  and  who  probably  "spoke  evil  of  the  Way 
before  the  multitude"  there  so  that  Paul  had  to  separate  the 
disciples  from  the  synagogue  and  go  to  the  School  of  Tyran- 
nus  (i9:9f.).  These  enemies  of  Paul  had  .now  raised  the  cry 
of  "fire"  and  vanish  from  the  scene  completely  (24:19). 
This  charge  was  absolutely  false  as  we  shall  see,  made  out 
of  inferences  of  hate  and  suspicion. 

29.  For  {gar).    Luke  adds  the  reason  for  the  wild  charges 


378      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

made  against  Paul.  They  had  before  seen  (esan  proeorakotes). 
Periphrastic  past  perfect  of  proorao,  old  verb  to  see  before, 
whether  time  or  place.  Only  twice  in  the  N.T.,  here  and 
Acts  2:25  quoted  from  Psa.  15:8.  Note  the  double  reduplica- 
tion in  -eo-  as  in  Attic  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  364).  With 
him  in  the  city  Trophimus  the  Ephesian  {Trophimon  ton 
Ephesion  en  tei  polei  sun  autoi).  The  Jews  from  Asia  (Ephe- 
sus)  knew  Trophimus  by  sight  as  well  as  Paul.  One  day 
they  saw  both  of  them  together  (sun)  in  the  city.  That  was  a 
fact.  They  had  just  seized  Paul  in  the  temple  {hieron).  That 
was  another  fact.  They  supposed  (enomizon).  Imperfect  ac- 
tive of  nomizo,  common  to  think  or  suppose.  Perfectly  harm- 
less word,  but  they  did,  as  so  many  people  do,  put  their  sup- 
posed inference  on  the  same  basis  with  the  facts.  They  did 
not  see  Trophimus  with  Paul  now  in  the  temple,  nor  had 
they  ever  seen  him  there.  They  simply  argued  that,  if  Paul 
was  willing  to  be  seen  down  street  with  a  Greek  Christian, 
he  would  not  hesitate  to  bring  him  (therefore,  did  bring 
him,  eisegagen  as  in  verse  28)  into  the  temple,  that  is  into 
the  court  of  Israel  and  therefore  both  Paul  and  Trophimus 
were  entitled  to  death,  especially  Paul  who  had  brought  him 
in  (if  he  had)  and,  besides,  they  now  had  Paul.  This  is  the 
way  of  the  mob-mind  in  all  ages.  Many  an  innocent  man 
has  been  rushed  to  his  death  by  the  fury  of  a  lynching  party. 
30.  All  the  city  was  shaken  (ekinethe  he  polis  hole).  First 
aorist  passive  of  kineo,  common  verb  for  violent  motion  and 
emotion.  See  also  24:5  where  the  word  is  used  byTertullus 
of  Paul  as  the  stirrer  up  of  riots!  The  people  ran  together 
{egeneto  sundrome  tou  laou).  Rather,  There  came  a  running 
together  (sun-drome  from  sun-trecho)  of  the  people.  The 
cry  spread  like  wildfire  over  the  city  and  there  was  a  pell- 
mell  scramble  or  rush  to  get  to  the  place  of  the  disturbance. 
They  laid  hold  on  Paul  (epilabomenoi  tou  Paulou).  Second 
aorist  middle  participle  of  epilamhanomai  with  the  genitive 
(cf.  epebalan  in  verse  27).    Dragged  (heilkon).    Imperfect  ac- 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  379 

tive  of  helko  (and  also  helkuo),  old  verb  to  drag  or  draw. 
Imperfect  tense  vividly  pictures  the  act  as  going  on.  They 
were  saving  the  temple  by  dragging  Paul  outside.  Curiously 
enough  both  epilahomenoi  and  heilkusan  occur  in  16:19 
about  the  arrest  of  Paul  and  Silas  in  Philippi.  Straightway 
the  doors  were  shut  [eutheos  ekleisthesan  hai  thurai).  With 
a  bang  and  at  once.  First  aorist  (effective)  passive  of  kleib. 
The  doors  between  the  inner  court  and  the  court  of  the 
Gentiles.  But  this  was  only  the  beginning,  the  preparation 
for  the  .real  work  of  the  mob.  They  did  not  wish  to  defile  the 
holy  place  with  blood.   The  doors  were  shut  by  the  Levites. 

31.  As  they  were  seeking  to  kill  him  {zetoujiton  auton). 
Genitive  absolute  of  zeteo,  to  seek,  without  auton  (they). 
This  was  their  real  purpose.  Tidings  (phasis).  From  phaino, 
to  show.  Old  word  for  the  work  of  informers  and  then  the 
exposure  of  secret  crime.  In  LXX.  Here  only  in  the  N.T. 
Came  up  (anebe).  Naturally  in  the  wild  uproar.  The  Roman 
guard  during  festivals  was  kept  stationed  in  the  Tower  of 
Antonia  at  the  northwest  corner  of  the  temple  overlooking 
the  temple  and  connected  by  stairs  (verse  35).  To  the  chief 
captain  {toi  chiliarchoi) .  Commander  of  a  thousand  men  or 
cohort  (Mark  15:16).  His  name  was  Claudius  Lysias.  Of  the 
band  (tes  speires).  Each  legion  had  six  tribunes  and  so 
each  tribune  (chiliarch)  had  a  thousand  if  the  cohort  had 
its  full  quota.  See  on  10:1 ;  27:1 .  The  word  is  the  Latin  spira 
(anything  rolled  up).  Note  the  genitive  speires  instead  of 
speiras  (Attic).  fFas  in  confusion  {sunchunnetai) .  Present 
passive  indicative  of  sunchunno  (see  verse  27,  sunecheon). 
This  is  what  the  conspirators  had  desired. 

32.  Forthwith  (exautes).  Common  in  the  Koine  {ex  autes, 
supply  horaSy  hour).  He  took  (paralabon).  See  verses  24  and 
26.  Centurions  (hekatontarchas).  See  on  Luke  7:2  for  discus- 
sion. Plural  shows  that  Lysias  the  chiliarch  took  several 
hundred  soldiers  along  (a  centurion  with  each  hundred). 
Ran  down  (katedramen).     Effective  second  aorist  active  in- 


38o      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

dicative  of  katatrechb.  From  the  tower  of  Antonia,  vivid 
scene.  And  they  {hoi  de).  Demonstrative  use  of  hoi.  The 
Jewish  mob  who  had  begun  the  work  of  killing  Paul  (verse 
31).  Left  off  beating  Paul  {epausanto  tuptontes  ton  Paulon). 
The  participle  with  pauomai  describes  what  they  were 
already  doing,  the  supplementary  participle  (Robertson, 
Grammar,  p.  1121).  They  stopped  before  the  job  was  over 
because  of  the  sudden  onset  of  the  Roman  soldiers.  Some 
ten  years  before  in  a  riot  at  the  passover  the  Roman  guard 
marched  down  and  in  the  panic  several  hundred  were 
trampled  to  death. 

33.  Came  near  {eggisas).  First  aorist  active  participle  of 
eggizo,  to  draw  near,  Koine  verb  from  eggus,  near,  and  com- 
mon in  the  N.T.  Laid  hold  on  him  {epelabeto  antou).  See  same 
verb  in  verse  30.  To  be  bound  (dethenai).  First  aorist  passive 
infinitive  of  deo  (see  verse  11).  With  two  chains  (halusesi 
dusi).  Instrumental  case  of  halusis,  old  word  from  a  priva- 
tive and  luo  (not  loosing,  i.e.  chaining).  With  two  chains 
as  a  violent  and  seditious  person,  probably  leader  of  a  band 
of  assassins  (verse  38).  See  on  Mark  54.  Inquired  {epun- 
thaneto).  Imperfect  middle  of  punthanomai,  old  and  common 
verb  used  mainly  by  Luke  in  the  N.T.  Lysias  repeated  his 
inquiries.  Who  he  was  {tis  eie).  Present  active  optative  of 
eimi  changed  from  estin  (present  indicative)  in  the  indirect 
question,  a  change  not  obligatory  after  a  past  tense,  but 
often  done  in  the  older  Greek,  rare  in  the  N.T.  (Robertson, 
Grammar,  p.  I043f.).  And  what  he  had  done  (kai  ti  estin  pepoi- 
ekos).  Periphrastic  perfect  active  indicative  of  poieo  here 
retained,  not  changed  to  the  optative  as  is  true  of  eie  from 
estin  in  the  same  indirect  question,  illustrating  well  the  free- 
dom about  it. 

34.  Some  shouting  one  thing,  some  another  (alloi  alio  ti  epe- 
phonoun).  Same  idiom  of  alloi  alio  as  in  19:32  which  see.  The 
imperfect  of  epiphoneo,  to  call  out  to,  suits  well  the  idiom. 
This  old  verb  occurs  in  the  N.T.  only  in  Luke  and  Acts 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  381 

(already  in  12:22).  When  he  could  not  know  {me  dunamenou 
autou  gnonai).  Genitive  absolute  of  present  middle  participle 
of  dunamai  with  negative  me  and  second  aorist  active  infini- 
tive of  ginosko.  The  certainty  {to  asphales).  Neuter  articular 
adjective  from  a  privative  and  sphalloy  to  make  totter  or  fall. 
Old  word,  in  the  N.T.  only  in  Acts  21:34;  22:30;  25:26; 
Phil.  3:1;  Heb.  6:19.  Into  the  castle  {eis  ten  parembolen). 
KoinS  word  from  paremballo,  to  cast  in  by  the  side  of,  to 
assign  soldiers  a  place,  to  encamp  (see  on  Luke  19:43).  So 
parembole  comes  to  mean  an  interpolation,  then  an  army 
drawn  up  (Heb.  11:34),  but  mainly  an  encampment  (Heb. 
13:11,  13),  frequent  in  Polybius  and  LXX.  So  here  barracks 
of  the  Roman  soldiers  in  the  tower  of  Antonia  as  in  verse  37; 
22:24;  23:10,  16,  32. 

35.  Upon  the  stairs  {epi  tous  anahathmous).  From  ana^  up, 
and  baino,  to  go.  Late  word,  in  LXX  and  KoinS  writers. 
In  the  N.T.  only  here  and  verse  40.  So  it  was  {sunebe). 
Second  aorist  active  of  sumbaino,  to  happen  (see  on  20:19) 
with  infinitive  clause  as  subject  here  as  often  in  the  old 
Greek.  He  was  borne  {bastazesthai  auton).  Accusative  of 
general  reference  with  this  subject  infinitive,  present  passive 
of  bastazo,  to  take  up  with  the  hands,  literally  as  here.  Vio- 
lence {bian).  See  on  Acts  5:26.  Biazo,  to  use  force,  is  from 
hia. 

36.  Followed  after  {ekolouthei) .  Imperfect  active  of  ako- 
lutheoj  was  following.  Cheated  of  their  purpose  to  lynch 
Paul,  they  were  determined  to  have  his  blood.  Crying  out 
{krazontes).  Construction  according  to  sense,  plural  mascu- 
line participle  agreeing  with  neuter  singular  substantive 
plethos  (Robertson,  Grammar^  p.  401).  Away  with  him  {Aire 
auton).  The  very  words  used  by  the  mob  to  Pilate  when  they 
chose  Barabbas  in  preference  to  Jesus  (Luke  23  :i8,  Aire  tou- 
ton).  He  will  hear  it  again  from  this  same  crowd  (Acts  22 :22). 
It  is  the  present  imperative  {aire)  as  in  Luke  23  :i8,  but  some 
may  have  used  the  urgent  aorist  active  imperative  as  also 


382      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

in  the  case  of  Jesus  (John  19:15,  dron,  droit  with  stauroson 
added).  Luke  does  not  say  that  this  mob  demanded  crucifix- 
ion for  Paul.  He  was  learning  what  it  was  to  share  the  suffer- 
ings of  Christ  as  the  sullen  roar  of  the  mob's  yells  rolled  on 
and  on  in  his  ears. 

37.  May  I  say  something  unto  thee?  {Ei  exestin  moi  eipein 
ti  pros  se?).  On  this  use  of  ei  in  a  direct  question  see  on  i  :6. 
The  calm  self-control  of  Paul  in  the  presence  of  this  mob 
is  amazing.  His  courteous  request  to  Lysias  was  in  Greek  to 
the  chiliarch's  amazement.  Dost  thou  know  Greek?  {Hel- 
lenisti  ginoskeis?).  Old  Greek  adverb  in  -i  from  Hellenizo, 
meaning  "in  Greek."  "Do  you  know  it  in  Greek?"  In  the 
N.T.  only  here  and  John  19:20.  Art  thou  not  then  the  Egyp- 
tian? (Ouk  ara  su  ei  ho  Aiguptios?).  Expects  the  answer  Yes 
and  ara  argues  the  matter  (therefore).  The  well-known  {ho) 
Egyptian  who  had  given  the  Romans  so  much  trouble. 
Stirred  up  to  sedition  (anastatosas).  First  aorist  active  par- 
ticiple of  anastatoo,  a  late  verb  from  anastatos,  outcast,  and 
so  to  unsettle,  to  stir  up,  to  excite,  once  known  only  in  LXX 
and  Acts  17:6  (which  see);  21:38;  Gal.  5:12,  but  now  found 
in  several  papyri  examples  with  precisely  this  sense  to  upset. 
Of  the  Assassins  {ton  sikarion).  Latin  word  sicarius,  one 
who  carried  a  short  sword  sica  under  his  cloak,  a  cutthroat. 
Josephus  uses  this  very  word  for  bands  of  robbers  under  this 
Egyptian  {fVar  II.  17,  6  and  13,  5;  Ant.  XX.  8,  10).  Jose- 
phus says  that  there  were  30,000  who  gathered  on  the  Mount 
of  Olives  to  see  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  fall  down  and  not 
merely  4,000  as  Lysias  does  here.  But  Lysias  may  refer  to 
the  group  that  were  armed  thus  (banditti)  the  core  of  the 
mob  of  30,000.  Lysias  at  once  saw  by  Paul's  knowledge  of 
Greek  that  he  was  not  the  famous  Egyptian  who  led  the 
Assassins  and  escaped  himself  when  Felix  attacked  and  slew 
the  most  of  them. 

39.  /  am  {Ego  men  eimi).  In  contrast  with  the  wild  guess 
of  Lysias  Paul  uses  men  and  de.    He  tells  briefly  who  he  is: 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  383 

a  Jew  (loudaios)  by  race,  of  Tarsus  in  Cilicia  {Tar sens  Us 
Kilikias)  by  country,  belonging  to  Tarsus  (this  adjective 
Tarseus  only  here  and  Acts  9:11),  and  proud  of  it,  one  of  the 
great  cities  of  the  empire  with  a  great  university.  A  citizen 
of  no  mean  city  (ouk  asemou  poleos  polite s).  Litotes  again, 
"no  mean"  {asemos,  old  adjective,  unmarked,  a  privative 
and  sema,  mark,  insignificant,  here  only  in  the  N.T.).  This 
same  litotes  used  by  Euripides  of  Athens  {Ion  8).  But  Paul 
calls  himself  a  citizen  {polites)  of  Tarsus.  Note  the  "effective 
assonance"  (Page)  in  poleos  polites.  Paul  now  {de)  makes  his 
request  {deomai)  of  Lysias.  Give  me  leave  {epitrepson  moi). 
First  aorist  active  imperative  of  epitrepb,  old  and  common 
verb  to  turn  to,  to  permit,  to  allow.  It  was  a  strange  re- 
quest and  a  daring  one,  to  wish  to  speak  to  this  mob  howling 
for  Paul's  blood. 

40.  When  he  had  given  him  leave  {epitrepsantos  autou). 
Genitive  absolute  of  aorist  active  participle  of  the  same  verb 
epitrepo.  Standing  on  the  stairs  {hestos  epi  ton  anahathmon) . 
Second  perfect  active  participle  of  histemi,  to  place,  but  in- 
transitive to  stand.  Dramatic  scene.  Paul  had  faced  many 
audiences  and  crowds,  but  never  one  quite  like  this.  Most 
men  would  have  feared  to  speak,  but  not  so  Paul.  He  will 
speak  about  himself  only  as  it  gives  him  a  chance  to  put 
Christ  before  this  angry  Jewish  mob  who  look  on  Paul  as  a 
renegade  Jew,  a  turncoat,  a  deserter,  who  went  back  on 
Gamaliel  and  all  the  traditions  of  his  people,  who  not  only 
turned  from  Judaism  to  Christianity,  but  who  went  after 
Gentiles  and  treated  Gentiles  as  if  they  were  on  a  par  with 
Jews.  Paul  knows  only  too  well  what  this  mob  thinks  of  him. 
Beckoned  with  the  hand  {kateseise  tei  cheiri).  He  shook  down 
to  the  multitude  with  the  hand  (instrumental  case  cheiri)^ 
while  Alexander,  Luke  says  (19:33),  "shook  down  the  hand" 
(accusative  with  the  same  verb,  which  see).  In  26:1  Paul 
reached  out  the  hand  {ekteinas  ten  cheira).  When  there  was 
made  a  great  silence  {polles  siges  genomenes).    Genitive  abso- 


384      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

lute  again  with  second  aorist  middle  participle  of  ginomai, 
"much  silence  having  come."  Paul  waited  till  silence  had 
come.  In  the  Hebrew  language  {tei  Ehraidi  dialektoi).  The 
Aramaean  which  the  people  in  Jerusalem  knew  better  than 
the  Greek.  Paul  could  use  either  tongue  at  will.  His  enemies 
had  said  in  Corinth  that  "his  bodily  presence  was  weak 
and  his  speech  contemptible"  (II  Cor.  10:10).  But  surely 
even  they  would  have  to  admit  that  Paul's  stature  and  words 
reach  heroic  proportions  on  this  occasion.  Self-possessed 
with  majestic  poise  Paul  faces  the  outraged  mob  beneath 
the  stairs. 


CHAPTER  XXII 

I.  Brethren  and  fathers  {Andres  adelphoi  kai  pater es). 
Men,  brethren,  and  fathers.  The  very  language  used  by- 
Stephen  (7:2)  when  arraigned  before  the  Sanhedrin  with 
Paul  then  present.  Now  Paul  faces  a  Jewish  mob  on  the 
same  charges  brought  against  Stephen.  These  words  are 
those  of  courtesy  and  dignity  {amoris  et  honoris  nomina, 
Page).  These  men  were  Paul's  brother  Jews  and  were  (many 
of  them)  official  representatives  of  the  people  (Sanhedrists, 
priests,  rabbis).  Paul's  purpose  is  conciliatory,  he  employs 
"his  ready  tact"  (Rackham).  The  defence  which  I  now 
make  unto  you  {mou  tes  pros  humas  nuni  apologias).  Literally, 
My  defence  to  you  at  this  time.  Nuni  is  a  sharpened  form 
(by  -i)  of  nun  (now),  just  now.  The  term  apologia  (apology) 
is  not  our  use  of  the  word  for  apologizing  for  an  offence,  but 
the  original  sense  of  defence  for  his  conduct,  his  life.  It  is  an 
old  word  from  apologeomai,  to  talk  oneself  off  a  charge,  to 
make  defence.  It  occurs  also  in  Acts  25:16  and  then  also  in 
I  Cor.  9:3;  II  Cor.  7:11;  Phil.  1:7,  16;  II  Tim.  4:16;  I  Peter 
3:15.  Paul  uses  it  again  in  Acts  25:16  as  here  about  his  de- 
fence against  the  charges  made  by  the  Jews  from  Asia.  He 
is  suspected  of  being  a  renegade  from  the  Mosaic  law  and 
charged  with  specific  acts  connected  with  the  alleged  pro- 
fanation of  the  temple.  So  Paul  speaks  in  Aramaic  and  re- 
cites the  actual  facts  connected  with  his  change  from  Judaism 
to  Christianity.  The  facts  make  the  strongest  argument.  He 
first  recounts  the  well-known  story  of  his  zeal  for  Judaism 
in  the  persecution  of  the  Christians  and  shows  why  t-he 
change  came.  Then  he  gives  a  summary  of  his  work  among 
the  Gentiles  and  why  he  came  to  Jerusalem  this  time.  He 
answers  the  charge  of  enmity  to  the  people  and  the  law  and  of 

38s 


386      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

desecration  of  the  temple.  It  is  a  speech  of  great  skill  and 
force,  delivered  under  remarkable  conditions.  The  one  in 
chapter  26  covers  some  of  the  same  ground,  but  for  a  slightly 
different  purpose  as  we  shall  see.  For  a  discussion  of  the 
three  reports  in  Acts  of  Paul's  conversion  see  chapter  9. 
Luke  has  not  been  careful  to  make  every  detail  correspond, 
though  there  is  essential  agreement  in  all  three. 

2.  He  spake  (prosephonei).  Imperfect  active,  was  speaking. 
See  aorist  active  prosephonesen  in  21 :40.  They  were  the  more 
quiet  (mdllon  pareschon  hesuchian).  Literally,  The  more 
{mdllon)  they  furnished  or  supplied  (second  aorist  active 
indicative  of  parecho)  quietness  {hesuchian,  old  word,  in 
the  N.T.  only  here  and  II  Thess.  3:12;  I  Tim.  2:1  iff.). 
Precisely  this  idiom  occurs  in  Plutarch  {Cor.  18)  and  the 
LXX  (Job  34:29).  Knowling  notes  the  fondness  of  Luke  for 
words  of  silence  {sige,  sigao,  hesuchazo)  as  in  Luke  14:4; 
15:26;  Acts  11:18;  12:17;  15-12;  21:14,  40.  It  is  a  vivid 
picture  of  the  sudden  hush  that  swept  over  the  vast  mob 
under  the  spell  of  the  Aramaic.  They  would  have  under- 
stood Paul's  Koine  Greek,  but  they  much  preferred  the 
Aramaic.  It  was  a  masterstroke. 

3.  /  am  a  Jew  {Ego  eimi  aner  loudaios).  Note  use  of  Ego 
for  emphasis.  Paul  recounts  his  Jewish  advantages  or 
privileges  with  manifest  pride  as  in  Acts  26:4^ ;  II  Cor. 
11:22;  Gal.  1:14;  Phil.  3:4-7.  Born  {gegennemenos).  Perfect 
passive  participle  of  gennao.  See  above  in  21:39  for  the 
claim  of  Tarsus  as  his  birth-place.  He  was  a  Hellenistic 
Jew,  not  an  Aramaean  Jew  (cf.  Acts  6:1).  Brought  up  {anate- 
thrammenos) .  Perfect  passive  participle  again  of  anatrepho, 
to  nurse  up,  to  nourish  up,  common  old  verb,  but  in  the  N.T. 
only  here,  7:2oflF.,  and  MSS.  in  Luke  4:16.  The  implication 
is  that  Paul  was  sent  to  Jerusalem  while  still  young,  "from 
my  youth"  (26:4),  how  young  we  do  not  know,  possibly  thir- 
teen or  fourteen  years  old.  He  apparently  had  not  seen 
Jesus  in  the  flesh  (II  Cor.  5:16).    Jt  the  feet  of  Gamaliel  {pros 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  387 

tous  podas  Gamaliel).  The  rabbis  usually  sat  on  a  raised  seat 
with  the  pupils  in  a  circle  around  either  on  lower  seats  or 
on  the  ground.  Paul  was  thus  nourished  in  Pharisaic  Juda- 
ism as  interpreted  by  Gamaliel,  one  of  the  lights  of  Judaism. 
For  remarks  on  Gamaliel  see  chapter  5 :34fF.  He  was  one  of 
the  seven  Rabbis  to  whom  the  Jews  gave  the  highest  title 
Rabhan  (our  Rabbi).  Rabbi  (my  teacher)  was  next,  the 
lowest  being  Rab  (teacher).  "As  Aquinas  among  the  school- 
men was  called  Doctor  Angelicus,  and  Bonaventura  Doctor 
Seraphicus,  so  Gamaliel  was  called  the  Beauty  of  the  Law^^ 
(Conybeare  and  Howson),  Instructed  (pepaideumenos). 
Perfect  passive  participle  again  (each  participle  beginning  a 
clause),  this  time  of  paideud,  old  verb  to  train  a  child  (pais) 
as  in  7:22  which  see.  In  this  sense  also  in  I  Tim.  1:20;  Tit. 
2:12.  Then  to  chastise  as  in  Luke  23:16,  22  (which  see); 
n  Tim.  2:25;  Heb.  I2:6f.  According  to  the  strict  manner  (kata 
akribeian).  Old  word,  only  here  in  N.T.  Mathematical 
accuracy,  minute  exactness  as  seen  in  the  adjective  In  26:5. 
See  also  Rom.  10:2;  Gal.  1:4;  Phil.  3:4-7.  Of  our  fathers 
(patroiou).  Old  adjective  from  pater,  only  here  and  24:14 
in  N.T.  Means  descending  from  father  to  son,  especially 
property  and  other  inherited  privileges.  Patrikos  (patrician) 
refers  more  to  personal  attributes  and  affiliations.  Being 
zealous  for  God  {zelotes  huparchon  tou  theou).  Not  adjective, 
but  substantive  zealot  (same  word  used  by  James  of  the 
thousands  of  Jewish  Christians  in  Jerusalem,  21:20  which 
see)  with  objective  genitive  tou  theou  (for  God).  See  also 
verse  14;  28:17;  H  Tim.  1:3  where  he  makes  a  similar  claim. 
So  did  Peter  (Acts  3:13;  5:30)  and  Stephen  (7:32).  Paul 
definitely  claims,  whatever  freedom  he  demanded  for  Gentile 
Christians,  to  be  personally  "a  zealot  for  God"  "even  as  ye 
all  are  this  day"  {kathos  pantes  humeis  este  semeron).  In 
his  conciliation  he  went  to  the  limit  and  puts  himself  by  the 
side  of  the  mob  in  their  zeal  for  the  law,  mistaken  as  they 
were  about  him.    He  was  generous  surely  to  interpret  their 


388      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

fanatical  frenzy  as  zeal  for  God.    But  Paul  is  sincere  as  he 
proceeds  to  show  by  appeal  to  his  own  conduct. 

4.  And  I  (hos).  I  who,  literally.  This  Way  {tauten  ten 
hodon).  The  very  term  used  for  Christianity  by  Luke  con- 
cerning Paul's  persecution  (9:2),  which  see.  Here  it  "avoids 
any  irritating  name  for  the  Christian  body"  (Furneaux)  by 
using  this  Jewish  terminology.  Unto  the  death  {achri  thana- 
tou).  Unto  death,  actual  death  of  many  as  26:10  shows. 
Both  men  and  women  {andras  ie  kai  gunaikas).  Paul  felt 
ashamed  of  this  fact  and  it  was  undoubtedly  in  his  mind 
when  he  pictured  his  former  state  as  "a  blasphemer,  and  a 
persecutor,  and  injurious  (I  Tim.  i  :I3),  the  first  of  sinners** 
(I  Tim.  1:15).  But  it  showed  the  lengths  to  which  Paul 
went  in  his  zeal  for  Judaism. 

5.  Doth  bear  me  witness  {marturei  moi).  Present  active  in- 
dicative as  if  still  living.  Caiaphas  was  no  longer  high  priest 
now,  for  Ananias  is  at  this  time  (23:2),  though  he  may  be 
still  alive.  All  the  estate  of  the  elders  {pan  to  presbuterion). 
All  the  eldership  or  the  Sanhedrin  (4:5)  of  which  Paul  was 
probably  then  a  member  (26:10).  Possibly  some  of  those 
present  were  members  of  the  Sanhedrin  then  (some  20  odd 
years  ago).  From  whom  {par'  hon).  The  high  priest  and  the 
Sanhedrin.  Letters  unto  the  brethren  {epistalas  pros  tous 
adelphous) .  Paul  still  can  tactfully  call  the  Jews  his  "broth- 
ers" as  he  did  in  Rom.  9:3.  There  is  no  bitterness  in  his 
heart.  Journeyed  (eporeuomen) .  Imperfect  middle  indicative 
of  poreuomai,  and  a  vivid  reality  to  Paul  still  as  he  was  going 
on  towards  Damascus.  To  bring  also  (axon  kai).  Future 
active  participle  of  ago,  to  express  purpose,  one  of  the  few 
N.T.  examples  of  this  classic  idiom  (Robertson,  Grammar, 
p.  1 1 18).  Them  which  were  there  {tous  ekeise  ontas).  Con- 
structio  praegnans.  The  usual  word  would  be  ekei  (there), 
not  ekeise  (thither).  Possibly  the  Christians  who  had  fled  to 
Damascus,  and  so  were  there  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  548). 
In  bonds  {dedemenous) .     Perfect  passive  participle  of  deo. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  389 

predicate  position,  "bound."  For  to  he  punished  {hina 
timbrethosin) .  First  aorist  passive  subjunctive  of  timoreo, 
old  verb  to  avenge,  to  take  vengeance  on.  In  the  N.T.  only 
here,  and  26:11.  Pure  final  clause  with /if wa.  He  carried  his 
persecution  outside  of  Palestine  just  as  later  he  carried  the 
gospel  over  the  Roman  empire. 

6.  And  it  came  to  pass  {egeneto  de) .  Rather  than  the  common 
kai  egeneto  and  with  the  infinitive  (periastrapsai),  one  of  the 
three  constructions  with  kai  (de)  egeneto  by  Luke  (Robertson, 
Grammar,  pp.  I042f.),  followed  by  kai,  by  finite  verb,  by  sub- 
ject infinitive  as  here.  As  I  made  my  journey  (moi  poreuome- 
noi).  To  me  (dative  after  egeneto,  happened  to  me)  journey- 
ing (participle  agreeing  with  moi).  See  this  same  idiom  in 
verse  17.  Luke  uses  egeneto  de  seventeen  times  in  the  gospel 
and  twenty-one  in  the  Acts.  Unto  Damascus  [tei  Damaskbi). 
Dative  after  eggizonti  (drawing  nigh  to).  About  noon  [peri 
mesembrian).  Mid  (mesos)  day  (hemera),  old  word,  in  the 
N.T.  only  here  and  8:26  which  see  where  it  may  mean  "to- 
ward the  south."  An  item  not  in  ch.  9.  Shone  round  about  me 
(periastrapsai  peri  erne).  First  aorist  active  infinitive  oi peri- 
astrapto,  to  flash  around,  in  LXX  and  late  Greek,  in  the  N.T. 
only  here  and  9:3  which  see.  Note  repetition  oi  peri.  A  great 
light  (phos  hikanon).  Luke's  favourite  word  hikanon  (consid- 
erable). Accusative  of  general  reference  with  the  infinitive. 

7.  I  fell  (epesa).  Second  aorist  active  indicative  with  -a 
rather  than  epeson,  the  usual  form  of  pipto.  Unto  the  ground 
(eis  to  edaphos).  Old  word,  here  alone  in  N.T.  So  the  verb 
edaphizb,  is  in  Luke  19:44  alone  in  the  N.T.  A  voice  saying 
{phones  legouses).  Genitive  after  ekousa,  though  in  26:14  the 
accusative  is  used  after  ekousa,  as  in  22:14  after  akousai, 
either  being  allowable.  See  on  9:7  for  discussion  of  the 
difference  in  case.  Saul's  name  repeated  each  time  (9:4; 
22:7;  26:14).  Same  question  also  in  each  report:  "Why 
persecuted  thou  me?''  {Ti  me  dibkeis?).  These  piercing  words 
stuck  in  Paul's  mind. 


390      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

8.  Oj  Nazareth  {ho  Nazoraios).  The  Nazarene,  not  in  9:5 
or  26:15  and  here  because  Jesus  is  mentioned  now  for  the 
first  time  in  the  address.  The  form  Nazoraios  as  in  Matt. 
2:23  (which  see)  is  used  also  in  24:5  for  the  followers  of 
Jesus  instead  of  Nazarenos  as  in  Mark  1 124,  etc.  (which 
see). 

9.  But  they  heard  not  the  voice  {ten  de  phonen  ouk  ekousan). 
The  accusative  here  may  be  used  rather  than  the  genitive 
as  in  verse  7  to  indicate  that  those  with  Paul  did  not  under- 
stand what  they  heard  (9:7)  just  as  they  beheld  the  light 
(22:9),  but  did  not  see  Jesus  (9:7).  The  difference  in  cases 
allows  this  distinction,  though  it  is  not  always  observed  as 
just  noticed  about  22:14  and  26:14.  The  verb  akouo  is  used 
in  the  sense  of  understand  (Mark  4:33;  I  Cor.  14:2).  It  is 
one  of  the  evidences  of  the  genuineness  of  this  report  of 
Paul's  speech  that  Luke  did  not  try  to  smooth  out  apparent 
discrepancies  in  details  between  the  words  of  Paul  and  his 
own  record  already  in  ch.  9.  The  Textus  Receptus  adds  in 
this  verse:  "And  they  became  afraid"  {kai  emphoboi  ege- 
nonto).     Clearly  not  genuine. 

10.  Into  Damascus  {eis  Damaskon).  In  9:6  simply  "into 
the  city  "  {eis  ten  polin).  Of  all  things  which  {peri  pant  on  hon). 
Hon,  relative  plural  attracted  to  genitive  of  antecedent  from 
accusative  ha,  object  of  poiesai  {do).  Are  appointed  jor  thee 
{tetaktai  soi).  Perfect  passive  indicative  of  tasso,  to  appoint, 
to  order,  with  dative  soi.  Compare  with  hoti  se  dei  of  9:6. 
The  words  were  spoken  to  Paul,  of  course,  in  the  Aramaic, 
Saoul,  Saoul. 

11.  /  could  not  see  {ouk  enehlepon).  Imperfect  active  of 
emhlepo,  I  was  not  seeing,  same  fact  stated  in  9:8.  Here  the 
reason  as  "for  the  glory  of  that  light"  {apo  tes  doxes  tou 
photos  ekeinou).  Being  led  by  the  hand  {cheiragogoumenos). 
Present  passive  participle  of  cheiragogeo,  the  same  verb  used 
in  9:8  {cheiragogountes)  which  see.  Late  verb,  in  the  N.T. 
only  in  these  two  places.    In  LXX. 


I 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  391 

12.  ^  devout  man  according  to  the  law  (eulabes  kata  ton 
nomon).  See  on  2:5;  8:2;  Luke  2:25  for  the  adjective  eulabes. 
Paul  adds  "according  to  the  law"  to  show  that  he  was  in- 
troduced to  Christianity  by  a  devout  Jew  and  no  law- 
breaker (Lewin). 

13.  /  looked  up  on  him  {anahlepsa  eis  auton).  First  aorist 
active  indicative  and  same  word  as  anablepson  (Receive  thy 
sight).  Hence  here  the  verb  means  as  the  margin  of  the 
Revised  Version  has  it:  "I  received  my  sight  and  looked  upon 
him."    For  "look  up"  see  John  9:11. 

14.  Hath  appointed  thee  (proecheirisato).  First  aorist 
middle  indicative  of  procheirizo,  old  verb  to  put  forth  into 
one's  hands,  to  take  into  one's  hands  beforehand,  to  plan, 
propose,  determine.  In  the  N.T.  only  in  Acts  3:20;  22:14; 
26:16.  Three  infinitives  after  this  verb  of  God's  purpose 
about  Paul:  to  know  (gnonai^  second  aorist  active  of  ginosko) 
his  will,  to  see  {idein,  second  aorist  active  of  horao)  the 
Righteous  One  (cf.  3:14),  to  hear  {akousaij  first  aorist  active 
of  akouo)  a  voice  from  his  mouth. 

15.  A  witness  for  him  (martus  autoi).  As  in  1:8.  Of  what 
Qion).  Attraction  of  the- accusative  relative  ha  to  the  geni- 
tive case  of  the  unexpressed  antecedent  touton.  Thou  hast 
seen  and  heard  (heorakas,  present  perfect  active  indicative 
kai  ekousas,  first  aorist  active  indicative).  This  subtle  change 
of  tense  is  not  preserved  in  the  English.  Blass  properly  cites 
the  perfect  hedraka  in  I  Cor.  9:1  as  proof  of  Paul's  enduring 
qualification  for  the  apostleship. 

16.  Be  baptized  (baptisai).  First  aorist  middle  (causative), 
not  passive,  Get  thyself  baptized  (Robertson,  Grammar, 
p.  808).  Cf.  I  Cor.  10:2.  Submit  yourself  to  baptism.  So  as  to 
apolousai,  Get  washed  off  as  in  I  Cor.  6:11.  It  is  possible,  as 
in  2:38,  to  take  these  words  as  teaching  baptismal  remission 
or  salvation  by  means  of  baptism,  but  to  do  so  is  in  my 
opinion  a  complete  subversion  of  Paul's  vivid  and  pictur- 
esque language.    As  in  Rom.  6:4-6  where  baptism  is  the 


392      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

picture  of  death,  burial  and  resurrection,  so  here  baptism 
pictures  the  change  that  had  already  taken  place  when 
Paul  surrendered  to  Jesus  on  the  way  (verse  lo).  Baptism 
here  pictures  the  washing  away  of  sins  by  the  blood  of  Christ. 

17.  When  I  had  returned  {mot  hupostrepsanti),  while  I 
prayed  (proseuchomenou  mou),  I  fell  {genesthai  me).  Note 
dative  mot  with  egeneto  as  in  verse  6,  genitive  mou  (genitive 
absolute  with  proseuchomenou) ,  accusative  of  general  refer- 
ence me  with  genesthai,  and  with  no  effort  at  uniformity, 
precisely  as  in  15:22  and  23  which  see.  The  participle  is 
especially  liable  to  such  examples  of  anacolutha  (Robertson, 
Grammar,  p.  439). 

18.  Saw  him  saying  (ideiri  auton  legonta).  The  first  visit 
after  his  conversion  when  they  tried  to  kill  him  in  Jerusalem 
(9:29).    Because  {dioti,  dia  and  hoti),for  that. 

19.  Imprisoned  and  beat  {emen  phulakizon  kai  deron).  Peri- 
phrastic imperfect  active  of  phulakizo  (LXX  and  late  Koini, 
here  alone  in  the  N.T.)  and  dero  (old  verb  to  skin,  to  beat 
as  in  Matt.  21:35  which  see).  In  every  synagogue  {kata  tas 
sunagogas).   Up  and  down  (kata)  in  the  synagogues. 

20.  Was  shed  {exechunneto).  Imperfect  passive  of  (f^cAwnno 
(see  on  Matt.  23:35),  was  being  shed.  Witness  (marturos). 
And  "martyr"  also  as  in  Rev.  2:13;  17:6.  Transition  state 
for  the  word  here.  /  also  was  standing  by  (kai  autos  emen 
ephestos).  Periphrastic  second  past  perfect  in  form,  but  im- 
perfect (linear)  in  sense  since  hestos  =  histamenos  (intransi- 
tive). Consenting  (suneudokon).  The  very  word  used  by 
Luke  in  Acts  8:1  about  Paul.  KoinS  word  for  being  pleased 
at  the  same  time  with  (cf.  Luke  11 :48).  Paul  adds  here  the 
item  of  "guarding  the  clothes  of  those  who  were  slaying 
(anairounton  as  in  Luke  23:32;  Acts  12:2)  him"  (Stephen). 
Paul  recalls  the  very  words  of  protest  used  by  him  to  Jesus. 
He  did  not  like  the  idea  of  running  away  to  save  his  own 
life  right  where  he  had  helped  slay  Stephen.  He  is  getting 
on  dangerous  ground.  * 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  393 

21.  /  will  send  thee  forth  far  hence  unto  the  Gentiles  {Ego 
eis  ethne  makran  exapostelo  se).  Future  active  of  the  double 
{ex^  out,  apo^  off  or  away)  compound  of  exapostello,  common 
word  in  the  Koine  (cf.  Luke  24:49).  This  is  a  repetition  by 
Jesus  of  the  call  given  in  Damascus  through  Ananias  (9:15). 
Paul  had  up  till  now  avoided  the  word  Gentiles,  but  at  last 
it  had  to  come,  "the  fatal  word"  (Farrar). 

22.  They  gave  him  audience  (ekouon).  Imperfect  active, 
they  kept  on  listening,  at  least  with  respectful  attention. 
Unto  this  word  (achri  toutou  tou  logou).  But  "this  word" 
was  like  a  spark  in  a  powder  magazine  or  a  torch  to  an  oil 
tank.  The  explosion  of  pent-up  indignation  broke  out  in- 
stantly worse  than  at  first  (21:30).  Away  with  such  a  fellow 
from  the  earth  {Aire  apo  tes  ges  ton  toiouton).  They  renew  the 
cry  with  the  very  words  in  21 :36,  but  with  "from  the  earth" 
for  vehemence.  For  it  is  not  fit  {ou  gar  katheken).  Imperfect 
active  of  katheko,  old  verb  to  come  down  to,  to  become,  to 
fit.  In  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Rom.  i  :28.  The  imperfect 
is  a  neat  Greek  idiom  for  impatience  about  an  obligation: 
It  was  not  fitting,  he  ought  to  have  been  put  to  death  long 
ago.  The  obligation  is  conceived  as  not  lived  up  to  like  our 
"ought"  (past  of  owe).    See  Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  886. 

23.  As  they  cried  out  {kraugazonton  auton).  Genitive 
absolute  with  present  active  participle  of  kraugazo,  a  rare 
word  in  the  old  Greek  from  krauge  (a  cry).  See  on  Matt. 
12:19.  Two  other  genitive  absolutes  here,  rhiptounton 
(throwing  off,  present  active  participle,  frequent  active 
variation  of  rhipto)  and  ballonton  (present  active  participle 
of  hallo,  flinging).  These  present  participles  give  a  lively 
picture  of  the  uncontrolled  excitement  of  the  mob  in  their 
spasm  of  wild  rage. 

24.  That  he  be  examined  by  scourging  {mastixin  anetazesthai 
auton).  The  present  passive  infinitive  of  anetazo  in  indirect 
command  after  eipas  (bidding).  This  verb  does  not  occur 
in  the  old  Greek  (which  used  exetazo  as  in  Matt.  2:8),  first 


394      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

in  the  LXX,  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  verse  29,  but  Miiiigan 
and  Moulton's  Vocabulary  quotes  an  Oxyrhynchus  papyrus 
of  A.D.  127  which  has  a  prefect  using  the  word  directing 
government  clerks  to  "examine"  {anetazein)  documents  and 
glue  them  together  into  volumes  (tomoi).  The  word  was 
evidently  in  use  for  such  purposes.  It  was  a  kind  of  "third 
degree"  applied  to  Paul  by  the  use  of  scourges  {mastixin), 
instrumental  plural  of  mastix,  old  word  for  whip,  as  in  Heb. 
11:36.  But  this  way  of  beginning  an  inquiry  by  torture 
(inquisition)  was  contrary  to  Roman  law  (Page) :  Non  esse  a 
tormentis  incipiendum,  Divus  Augustus  statuit.  That  he  might 
know  {hina  epignoi).  Final  clause  with  hina  and  second  aorist 
active  subjunctive  of  epignosko  (full  knowledge).  Lysias  was 
as  much  in  the  dark  as  ever,  for  Paul's  speech  had  been  in 
Aramaic  and  this  second  explosion  was  a  mystery  to  him  like 
the  first.  They  so  shouted  {houtbs  epephonoun).  Imperfect 
active  progressive  imperfect  had  been  so  shouting. 

25.  When  they  had  tied  him  up  {hos  proeteinan  autofi). 
First  aorist  active  indicative  of  proteino,  old  verb  to  stretch 
forward,  only  here  in  the  N.T.  Literally,  "When  they 
stretched  him  forward."  With  the  thongs  {tois  himasin).  If 
the  instrumental  case  of  himas,  old  word  for  strap  or  thong 
(for  sandals  as  Mark  1:7,  or  for  binding  criminals  as  here), 
then  Paul  was  bent  forward  and  tied  by  the  thongs  to  a  post 
in  front  to  expose  his  back  the  better  to  the  scourges.  But 
tois  himasin  may  be  dative  case  and  then  it  would  mean 
"for  the  lashes."  In  either  case  it  is  a  dreadful  scene  of  ter- 
rorizing by  the  chiliarch.  Unto  the  centurion  that  stood  by 
(pros  ton  hestota  hekatontarchon) .  He  was  simply  carrying 
out  the  orders  of  the  chiliarch  (cf.  Matt.  27:54).  Why  had 
not  Paul  made  protest  before  this.^  Is  it  lawful?  {ei  exestin?). 
This  use  of  ei  in  indirect  questions  we  have  had  before  (1:6). 
A  Roman  and  uncondemned  (Romaion  kai  akatakriton).  Just 
as  in  16:37  which  see.  Blass  says  of  Paul's  question:  Inter- 
rogatio  subironica  est  confidentiae  plena. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  395 

26.  What  art  thou  about  to  do?  (Ti  melleis  poiein?).  On 
the  point  of  doing,  sharp  warning. 

27.  Art  thou  a  Roman?  {Su  Romaios  ei?).  Thou  (emphatic 
position)  a  Roman?    It  was  unbelievable. 

28.  With  a  great  sum  (pollou  kephalaiou).  The  use  of 
kephalaiou  (from  kephale,  head)  for  sums  of  money  (principal 
as  distinct  from  interest)  is  old  and  frequent  in  the  papyri. 
Our  word  capitafis  from  caput  (head).  The  genitive  is  used 
here  according  to  rule  for  price.  "The  sale  of  the  Roman 
citizenship  was  resorted  to  by  the  emperors  as  a  means  of 
filling  the  exchequer,  much  as  James  I.  made  baronets" 
(Page).  Dio  Cassius  (LX.,  17)  tells  about  Messalina  the  wife 
of  Claudius  selling  Roman  citizenship.  Lysias  was  probably  a 
Greek  and  so  had  to  buy  his  citizenship.  But  I  am  a  Roman 
born  (Ego  de  kai  gegennemai).  Perfect  passive  indicative  of 
gennao.  The  word  "Roman"  not  in  the  Greek.  Literally, 
"But  I  have  been  even  born  one,"  (i.e.  born  a  Roman  citi- 
zen). There  is  calm  and  simple  dignity  in  this  reply  and  par- 
donable pride.  Being  a  citizen  of  Tarsus  (21:39)  did  not 
make  Paul  a  Roman  citizen.  Tarsus  was  an  urbs  libera^  not 
a  colonia  like  Philippi.  Some  one  of  his  ancestors  (father, 
grandfather)  obtained  it  perhaps  as  a  reward  for  distinguished 
service.  Paul's  family  was  of  good  social  position.  "He  was 
educated  by  the  greatest  of  the  Rabbis;  he  was  at  an  early 
age  entrusted  by  the  Jewish  authorities  with  an  important 
commission;  his  nephew  could  gain  ready  access  to  the 
Roman  tribune;  he  was  treated  as  a  person  of  consequence 
by  Felix,  Festus,  Agrippa,  and  Juhus"  (Furneaux). 

29.  Departed  from  him  (apestesan  ap^  autou).  Second 
aorist  active  indicative  (intransitive)  of  aphistemi,  stood 
oflF  from  him  at  once.  Was  afraid  (ephobethe).  Ingressive 
aorist  passive  indicative  of  phobeomai,  became  afraid.  He 
had  reason  to  be.  That  he  was  a  Roman  (hoti  Romaios  estin). 
Indirect  assertion  with  tense  of  estin  retained.  Because  he 
had  bound  him  {hoti  auton  en  dedekos).  Causal  hoti  here  after 


396      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

declarative  hoti  just  before.   Periphrastic  past  perfect  active 
of  deo,  to  bind. 

30.  To  know  the  certainty  (gnonai  to  asphales).  Same  idiom 
in  21:34  which  see.  Wherefore  he  was  accused  {to  ti  kate- 
goreitai).  Epexegetical  after  to  asphales.  Note  article  (ac- 
cusative case)  with  the  indirect  question  here  as  in  Luke 
22:1,  23,  24  (which  see),  a  neat  idiom  in  the  Greek.  Com- 
manded (ekeleusen).  So  the  Sanhedrin  had  to  meet,  but  in  the 
Tower  of  Antonia,  for  he  brought  Paul  down  {katagagon, 
second  aorist  active  participle  of  katago).  Set  him  (estesen). 
First  aorist  active  (transitive)  indicative  of  histemi,  not  the 
intransitive  second  aorist  este.  Lysias  is  determined  to  find 
out  the  truth  about  Paul,  more  puzzled  than  ever  by  the 
important  discovery  that  he  has  a  Roman  citizen  on  his 
hands  in  this  strange  prisoner. 


CHAPTER  XXIII 

I.  Looking  steadfastly  {atenisas).  See  on  this  word  i:io; 
3:12;  6:15;  7:5s;  13:9-  Paul  may  have  had  weak  eyes,  but 
probably  the  earnest  gaze  was  to  see  if  he  recognized  any 
faces  that  were  in  the  body  that  tried  Stephen  and  to  which 
he  apparently  once  belonged.  /  have  lived  before  God  {pepo- 
liteumai  tbi  thebi).  Perfect  middle  indicative  of  politeuo,  old 
verb  to  manage  affairs  of  city  (polis)  or  state,  to  be  a  citizen, 
behave  as  a  citizen.  In  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Phil,  i  :2y. 
The  idea  of  citizenship  was  Greek  and  Roman,  not  Jewish. 
"He  had  lived  as  God's  citizen,  as  a  member  of  God's 
commonwealth"  (Rackham).  God  {thebi)  is  the  dative 
of  personal  interest.  As  God  looked  at  it  and  in  his  relation 
to  God.  In  all  good  conscience  unto  this  day  (pasei  suneidesei 
agathei  achri  tautes  tes  hemeras).  This  claim  seems  to  lack 
tact,  but  for  brevity's  sake  Paul  sums  up  a  whole  speech  in  it. 
He  may  have  said  much  more  than  Luke  here  reports  along 
the  line  of  his  speech  the  day  before,  but  Paul  did  not  make 
this  claim  without  consideration.  It  appears  to  contradict 
his  confession  as  the  chief  of  sinners  (I  Tim.  1:13-16).  But 
that  depends  on  one's  interpretation  of  "good  conscience." 
The  word  suneidesis  is  literally  "joint-knowledge"  in  Greek, 
Latin  (conscientia)  and  English  "conscience"  from  the  Latin. 
It  is  a  late  word  from  sunoida,  to  know  together,  common  in 
O.T.,  Apocrypha,  Philo,  Plutarch,  New  Testament,  Stoics, 
ecclesiastical  writers.  In  itself  the  word  simply  means  con- 
sciousne^ss  of  one's  own  thoughts  (Heb.  10:2),  or  of  one's 
own  self,  then  consciousness  of  the  distinction  between  right 
and  wrong  (Rom.  2:15)  with  approval  or  disapproval.  .But 
the  conscience  is  not  an  infallible  guide  and  acts  according 

397 


398      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

to  the  light  that  it  has  (I  Cor.  8:7,  10;  I  Peter  2:19).  The 
conscience  can  be  contaminated  (Heb.  10:22,  evil  ponerds). 
All  this  and  more  must  be  borne  in  mind  in  trying  to  under- 
stand Paul's  description  of  his  motives  as  a  persecutor. 
Alleviation  of  his  guilt  comes  thereby,  but  not  removal  of 
guilt  as  he  himself  felt  (I  Tim.  1:13-16).  He  means  to  say 
to  the  Sanhedrin  that  he  persecuted  Christians  as  a  con- 
scientious (though  mistaken)  Jew  (Pharisee)  just  as  he  fol- 
lowed his  conscience  in  turning  from  Judaism  to  Christianity. 
It  is  a  pointed  disclaimer  against  the  charge  that  he  is  a 
renegade  Jew,  an  opposer  of  the  law,  the  people,  the  temple. 
Paul  addresses  the  Sanhedrin  as  an  equal  and  has  no  "apol- 
ogies" (in  our  sense)  to  make  for  his  career  as  a  whole.  The 
golden  thread  of  consistency  runs  through,  as  a  good  citizen 
in  God's  commonwealth.  He  had  the  consolation  of  a  good 
conscience  (I  Peter  3:16).  The  word  does  not  occur  in  the 
Gospels  and  chiefly  in  Paul's  Epistles,  but  we  see  it  at  work 
in  John  8:9  (the  interpolation  7:53  to  8:11). 

2.  Ananias  {Hananias).  Not  the  one  in  Luke  3:2;  John 
18:13;  Acts  4:7,  but  the  son  of  Nebedaeus,  nominated  high 
priest  by  Herod,  King  of  Chalcis,  a.d.  48  and  till  a.d,  59. 
He  was  called  to  Rome  a.d.  52  to  answer  "a  charge  of  rapine 
and  cruelty  made  against  him  by  the  Samaritans,  but 
honourably  acquitted"  (Page).  Though  high  priest,  he  was 
a  man  of  bad  character.  Them  that  stood  by  him  {tois  pares- 
tosin  autoi).  Dative  case  of  second  perfect  participle  of 
paristemi,  to  place,  and  intransitive.  See  the  same  form  in 
verse  4  [parestotes).  To  smite  him  on  the  mouth  {tuptein  autou 
to  stoma).  See  on  12:45;  ^^^  18:17.  Cf.  the  treatment  of 
Jesus  (John  18:22).  Ananias  was  provoked  by  Paul's  self- 
assertion  while  on  trial  before  his  judges.  "The  act  was 
illegal  and  peculiarly  offensive  to  a  Jew  at  the  hands  of  a 
Jew"  (Knowling).  More  self-control  might  have  served 
Paul  better.  Smiting  the  mouth  or  cheek  is  a  peculiarly 
irritating  oflFence  and  one  not  uncommon  among  the  Jews 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  399 

and  this  fact  gives  point  to  the  command  of  Jesus  to  turn 
the  other  check  (Luke  6:29  where  tupto  is  also  used). 

3.  Thou  whited  wall  {toiche  kekoniamene) .  Perfect  passive 
participle  of  koniao  (from  konia,  dust  or  lime).  The  same 
word  used  in  Matt.  23:27  for  "whited  sepulchres"  {taphoi 
kekoniamenoi)  which  see.  It  is  a  picturesque  way  of  calling 
Ananias  a  hypocrite,  undoubtedly  true,  but  not  a  partic- 
ularly tactful  thing  for  a  prisoner  to  say  to  his  judge,  not  to 
say  Jewish  high  priest.  Besides,  Paul  had  hurled  back  at 
him  the  word  tuptein  {smite)  in  his  command,  putting  it 
first  in  the  sentence  {tuptein  se  mellei  ho  theos)  in  strong 
emphasis.  Clearly  Paul  felt  that  he,  not  Ananias,  was  living 
as  a  good  citizen  in  God's  commonwealth.  And  sittest  thou 
to  judge  me?  {Kai  su  kathei  krinon  me?)  Literally,  "And  thou 
(being  what  thou  art)  art  sitting  {kathei,  second  person 
singular  middle  of  kathemai,  late  form  for  kathesai,  the  un- 
contracted  form)  judging  me."  Cf.  Luke  22:30.  Kai  su 
at  the  beginning  of  a  question  expresses  indignation.  Con- 
trary to  the  law  {paranomon).  Present  active  participle  of 
paranomeo,  old  verb  to  act  contrary  to  the  law,  here  alone 
in  the  N.T.,  "acting  contrary  to  the  law." 

4.  Of  God  {tou  theou).  As  God's  representative  in  spite 
of  his  bad  character  (Deut.  I7:8f.).  Here  was  a  charge 
of  irreverence,  to  say  the  least.  The  office  called  for  re- 
spect. 

5.  /  wist  not  {ouk  eidein).  Second  past  perfect  of  oida 
used  as  an  imperfect.  The  Greek  naturally  means  that 
Paul  did  not  know  that  it  was  the  high  priest  who  gave  the 
order  to  smite  his  mouth.  If  this  view  is  taken,  several 
things  may  be  said  by  way  of  explanation.  The  high  priest 
may  not  have  had  on  his  official  dress  as  the  meeting  was 
called  hurriedly  by  Lysias.  Paul  had  been  away  so  long 
that  he  may  not  have  known  Ananias  on  sight.  And  then 
Paul  may  have  had  poor  eyesight  or  the  high  priest  may  not 
have  been  sitting  in  the  official  seat.    Another  way  of  ex- 


400      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

plaining  it  is  to  say  that  Paul  was  so  indignant,  even  angry, 
at  the  command  that  he  spoke  without  considering  who  it 
was  that  gave  the  order.  The  Greek  allows  this  idea  also. 
At  any  rate  Paul  at  once  recognizes  the  justice  of  the  point 
made  against  him.  He  had  been  guilty  of  irreverence  against 
the  office  of  high  priest  as  the  passage  from  Ex.  22:18  (LXX) 
shows  and  confesses  his  fault,  but  the  rebuke  was  deserved. 
Jesus  did  not  threaten  (I  Peter  2:23)  when  smitten  on  the 
cheek  (John  18:22),  but  he  did  protest  against  the  act  and 
did  not  turn  the  other  cheek. 

6.  But  when  Paul  perceived  {gnous  de  ho  Paulos).  Per- 
ceiving (second  aorist  ingressive  of  ginosko).  Paul  quickly 
saw  that  his  cause  was  ruined  before  the  Sanhedrin  by  his 
unwitting  attack  on  the  high  priest.  It  was  impossible  to 
get  a  fair  hearing.  Hence,  Vincent  says,  "Paul,  with  great 
tact,  seeks  to  bring  the  two  parties  of  the  council  into  col- 
lision with  each  other."  So  Alford  argues  with  the  motto 
"divide  and  conquer."  Farrar  condemns  Paul  and  takes 
24:21  as  a  confession  of  error  here,  but  that  is  reading  into 
Paul's  word  about  the  resurrection  more  than  he  says. 
Page  considers  Luke's  report  meagre  and  unsatisfactory. 
Rackham  thinks  that  the  trial  was  already  started  and  that 
Paul  repeated  part  of  his  speech  of  the  day  before  when 
"the  Sadducees  received  his  words  with  ostentatious  scepti- 
cism and  ridicule:  this  provoked  counter-expressions  of 
sympathy  and  credulity  among  the  Pharisees."  But  all 
this  is  inference.  We  do  not  have  to  adopt  the  Jesuitical 
principle  that  the  end  justifies  the  means  in  order  to  see 
shrewdness  and  hard  sense  in  what  Paul  said  and  did.  Paul 
knew,  of  course,  that  the  Sanhedrin  was  nearly  evenly 
divided  between  Pharisees  and  Sadducees,  for  he  himself 
had  been  a  Pharisee.  /  am  a  Pharisee,  a  son  of  Pharisees 
(Ego  Pharisaios  eimi  huios  Pharisaion).  This  was  strictly 
true  as  we  know  from  his  Epistles  (Phil.  3:5).  Touching  the 
hope  and  resurrection  of  the  dead  I  am  called  in  question  {peri 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  401 

elpidos  kai  anastaseos  nekron  krinomai).  This  was  true 
also  and  this  is  the  point  that  Paul  mentions  in  24:21.  His 
failure  to  mention  again  the  fact  that  he  was  a  Pharisee 
throws  no  discredit  on  Luke's  report  here.  The  chief  point 
of  difference  between  Pharisees  and  Sadducees  was  precisely 
this  matter  of  the  resurrection.  And  this  was  Paul's  cardinal 
doctrine  as  a  Christian  minister.  It  was  this  fact  that  con- 
vinced him  that  Jesus  was  the  Messiah  and  was  "the  very 
centre  of  his  faith  "  (Page)  and  of  his  preaching.  It  was  not  a 
mere  trick  for  Paul  to  proclaim  this  fact  here  and  so  divide 
the  Sanhedrin.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  Pharisees  held  aloof 
when  the  Sadducees  persecuted  Peter  and  the  other  apostles 
for  preaching  resurrection  in  the  case  of  Jesus  and  even 
Gamaliel  threw  cold  water  on  the  effort  to  punish  them 
for  it  (Acts  5:34-39).  So  then  Paul  was  really  recurring  to 
the  original  cleavage  on  this  point  and  was  able  to  score  a 
point  against  the  Sadducees  as  Gamaliel,  his  great  teacher, 
had  done  before  him.  Besides,  "Paul  and  Pharisaism  seem 
to  us  such  opposite  ideas  that  we  often  forget  that  to  Paul 
Christianity  was  the  natural  development  of  Judaism" 
(Page).    Paul  shows  this  in  Gal.  3  and  Rom.  9-1 1. 

7.  When  he  had  so  said  {touto  autou  lalountos).  Genitive 
absolute  of  present  participle  (Westcott  and  Hort)  rather 
than  aorist  (eipontos).  While  he  was  saying  this.  ^  dissension 
(stasis).  This  old  word  for  standing  or  station  (Heb.  9:8) 
from  histemi,  to  place,  we  have  seen  already  to  mean  insur- 
rection (Acts  19:40  which  see).  Here  it  is  strife  as  in  15:2. 
Was  divided  (eschisthe).    See  on  14:4. 

8.  There  is  no  resurrection,  neither  angel,  nor  spirit  {me 
einai  anastasin  mete  aggelon  mete  pneuma).  Infinitive  with 
negative  me  in  indirect  assertion.  These  points  constitute 
the  chief  doctrinal  differences  between  the  Pharisees  and 
the  Sadducees.  Both  (amphotera) .  Here  used  though  three 
items  of  belief  are  mentioned  as  in  19:16  where  the  seven 
sons  of  Sceva  are  thus  described.   This  idiom  is  common 


402      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

enough  in  papyri  and  Byzantine  Greek  (Robertson,  Gram- 
mar, p.  745). 

9.  Strove  {diemachonto) .  Imperfect  middle  of  diamachomai, 
old  Attic  verb,  to  fight  it  out  (between,  back  and  forth, 
fiercely).  Here  only  in  the  N.T.  It  was  a  lively  scrap  and 
Luke  pictures  it  as  going  on.  The  Pharisees  definitely  take 
Paul's  side.  And  what  if  a  spirit  hath  spoken  to  him  or  an 
angel?  {ei  de  pneuma  elalesen  autoi  e  aggelos?).  This  is  apo- 
siopesis,  not  uncommon  in  the  N.T.,  as  in  Luke  13:9;  John 
6:62  (Robertson,  Grammar ^  p.  1203).  See  one  also  in  Ex. 
32:32. 

10.  When  there  arose  a  great  dissension  {polles  tes  gino- 
menes  staseos).  Present  middle  participle  (genitive  absolute). 
Literally,  "dissension  becoming  much."  Lest  Paul  should 
be  torn  in  pieces  by  them  {me  diaspasthei  ho  Paulos).  First 
aorist  passive  subjunctive  of  diaspao,  to  draw  in  two,  to 
tear  in  pieces,  old  verb,  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Mark  5 14 
of  tearing  chains  in  two.  The  subjunctive  with  me  Is  the 
common  construction  after  a  verb  of  fearing  (Robertson, 
Grammar,  p.  995).  The  soldiers  {to  strateuma).  The  army, 
the  band  of  soldiers  and  so  in  verse  27.  To  go  down  {kataban). 
Second  aorist  active  participle  of  katabaino,  having  gone 
down.  Take  him  by  force  {harpasai).  To  seize.  The  soldiers 
were  to  seize  and  save  Paul  from  the  midst  of  {ek  me  sou) 
the  rabbis  or  preachers  (in  their  rage  to  get  at  each  other). 
Paul  was  more  of  a  puzzle  to  Lysias  now  than  ever. 

11.  The  night  following  {tei  epiousei  nukti).  Locative 
case,  on  the  next  (following)  night.  The  Lord  {ho  kurios). 
Jesus.  Paul  never  needed  Jesus  more  than  now.  On  a  pre- 
vious occasion  the  whole  church  prayed  for  Peter's  release 
(12:5),  but  Paul  clearly  had  no  such  grip  on  the  church  as 
that,  though  he  had  been  kindly  welcomed  (21:18).  In 
every  crisis  Jesus  appears  to  him  (cf.  Acts  18:9).  It  looked 
dark  for  Paul  till  Jesus  spoke.  Once  before  in  Jerusalem 
Jesus  spoke  words  of  cheer  (22:18).    Then  he  was  told  to 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  403 

leave  Jerusalem.  Now  he  Is  to  have  "cheer"  or  "courage" 
{tharsei).  Jesus  used  this  very  word  to  others  (Matt.  9:2, 
22;  Mark  10:49).  It  is  a  brave  word.  Thou  hast  testified  (die- 
marturo).  First  aorist  middle  indicative  second  person 
singular  of  diamarturomai,  strong  word  (see  on  22:18).  Must 
thou  {se  del).  That  is  the  needed  word  and  on  this  Paul 
leans.  His  hopes  (19:21)  of  going  to  Rome  will  not  be  in 
vain.  He  can  bide  Christ's  time  now.  And  Jesus  has  ap- 
proved his  witness  in  Jerusalem. 

12.  Banded  together  {poiesantes  sustrophen).  See  on  19:40 
(riot),  but  here  conspiracy,  secret  combination,  binding  to- 
gether like  twisted  cords.  Bound  themselves  under  a  curse 
{anethematisan  heautous).  First  aorist  active  indicative  of 
anathematizo,  a  late  word,  said  by  Cremer  and  Thayer  to 
be  wholly  Biblical  or  ecclesiastical.  But  Deissmann  {Light 
from  the  Ancient  East,  p.  95)  quotes  several  examples  of  the 
verb  in  an  Attic  cursing  tablet  from  Megara  of  the  first  or 
second  century  a.d.  This  proof  shows  that  the  word,  as  well 
as  anathema  (substantive)  from  which  the  verb  is  derived, 
was  employed  by  pagans  as  well  as  by  Jews.  Deissmann 
suggests  that  Greek  Jews  like  the  seven  sons  of  Sceva  may 
have  been  the  first  to  coin  it.  It  occurs  in  the  LXX  as  well 
as  Mark  14:71  (which  see  and  Luke  21:5);  Acts  23:12,  14, 
21.  They  placed  themselves  under  an  anathema  or  curse, 
devoted  themselves  to  God  (cf.  Lev.  27:28^;  I  Cor.  16:22). 
Drink  {pein  =  piein).  Second  aorist  active  infinitive  of 
pino.  For  this  shortened  form  see  Robertson,  Grammar ^ 
p.  343.  Till  they  had  killed  (heos  hou  apokteinbsin) .  First 
aorist  active  subjunctive  of  apokteino,  common  verb.  No 
reason  to  translate  "had  killed,"  simply  "till  they  should 
kill,"  the  aorist  merely  punctiliar  action,  the  subjunctive  re- 
tained instead  of  the  optative  for  vividness  as  usual  in  the 
Koine  (Robertson,  Grammar,  pp.  974-6).  Same  construc- 
tion In  verse  14.  King  Saul  took  an  "anathema"  that 
imperilled  Jonathan  (I  Sam.  14:24).    Perhaps  the  forty  felt 


404      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

that  the  rabbis  could  find  some  way  to  absolve  the  curse 
if  they  failed.   See  this  verse  repeated  in  verse  21. 

13.  More  than  forty  {pleious  tesserakonta).  Without  "than" 
(?)  as  in  verse  21  and  24:11  and  often  in  the  ancient  Greek. 
Conspiracy  (sunomosian).  Old  word  from  sunomnumi,  to 
swear  together.   Only  here  in  the  N.T. 

14.  Came  to  the  chief  priests  and  the  elders  {proselthontes 
tois  archiereusin  kai  tois  preshuterois).  The  Sanhedrin,  just 
as  Judas  did  (Luke  22:4).  With  a  great  curse  {anathemati). 
This  use  of  the  same  word  as  the  verb  repeated  in  the  in- 
strumental case  is  in  imitation  of  the  Hebrew  absolute  infini- 
tive and  common  in  the  LXX,  the  very  idiom  and  words 
of  Deut.  13:15;  20:17,  an  example  of  translation  Greek, 
though  found  in  other  languages  (Robertson,  Grammar^ 
p.  531).  See  on  Luke  21:5  for  the  distinction  between  ana- 
thema and  anathema.  Jesus  had  foretold:  "Whoso  killeth 
you  will  think  that  he  doeth  God  service"  (John  16:2). 

15.  Ye  (humeis).  Emphatic.  Signify  (emphanisate).  First 
aorist  active  imperative  of  emphanizo.  Make  plain  from 
emphanes,  chiefly  in  Acts.  Repeated  in  verse  22.  The  author- 
ity is  with  the  chiliarch  not  with  the  Sanhedrin,  but  he  had 
appealed  to  the  Sanhedrin  for  advice.  As  though  ye  would 
judge  of  his  case  more  exactly  (hos  mellontas  diaginbskein 
akribesteron  ta  peri  autou).  Hos  with  the  participle  gives  the 
alleged  reason  as  here.  So  also  In  verse  20.  Diagnosko,  old 
verb  to  distinguish  accurately,  only  here  in  N.T.  and  24:22. 
Or  ever  come  near  {pro  tou  eggisai  auton).  "Before  the  coming 
near  as  to  him."  Pro  and  the  genitive  of  the  articular  infini- 
tive of  eggizo  with  accusative  of  general  reference.  We  are 
ready  to  slay  him  (hetoimoi  esmen  tou  anelein  auton).  Genitive 
of  purpose  of  the  articular  infinitive  after  the  adjective 
hetoimoi  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  1061).  Anelein,  second 
aorist  active  of  anaireo. 

16.  Their  lying  in  wait  {ten  enedran).  Old  word  from  en 
(in)  and  hedra  (seal),  ambush.    In  N.T.  only  here  and  25:3. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  405 

Accusative  object  of  akousas.  He  came  {paragenomenos). 
Second  aorist  middle  participle  of  paraginomai.  It  may 
mean,  "having  come  upon  them"  and  so  discount  their 
plot,  a  graphic  touch.  Vincent  thinks  that  some  Pharisee, 
since  Paul  was  a  Pharisee  and  so  a  member  of  the  "guild," 
told  his  nephew  of  the  plot.  Perhaps,  and  perhaps  not. 
Told  Paul  {apeggeilen  tot  Paulbi).  This  nephew  is  not  known 
otherwise.  He  may  be  a  student  here  from  Tarsus  as  Paul 
once  was.  Anyhow  he  knows  what  to  do  when  he  catches 
on  to  the  conspirators.  He  had  enough  address  to  get  into 
the  barracks  where  Paul  was.  He  ran  the  risk  of  death  if 
discovered. 

17.  Called  unto  him  (proskalesamenos) .  First  aorist  parti- 
ciple indirect  middle,  calling  to  himself.  Paul  laid  his  plans 
as  energetically  as  if  Jesus  had  not  promised  that  he  would 
see  Rome  (23:11).    Bring  (apage).    "Take  away." 

18.  Paul  the  prisoner  {ho  desmios  Paulos).  Bound  {des- 
mios)  to  a  soldier,  but  not  with  two  chains  (21 133),  and  with 
some  freedom  to  see  his  friends  as  later  (28:16),  in  military 
custody  {custodia  militaris).  This  was  better  than  custodia 
puhlica  (public  custody),  the  common  prison,  but  more 
confining.  Who  hath  something  to  say  to  thee  {echonta  ti 
lalesai  soi).  Same  idiom  as  in  verse  17  and  in  19,  but  lalesai 
here  instead  of  apaggeilai. 

19.  7*00^  him  hy  the  hand  {epilahomenos  tes  cheiros  autou). 
Kindly  touch  in  Lysias,  ut  fiduciam  adolescentis  confirmaret 
(Bengel).  Note  genitive  with  the  second  aorist  middle  (in- 
direct, to  himself)  of  epilambano  as  in  Luke  8 :54  with  kratesas 
which  see.  How  old  the  young  man  (neanias)  was  we  do  not 
know,  but  it  is  the  very  word  used  of  Paul  in  7:58  when  he 
helped  in  the  killing  of  Stephen,  a  young  man  in  the  twenties 
probably.  See  also  20:9  of  Eutychus.  He  is  termed  neaniskos 
in  verse  22.  Asked  him  privately  {kaf  idian  epunthaneto). 
Imperfect  middle,  began  to  ask  (inchoative). 

20.  The  Jews  {hoi  loudaioi).  As  if  the  whole  nation  was  in 


4o6      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

the  conspiracy  and  so  in  verse  12.  The  conspirators  may 
have  belonged  to  the  Zealots,  but  clearly  they  represented  the 
state  of  Jewish  feeling  toward  Paul  in  Jerusalem.  Have 
agreed  {sunethento).  Second  aorist  middle  indicative  of 
suntithemiy  old  verb  to  join  together,  to  agree.  Already  this 
form  in  Luke  22:5  which  see.  See  also  John  9:22;  Acts  24:9. 
To  bring  down  {hopbs  katagageis).  Very  words  of  the  con- 
spirators in  verse  15  as  if  the  young  man  overheard.  Second 
aorist  active  subjunctive  of  katago  with  hopds  in  final  clause, 
still  used,  but  nothing  like  so  common  as  hina  though  again 
in  verse  23  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  985).  As  though  thou 
tvouldest  inquire  (hos  mellon  punthanesthai).  Just  as  in  verse 
15  except  that  here  mellon  refers  to  Lysias  instead  of  to  the 
conspirators  as  in  verse  15.  The  singular  is  used  by  the 
youth  out  of  deference  to  the  authority  of  Lysias  and  so 
modifies  a  bit  the  scheming  of  the  conspirators,  not  "absurd" 
as  Page  holds. 

21.  Do  not  therefore  yield  unto  them  (Su  oun  me  peistheis 
autois).  First  aorist  passive  subjunctive  of  peitho,  common 
verb,  here  to  be  persuaded  by,  to  listen  to,  to  obey,  to  yield 
to.  With  negative  and  rightly.  Do  not  yield  to  them  (da- 
tive) at  all.  On  the  aorist  subjunctive  with  me  in  prohibi- 
tions against  committing  an  act  see  Robertson,  Grammary 
pp.  851-4.  For  there  lie  in  wait  {enedreuousin  gar).  Present 
active  indicative  of  enedreuo,  old  verb  from  enedra  (verse 
16),  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Luke  11:54  which  see.  Till 
they  have  slain  him  (heos  hou  anelosin  auton).  Same  idiom 
as  in  verse  12  save  that  here  we  have  anelosin  (second  aorist 
active  subjunctive)  instead  of  apokteinosin  (another  word 
for  kill),  "till  they  slay  him."  Looking  for  the  promise  from 
thee  (prosdechomenoi  ten  apo  sou  epaggelian).  This  item  is  all 
that  is  needed  to  put  the  scheme  through,  the  young  man 
shrewdly  adds. 

22.  Tell  no  man  (medeni  eklalesai).  Indirect  command 
{oratio  obliqua)  after  paraggeilas  (charging)  with  first  aorist 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  407 

active  infinitive  of  eklaleo  (in  ancient  Greek,  but  here  only 
in  N.T.),  but  construction  changed  to  direct  in  rest  of  the 
sentence  {oratio  recta)  as  in  1:4,  "that  thou  hast  signified 
these  things  to  me"  {hoti  tauta  enephanisas  pros  erne).  Same 
verb  here  as  in  verse  15.  This  change  is  common  in  the  N.T. 
(Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  1047). 

23.  Two  {tinas  duo).  "Some  two"  as  in  Luke  7:19,  in- 
dicating (Page)  that  they  were  not  specially  chosen.  Soldiers 
(stratiotas),  horsemen  (hippeis),  spearmen  (dexiolabous). 
The  three  varieties  of  troops  in  a  Roman  army  like  the  cohort 
of  Lysias  (Page).  The  stratiotai  were  the  heavy-armed 
legionaries,  the  hippeis  belonged  to  every  legion,  the  dexio- 
laboi  were  light-armed  supplementary  troops  who  carried 
a  lance  in  the  right  hand  {dexios,  right,  lambano,  to  take). 
Vulgate,  lancearios.  At  the  third  hour  of  the  night  {apo  trites 
horas  tes  nuktos).  About  nine  in  the  evening. 

24.  Provide  beasts  {ktene  parastesai).  Change  from  direct 
to  indirect  discourse  just  the  opposite  of  that  in  verse  22. 
Beasts  (ktene).  For  riding  as  here  or  for  baggage.  See  on 
Luke  10:34.  Asses  or  horses,  but  not  war-horses.  Since  Paul 
was  chained  to  a  soldier,  another  animal  would  be  required 
for  baggage.  It  was  also  seventy  miles  and  a  change  of 
horses  might  be  needed.  The  extreme  precaution  of  Lysias 
is  explained  in  some  Latin  MSS.  as  due  to  fear  of  a  night 
attack  with  the  result  that  he  might  be  accused  to  Felix  of 
bribery.  Luke  also  probably  accompanied  Paul.  To  bring 
safe  (hina  diasososin).  Final  clause  with  hina  and  the 
first  aorist  active  subjunctive  of  diasozo,  old  verb,  to  save 
through  (dia)  to  a  finish.  Eight  times  in  the  N.T.  (Matt. 
14:36;  Luke  7:3;  Acts  23:24;  27:43,  44;  28:1,  4;  I  Peter  3:20). 
Unto  Felix  the  governor  (pros  Phelika  ton  hegemona).  Felix 
was  a  brother  of  Pallas,  the  notorious  favourite  of  Claudius. 
Both  had  been  slaves  and  were  now  freedmen.  Felix  was 
made  procurator  of  Judea  by  Claudius  a.d.  52.  He  held 
the  position  till  Festus  succeeded  him  after  complaints  by 


4o8      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

the  Jews  to  Nero.  He  married  Drusilla  the  daughter  of 
Herod  Agrippa  I  with  the  hope  of  winning  the  favour  of  the 
Jews.  He  was  one  of  the  most  depraved  men  of  his  time. 
Tacitus  says  of  him  that  ^'with  all  cruelty  and  lust  he 
exercised  the  power  of  a  king  with  the  spirit  of  a  slave."  The 
term  "governor"  {hegemon)  means  "leader"  from  hegeomai, 
to  lead,  and  was  applied  to  leaders  of  all  sorts  (emperors, 
kings,  procurators).  In  the  N.T.  it  is  used  of  Pilate  (Matt. 
27:2),  of  Felix,  (Acts  23:24,  26,  33;  24:1),  of  Festus  (26:30). 

25.  And  he  wrote  (grapsas).  First  aorist  active  participle 
of  graphd,  agreeing  with  the  subject  (Lysias)  of  eipen  (said) 
back  in  verse  23  (beginning).  After  this  form  [echousan  ton 
tupon  touton).  Textus  Receptus  has  periechousan.  The  use 
of  tupon  (type  or  form)  like  exemplum  in  Latin  (Page  who 
quotes  Cicero  Ad  Att.  IX.  6.  3)  may  give  merely  the  purport 
or  substantial  contents  of  the  letter.  But  there  is  no  reason 
for  thinking  that  it  is  not  a  genuine  copy  since  the  letter 
may  have  been  read  in  open  court  before  Felix,  and  Luke 
was  probably  with  Paul.  The  Roman  law  required  that  a 
subordinate  officer  like  Lysias  in  reporting  a  case  to  his 
superior  should  send  a  written  statement  of  the  case  and  it 
was  tenried  elogium.  A  copy  of  the  letter  may  have  been 
given  Paul  after  his  appeal  to  Caesar.  It  was  probably 
written  in  Latin.  The  letter  is  a  "dexterous  mixture  of 
truth  and  falsehood"  (Furneaux)  with  the  stamp  of  genuine- 
ness. It  puts  things  in  a  favourable  light  for  Lysias  and  makes 
no  mention  of  his  order  to  scourge  Paul. 

26.  Most  excellent  (kratistdi).  See  on  Luke  i  :3  to  Theophi- 
lus  though  not  in  Acts  i  :i.  It  is  usual  in  addressing  men  of 
rank  as  here,  like  our  "Your  Excellency"  in  24:3  and  Paul 
uses  it  to  Festus  in  26:25.  Greeting  (chairein).  Absolute 
infinitive  with  independent  or  absolute  nominative  {Klaudios 
Lusias)  as  is  used  in  letters  (Acts  15:23;  James  1:1)  and  in 
countless  papyri  (Robertson,  Grammar ^  p.  1092). 

27.  Was  seized  {sullemphthenla) .    First  aorist  passive  par- 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  409 

ticiple  of  sullamhano.  Rescued  him  having  learned  that  he  was  a 
Roman  {exeilamen  mathon  hoti  Romaics  estin).  Wendt, 
Zoeckler,  and  Furneaux  try  to  defend  this  record  of  two 
facts  by  Lysias  in  the  wrong  order  from  being  an  actual 
lie  as  Bengel  rightly  says.  Lysias  did  rescue  Paul  and  he 
did  learn  that  he  was  a  Roman,  but  in  this  order.  Fie  did  not 
first  learn  that  he  was  a  Roman  and  then  rescue  him  as  his 
letter  states.  The  use  of  the  aorist  participle  {mathon  from 
manthanb)  after  the  principal  verb-  exeilamen  (second  aorist 
middle  of  exaireo,  to  take  out  to  oneself,  to  rescue)  can  be 
either  simultaneous  action  or  antecedent.  There  is  in  Greek 
no  such  idiom  as  the  aorist  participle  of  subsequent  action 
(Robertson,  Grammar,  pp.  11 12-14).  Lysias  simply  reversed 
the  order  of  the  facts  and  omitted  the  order  for  scourging 
Paul  to  put  himself  in  proper  light  with  Felix  his  superior 
officer  and  actually  poses  as  the  protector  of  a  fellow  Roman 
citizen. 

28.  To  know  {epignonai).  To  know  fully,  epi,  second  aorist 
active  infinitive.  They  accused  him  {enekaloun  autoi).  Imper- 
fect active  indicative,  were  accusing  him  (dative),  repeating 
their  charges. 

29.  Concerning  questions  of  their  law  {peri  zetemata  tou 
nomou  auton).  The  very  distinction  drawn  by  Gallio  in 
Corinth  (Acts  i8:i4f.).  On  the  word  see  on  15:2.  But  to  have 
nothing  laid  to  his  charge  worthy  of  death  or  of  bonds  {meden 
de  axion  thanatou  e  desmon  echonta  enklema).  Literally, 
"having  no  accusation  (or  crime)  worthy  of  death  or  of 
bonds."  This  phrase  here  only  in  the  N.T.  Egklema  is  old 
word  for  accusation  or  crime  from  egkaleo  used  in  verse  28 
and  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  25:16.  Lysias  thus  expresses 
the  opinion  that  Paul  ought  to  be  set  free  and  the  lenient 
treatment  that  Paul  received  in  Caesarea  and  Rome  (first 
imprisonment)  is  probably  due  to  this  report  of  Lysias. 
Every  Roman  magistrate  before  whom  Paul  appears  de- 
clares him  innocent  (Gallio,  Lysias,  Felix,  Festus). 


4IO      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

30.  When  it  was  shown  to  me  that  there  would  be  a  plot 
(menutheises  moi  epiboules  esesthai).  Two  constructions  com- 
bined; genitive  absolute  (menutheises  epiboules,  first  aorist 
passive  participle  of  menuo)  and  future  infinitive  {esesthai 
as  if  epiboulen  accusative  of  general  reference  used)  in  in- 
direct assertion  after  menuo  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  877). 
Charging  his  accusers  also  (paraggeilas  kai  tois  kategorois). 
First  aorist  active  participle  of  paraggello  with  which  com- 
pare mathon  above  (verse  27),  not  subsequent  action.  Da- 
tive case  in  kategorois.  Before  thee  {epi  sou).  Common  idiom 
for  "in  the  presence  of"  when  before  a  judge  (like  Latin 
apud)  as  in  24:20,  21;  25:26;  26:2.  What  happened  to  the 
forty  conspirators  we  have  no  way  of  knowing.  Neither  they 
nor  the  Jews  from  Asia  are  heard  of  more  during  the  long 
five  years  of  Paul's  imprisonment  in  Caesarea  and  Rome. 

31.  -^j  it  was  commanded  them  {kata  to  diatetagmenon 
autois).  "According  to  that  which  was  commanded  them," 
perfect  passive  articular  participle  of  diatasso.  By  night  {dia 
nuktos).  Through  the  night,  travelling  by  night  forty  miles 
from  Jerusalem  to  Antipatris  which  was  founded  by  Herod 
the  Great  and  was  on  the  road  from  Jerusalem  to  Caesarea, 
a  hard  night's  ride. 

33.  And  they  {hoitines).  Which  very  ones,  the  cavalry,  the 
horsemen  of  verse  31.  Delivered  (anadontes).  Second  aorist 
active  participle  of  anadidomi,  old  verb  to  give  up,  to  hand 
over,  here  only  in  the  N.T.  Presented  Paul  also  (parestesan 
kai  ton  Paulon).  First  aorist  active  (transitive,  not  second 
aorist  intransitive)  indicative  of  paristemi,  common  verb  to 
present  or  place  beside.  What  would  Paul's  friends  in 
Caesarea  (Philip  and  his  daughters)  think  of  the  prophecy 
of  Agabus  now  so  quickly  come  true. 

34.  When  he  had  read  it  (anagnous).  Second  aorist  active 
participle  of  anaginosko,  to  know  again,  to  read.  Of  what 
province  he  was  {ek  poias  eparcheias  estin).  Tense  of  estin  (is) 
retained  in  indirect  question.    Poias  is  strictly  "of  what 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  41 1 

kind  of"  province,  whether  senatorial  or  imperial.  Cilicia, 
like  Judea,  was  under  the  control  of  the  propraetor  of  Syria 
(imperial  province).  Paul's  arrest  was  in  Jerusalem  and  so 
under  the  jurisdiction  of  Felix  unless  it  was  a  matter  of  in- 
surrection when  he  could  appeal  to  the  propraetor  of  Syria. 
35.  /  will  hear  thy  cause  (diakousomai).  "I  will  hear  thee 
fully"  (^zfl).  When — are  come  {par agenontai).  Second  aorist 
middle  subjunctive  of  paraginomai  with  temporal  conjunc- 
tion hotan,  indefinite  temporal  clause  of  future  time  (Robert- 
son, Grammar,  p.  972),  "whenever  thine  accusers  come." 
In  Herod's  palace  {en  toi  praitorioi).  The  Latin  word  praeto- 
rium.  The  word  meant  the  camp  of  the  general,  then  the  pal- 
ace of  the  governor  as  here  and  Matt.  27:27  which  see,  and 
then  the  camp  of  praetorian  soldiers  or  rather  the  praetorian 
guard  as  in  Phil.  1:13. 


CHAPTER  XXIV 

1.  And  with  an  Orator^  one  Tertullus  {kai  rhetoros  Tertullou 
tinos).  A  deputation  of  elders  along  with  the  high  priest 
Ananias,  not  the  whole  Sanhedrin,  but  no  hint  of  the  forty 
conspirators  or  of  the  Asian  Jews.  The  Sanhedrin  had  be- 
come divided  so  that  now  it  is  probably  Ananias  (mortally 
oflFended)  and  the  Sadducees  who  take  the  lead  in  the  prose- 
cution of  Paul.  It  is  not  clear  whether  after  five  days  is  from 
Paul's  departure  from  Jerusalem  or  his  arrival  in  Caesarea. 
If  he  spent  nine  days  in  Jerusalem,  then  the  five  days  would 
be  counted  from  then  (verse  ii).  The  employment  of  a 
Roman  lawyer  (Latin  orator)  was  necessary  since  the  Jews 
were  not  familiar  with  Roman  legal  procedure  and  it  was  the 
custom  in  the  provinces  (Cicero  pro  Gael.  30).  The  speech 
was  probably  in  Latin  which  Paul  may  have  understood  also. 
Rhetor  is  a  common  old  Greek  word  meaning  a  forensic 
orator  or  advocate  but  here  only  in  the  N.T.  The  Latin 
rhetor  was  a  teacher  of  rhetoric,  a  very  different  thing. 
Tertullus  is  a  diminutive  of  Tertius  (Rom.  16:22).  Informed 
{enephanisan).  Same  verb  as  in  23:15,  22,  somewhat  like 
our  modern  "indictment,"  certainly  accusations  "against 
Paul"  {kata  tou  Paulou).  They  were  down  on  Paul  and  the 
hired  barrister  was  prosecuting  attorney.  For  the  legal  form 
see  Oxyrhynchus  Papyri,  Vol.  II.,  p.  162,  line  19. 

2.  fVhen  he  {Paul)  was  called  {klethentos  autou).  Genitive 
absolute  (as  so  often  in  Acts)  with  first  aorist  passive  parti- 
ciple of  kaleo.  Seeing  that  by  thee  we  enjoy  much  peace  {polles 
eirenes  tugchanontes  dia  sou).  Literally,  obtaining  much 
peace  by  thee.  A  regular  piece  of  flattery,  captatio  benevol- 
entiae,  to  ingratiate  himself  into  the  good  graces  of  the  gover- 
nor.   Felix  had  suppressed  a  riot,  but  Tacitus  {Ann.  XII.  54) 

412 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  413 

declares  that  Felix  secretly  encouraged  banditti  and  shared 
the  plunder  for  which  the  Jews  finally  made  complaint  to 
Nero  who  recalled  him.  But  it  sounded  well  to  praise  Felix 
for  keeping  peace  in  his  province,  especially  as  Tertullus 
was  going  to  accuse  Paul  of  being  a  disturber  of  the  peace. 
And  that  by  thy  providence  {kai  dia  tes  pronoias).  Forethought, 
old  Greek  word  from  pronoos  (pronoeo  in  I  Tim.  5:8;  Rom. 
12:17;  II  Cor.  8:21),  in  N.T.  only  here  and  Rom.  13:14. 
"Providence"  is  Latin  Providentia  (foreseeing,  provided). 
Roman  coins  often  have  Providentia  Caesaris.  Post-Augustan 
Latin  uses  it  of  God  (Deus).  Evils  are  corrected  for  this 
nation  (diorthomaton  ginomenon  toi  ethnei  toutoi).  Genitive 
absolute  again,  ginomenon,  present  middle  participle  de- 
scribing the  process  of  reform  going  on  for  this  nation  (dative 
case  of  personal  interest).  Diorthoma  (from  diorthoo,  to  set 
right)  occurs  from  Aristotle  on  of  setting  right  broken  limbs 
(Hippocrates)  or  reforms  in  law  and  life  (Polybius,  Plutarch). 
"Reform  continually  taking  place  for  this  nation."  Felix 
the  Reform  Governor  of  Judea !  It  is  like  a  campaign  speech, 
but  it  doubtless  pleased  Felix. 

3.  In  all  ways  and  in  all  places  {pantei  te  kai  pantachou). 
Pantei,  old  adverb  of  manner  only  here  in  N.T.  Pantachou 
also  old  adverb  of  place,  several  times  in  N.T.  But  these 
adverbs  most  likely  go  with  the  preceding  clause  about 
"reforms"  rather  than  as  here  translated  with  "we  accept" 
{apodechometha).  But  "with  all  gratitude"  {meta  pases 
eucharisiias)  does  naturally  go  with  apodechometha. 

4.  That  I  be  not  further  tedious  unto  thee  (hina  me  epi  pleion 
se  enkopto).  Koine  verb  (Hippocrates,  Polybius)  to  cut  in  on 
(or  Into),  to  cut  off,  to  impede,  to  hinder.  Our  modern 
telephone  and  radio  illustrate  it  well.  In  the  N.T.  (Acts 
24:4;IThess.  2:i8;Gal.  5:7;  Rom.  15:22;  I  Peter  3:7).  "That 
I  may  not  cut  in  on  or  interrupt  thee  further  {epi  pleion)  in 
thy  reforms."  Flattery  still.  Of  thy  clemency  (tei  sei  epiei- 
keidi).   Instrumental  case  of  old  word  from  epieikes  and  this 


414     WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

from  epi  and  eikos  (reasonable,  likely,  fair).  "Sweet  Reason- 
ableness" (Matthew  Arnold),  gentleness,  fairness.  An 
epieikes  man  is  "one  who  makes  reasonable  concessions" 
(Aristotle,  Eth.  V.  lo),  while  dikaios  is  "one  who  insists  on 
his  full  rights"  (Plato,  Leg.  757  D)  as  translated  by  Page. 
A  few  words  (suntomos).  Old  adverb  from  suntemno,  to  cut 
together  (short),  abbreviate.  Like  dia  bracheon  in  Heb. 
13:22.  In  N.T.  only  here  and  Mark  16  (shorter  conclusion). 
5.  For  we  have  found  {heurontes  gar).  Second  aorist  active 
participle  of  heurisko,  but  without  a  principal  verb  in  the 
sentence.  Probably  we  have  here  only  a  "summary  of  the 
charges  against  Paul"  (Page).  A  pestilent  fellow  (loimon). 
An  old  word  for  pest,  plague,  pestilence,  Paul  the  pest.  In 
N.T.  only  here  and  Luke  21  :ii  {loimoi  kai  limoi,  pestilences 
and  famines)  which  see.  Latin  pestis.  Think  of  the  greatest 
preacher  of  the  ages  being  branded  a  pest  by  a  contemporary 
hired  lawyer.  A  mover  of  insurrections  {kinounta  staseis). 
This  was  an  offence  against  Roman  law  if  it  could  be  proven. 
"Plotted  against  at  Damascus,  plotted  against  at  Jerusalem, 
expelled  from  Pisidian  Antioch,  stoned  at  Lystra,  scourged 
and  imprisoned  at  Philippi,  accused  of  treason  at  Thessa- 
lonica,  haled  before  the  proconsul  at  Corinth,  cause  of  a 
serious  riot  at  Ephesus,  and  now  finally  of  a  riot  at  Jeru- 
salem" (Furneaux).  Specious  proof  could  have  been  pro- 
duced, but  was  not.  Tertullus  went  on  to  other  charges  with 
which  a  Roman  court  had  no  concern  (instance  Gallio  in 
Corinth).  Throughout  the  world  {kata  ten  oikoumenen).  The 
Roman  inhabited  earth  [gen)  as  in  17:6.  A  ringleader  of  the 
sect  of  the  Nazarenes  (protostaten  tes  ton  Nazoraion  haireseos). 
Prbtostates  is  an  old  word  in  common  use  from  protos  and 
kistemi,  a  front-rank  man,  a  chief,  a  champion.  Here  only 
in  the  N.T.  This  charge  is  certainly  true.  About  "sect" 
(hairesis)  see  on  5:17.  Nazoraioi  here  only  in  the  plural  in 
the  N.T.,  elsewhere  of  Jesus  (Matt.  2 123 ;  26 71 ;  Luke  1 8 :37; 
John  18:5,  7;  19:19;  Acts  2:22;  3:6;  4:10;  6:14;  22:8;  26:9). 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  415 

The  disciple  is  not  above  his  Master.    There  was  a  sneer 
in  the  term  as  applied  to  Jesus  and  here  to  his  followers. 

6.  Assayed  to  profane  {epeirasen  bebelosai).  A  flat  untruth, 
but  the  charge  of  the  Asian  Jews  (21 :28-3o).  Verhum  optum 
ad  calumnian  (Bengel).  We  seized  (ekratesamen).  As  if  the 
Sanhedrin  had  arrested  Paul,  TertuUus  identifying  himself 
with  his  clients.  But  it  was  the  mob  (21 128-3 1)  that  attacked 
Paul  and  Lysias  who  rescued  him  (2i:32fl^.). 

7.  This  whole  verse  with  some  words  at  the  end  of  verse  6 
and  the  beginnihg  of  verse  8  in  the  Textus  Receptus  ("And 
would  have  judged  according  to  our  law.  But  the  chief 
captain  Lysias  came  upon  us,  and  with  great  violence  took 
him  away  out  of  our  hands,  commanding  his  accusers  to 
come  unto  thee")  is  absent  from  Aleph  A  B  H  L  P  61  (many 
other  cursives)  Sahidic  Bohairic.  It  is  beyond  doubt  a  later 
addition  to  the  incomplete  report  of  the  speech  of  Tertullus. 
As  the  Revised  Version  stands,  verse  8  connects  with  verse 
6.  The  motive  of  the  added  words  is  clearly  to  prejudice 
Felix  against  Lysias  and  they  contradict  the  record  in  Acts 
21.  Furneaux  holds  them  to  be  genuine  and  omitted  because 
contradictory  to  Acts  21.  More  likely  they  are  a  clumsy 
attempt  to  complete  the  speech  of  Tertullus. 

8.  From  whom  (par*  hou).  Referring  to  Paul,  but  in  the 
Textus  Receptus  referring  to  Lysias.  By  examining  him  thy- 
self (autos  anakrinas).  Not  by  torture,  since  Paul  was  a 
Roman  citizen,  but  by  hearing  what  Paul  has  to  say  in  de- 
fence of  himself.  Anakrino  is  to  examine  thoroughly  up  and 
down  as  in  Luke  23:14. 

9.  Joined  in  the  charge  (sunepethento) .  Second  aorist  mid- 
dle indicative  of  sunepiiithemi,  old  verb,  double  compound, 
to  place  upon  (epi)  together  with  (sun),  to  make  a  joint 
attack,  here  only  in  the  N.T.  Affirming  (phaskontes).  Alleg- 
ing, with  the  accusative  in  indirect  assertion  as  in  25:19; 
Rom.  1 :22  (nominative  with  infinitive,  Robertson,  Grammar, 
p.  1038).  Were  so  (houtos  echein),  "held  thus,"  common  idiom. 


4l6      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

10.  fFhen  the  governor  had  beckoned  to  him  {neusantos 
autoi  tou  hegemonos).  Genitive  absolute  again  with  first 
aorist  active  participle  of  neud^  to  give  a  nod,  old  word,  in 
N.T.  only  here  and  John  13:24.  "The  governor  nodding  to 
him."  Forasmuch  as  I  know  (epistamenos).  Knowing,  from 
epistamai.  That  thou  hast  been  of  many  years  a  judge  {ek 
pollon  eton  onta  se  kriten).  The  participle  in  indirect  assertion 
after  epistamenos  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  1041).  Paul 
goes  as  far  as  he  can  in  the  way  of  a  compliment.  For  seven 
years  Felix  has  been  governor,  onta  being  a  sort  of  progressive 
present  participle  with  ek  pollon  eton  (Robertson,  Grammar^ 
p.  892).  Cheerfully  (euthumos).  Old  adverb  from  euthumos 
(eu  and  thumos,  good  spirit),  here  only  in  N.T.  Make  my 
defence  (apologoumai).  Old  and  regular  word  for  this  idea 
as  in  Luke  21:14  which  see. 

11.  Seeing  that  thou  canst  take  knowledge  (dunamenou  sou 
epignonai).  Genitive  absolute  again.  The  same  word  and 
form  (epignonai)  used  by  Tertullus,  if  in  Greek,  in  verse  8 
to  Felix.  Paul  takes  it  up  and  repeats  it.  Not  more  than 
twelve  days  (ou  pleious  hemerai  dodeka).  Here  e  (than)  is 
absent  without  change  of  case  to  the  ablative  as  usually 
happens.  But  this  idiom  is  found  in  the  KoinS  (Robertson, 
Grammar,  p.  666).  Since  (aph*  hes).  Supply  hemeras,  "from 
which  day."  To  worship  (proskuneson).  One  of  the  few 
examples  of  the  future  participle  of  purpose  so  common  in 
the  old  Attic. 

12.  Disputing  (dialegomenon).  Simply  conversing,  dis- 
cussing, arguing,  and  then  disputing,  common  verb  in  old 
Greek  and  in  N.T.  (especially  in  Acts).  Stirring  up  a  crowd 
(epistasin  poiounta  ochlou).  Epistasis  is  a  late  word  from 
ephistemi,  to  make  an  onset  or  rush.  Only  twice  in  the  N.T., 
II  Cor.  II  :28  (the  pressure  or  care  of  the  churches)  and  here 
(making  a  rush  of  a  crowd).  The  papyri  give  examples  also 
for  "onset."  So  Paul  denies  the  two  charges  that  were  serious 
and  the  only  one  that  concerned  Roman  law  (insurrection). 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  417 

13.  Prove  {parastesai).  First  aorist  active  infinitive  of 
parisUmij  to  place  beside.  They  have  made  "charges,"  mere 
assertions.  They  have  not  backed  up  these  charges  with 
proof,  "nor  can  they,"  says  Paul.  Now  (nuni).  As  if  they 
had  changed  their  charges  from  the  cries  of  the  mob  in 
Jerusalem  which  is  true.  Paul  has  no  hired  lawyer  to  plead 
for  him,  but  he  has  made  a  masterly  plea  for  his  freedom. 

14.  /  confess  {homologo) .  The  only  charge  left  was  that 
of  being  a  ringleader  of  the  sect  of  the  Nazarenes.  This 
Paul  frankly  confesses  is  true.  He  uses  the  word  in  its 
full  sense.  He  is  "guilty"  of  that.  After  the  Way  {kata  ten  ho- 
don).  This  word  Paul  had  already  applied  to  Christianity 
(22:4).  He  prefers  it  to  "sect"  [hairesin  which  means  a 
choosing,  then  a  division).  Paul  claims  Christianity  to  be 
the  real  (whole,  catholic)  Judaism,  not  a  "sect"  of  it.  But 
he  will  show  that  Christianity  is  not  a  deviation  from  Juda- 
ism, but  the  fulfilment  of  it  (Page)  as  he  has  already  shown 
in  Gal.  3  and  Rom.  9.  So  serve  I  the  God  of  our  fathers  (houtos 
latreuo  toi  patroioi  theot).  Paul  has  not  stretched  the  truth 
at  all.  He  has  confirmed  the  claim  made  before  the  Sanhedrin 
that  he  is  a  spiritual  Pharisee  in  the  truest  sense  (23:6). 
He  reasserts  his  faith  in  all  the  law  and  the  prophets,  holding 
to  the  Messianic  hope.  A  curious  "heretic"  surely!  Which 
these  themselves  also  look  for  {hen  kai  autoi  houtoi  prosdechon- 
tat).  Probably  with  a  gesture  towards  his  accusers.  He  does 
not  treat  them  all  as  Sadducees.  See  Titus  2:13  for  similar 
use  of  the  verb  {prosdechomenoi  ten  makarian  elpida,  looking 
for  the  happy  hope). 

15.  That  there  shall  be  a  resurrection  {anastasin  mellein 
esesthai).  Indirect  assertion  with  infinitive  and  accusative  of 
general  reference  {anastasin)  after  the  word  elpida  (hope). 
The  future  infinitive  esesthai  after  mellein  is  also  according  to 
rule,  mello  being  followed  by  either  present,  aorist,  or  future 
infinitive  (Robertson,  Grammar^  pp.  870,  877,  878).  Both  of 
the  just  and  the  unjust  {dikaion  te  kai  adikon).    Apparently 


4l8      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

at  the  same  time  as  in  John  5:29  (cf.  Acts  17:3  if.).  Gardner 
thinks  that  Luke  here  misrepresents  Paul  who  held  to  no 
resurrection  save  for  those  "in  Christ,"  a  mistaken  inter- 
pretation of  Paul  in  my  opinion.  The  Talmud  teaches  the 
resurrection  of  Israelites  only,  but  Paul  was  more  than  a 
Pharisee. 

16.  Herein  {en  toutoi).  His  whole  confession  of  belief  in 
verses  14  and  15.  Do  I  also  exercise  myself  {kai  autos  asko). 
"Do  I  also  myself  take  exercise,"  take  pains,  labour,  strive. 
Old  word  in  Homer  to  work  as  raw  materials,  to  adorn  by 
art,  then  to  drill.  Our  word  ascetic  comes  from  this  root, 
one  who  seeks  to  gain  piety  by  rules  and  severe  hardship. 
Paul  claims  to  be  equal  to  his  accusers  in  efforts  to  please 
God.  Void  of  offence  (aproskopon).  This  word  belongs  to  the 
papyri  and  N.T.  (only  in  Paul),  not  in  the  ancient  writers. 
The  papyri  examples  (Moulton  Milligan,  Vocabulary)  use 
the  word  to  mean  "free  from  hurt  or  harm."  It  is  a  privative 
and  proskopto  (to  cut  or  stumble  against).  Page  likes  "void 
of  oifence"  since  that  can  be  either  active  "not  stumbling" 
as  in  Phil.  1:10  or  passive  "not  stumbled  against"  as  in  I 
Cor.  10:32  (the  first  toward  God  and  the  second  toward 
men),  the  only  other  N.T.  examples.  Hence  the  word  here 
appears  in  both  senses  (the  first  towards  God,  the  second 
towards  men).  Paul  adds  "alway"  {dia  pantos),  a  bold  claim 
for  a  consistent  aim  in  life.  "Certainly  his  conscience  ac- 
quitted him  of  having  caused  any  offence  to  his  country- 
men" (Rackham).  Furneaux  thinks  that  it  must  have  been 
wormwood  and  gall  to  Ananias  to  hear  Paul  repeat  here  the 
same  words  because  of  which  he  had  ordered  Paul  to  be 
smitten  on  the  mouth  (23:if.). 

17.  j^fter  many  years  {di^  eton  pleionon).  "At  an  interval 
(dia)  of  more  (pleionon)  years"  (than  a  few,  one  must  add), 
not  "after  many  years."  If,  as  is  likely  Paul  went  up  to 
Jerusalem  in  Acts  18:22,  that  was  some  five  years  ago  and 
would  justify  "pleionon"  (several  years  ago  or  some  years 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  419 

ago).  To  bring  alms  {eleemosunas  poieson).  Another  (see 
proskuneson  in  verse  11)  example  of  the  future  participle 
of  purpose  in  the  N.T.  These  "alms"  (on  eleemosunas  see 
on  Matt.  6:1,  4  and  Acts  10:2,  common  in  Tobit  and  is  in 
the  papyri)  were  for  the  poor  saints  in  Jerusalem  (I  Cor. 
16:1-4;  II  Cor.  8  and  9;  Rom.  15:26)  who  were  none  the 
less  Jews.  "And  offerings"  {kai  prosphoras).  The  very- 
word  used  in  21:26  of  the  offerings  or  sacrifices  made  by 
Paul  for  the  four  brethren  and  himself.  It  does  not  follow 
that  it  was  Paul's  original  purpose  to  make  these  "offerings" 
before  he  came  to  Jerusalem  (cf.  18:18).  He  came  up  to 
worship  (verse  11)  and  to  be  present  at  Pentecost  (20:16). 

18.  Amidst  which  {en  hais).  That  is,  "in  which  offerings" 
(in  presenting  which  offerings,  21:27).  They  found  me  (my 
accusers  here  present,  heuron  me),  purified  in  the  temple 
{hegnismenon  en  tbi  hieroi).  Perfect  passive  participle  of 
hagnizo  (same  verb  in  21 :24,  26)  state  of  completion  of  the 
Jewish  sacrifices  which  had  gone  on  for  seven  days  (21:27), 
the  very  opposite  of  the  charges  made.  With  no  crowd  (ou 
meta  ochlou).  "Not  with  a  crowd"  till  the  Asiatic  Jews 
gathered  one  (21:27).  -^^r  yet  with  tumult  {oude  meta  thoru- 
bou).  They  made  the  tumult  (27:30),  not  Paul.  Till  they 
made  the  stir,  all  was  quiet. 

19.  But  certain  Jews  from  Asia  {tines  de  apo  tes  Asias 
loudaioi).  No  verb  appears  in  the  Greek  for  these  words. 
Perhaps  he  meant  to  say  that  "certain  Jews  from  Asia 
charged  me  with  doing  these  things."  Instead  of  saying 
that,  Paul  stops  to  explain  that  they  are  not  here,  a  thor- 
oughly Pauline  anacoluthon  (II  Cor.  7:5)  as  in  26:9.  "The 
passage  as  it  stands  is  instinct  with  life,  and  seems  to  exhibit 
the  abruptness  so  characteristic  of  the  Pauline  Epistles" 
(Page) .  Who  ought  to  have  been  here  before  thee  {hous  edei  epi 
sou  pareinai).  This  use  of  epi  with  genitive  of  the  person  is 
common.  The  imperfect  indicative  with  verbs  of  necessity 
and  obligation  to  express  failure  to  live  up  to  it  is  common 


420      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

in  Greek  (Robertson,  Grammar,  pp.  919-21).  "The  accusers 
who  were  present  had  not  witnessed  the  alleged  offence: 
those  who  could  have  given  evidence  at  first-hand  were 
not  present"  (Furneaux).  There  was  no  case  in  a  Roman 
court.  These  Asiatic  Jews  are  never  heard  of  after  the  riot, 
though  they  almost  succeeded  in  killing  Paul  then.  //  they 
had  aught  against  me  (ei  ti  echoien  pros  eme).  A  condition  of 
the  fourth  class  or  undetermined  with  less  likelihood  of  be- 
ing determined  {ei  with  the  optative,  Robertson,  Grammar, 
p.  I02i).  This  is  a  "mixed  condition"  {op.cit.,  p.  1022)  with 
a  conclusion  of  the  second  class. 

20.  These  men  themselves  {autoi  houtoi).  Since  the  Asiatic 
Jews  are  not  present  and  these  men  are.  Wrong  doing 
{adikema).  Or  misdeed.  Old  word  from  adiked,  to  do  wrong. 
In  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Acts  18:14;  Rev.  18:5.  Paul  uses 
''adikema'^  from  the  standpoint  of  his  accusers.  "To  a  less 
sensitive  conscience  his  action  before  the  Sanhedrin  would 
have  seemed  venial  enough"  (Furneaux).  When  I  stood 
(stantos  mou).  Genitive  absolute,  second  aorist  active 
participle  of  histemi  (intransitive),  "when  I  took  my  stand." 
Before  the  council  {epi  tou  sunedriou).  Same  use  of  epi  with 
genitive  as  in  verse  19. 

21.  Except  it  he  (e).  Literally,  "than,"  but  after  inter- 
rogative ti  =  ti  alio  "what  else  than."  For  this  one  voice  {peri 
mias  tautes  phones).  The  normal  Greek  idiom  with  the 
attributive  use  of  houtos  calls  for  the  article  before  mias, 
though  some  inscriptions  show  it  as  here  (Robertson,  Gram- 
mar, p.  702).  That  {hes).  Genitive  of  the  relative  attracted 
to  the  case  of  the  antecedent  phones.  I  cried  {ekekraxa).  Re- 
duplicated aorist  as  is  usual  with  this  verb  in  the  LXX 
(Judges  3:15).  Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  348.  Touching  {peri). 
Concerning  (around,  about).  /  am  called  in  question  {krino- 
mai).  As  in  23:6.  Before  you  {eph'  humon).  Same  idiom  as 
in  verses  19  and  20. 

22.  Having    more    exact    knotvledge    {akribesteron    eidos). 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  421 

"Knowing"  (second  perfect  active  participle  of  oida)  "more 
accurately"  (comparative  of  adverb  akribos).  More  ac- 
curately than  what?  Than  the  Sanhedrin  supposed  he  had 
"concerning  the  Way"  {ta  peri  tes  hodou,  the  things  concern- 
ing the  Way,  common  in  Acts  for  Christianity).  How  Felix 
had  gained  this  knowledge  of  Christianity  is  not  stated. 
Philip  the  Evangelist  lived  here  in  Caesarea  and  there  was 
a  church  also.  Drusilla  was  a  Jewess  and  may  have  told  him 
something.  Besides,  it  is  wholly  possible  that  Felix  knew 
of  the  decision  of  Gallio  in  Corinth  that  Christianity  was  a 
religio  licita  as  a  form  of  Judaism.  As  a  Roman  official  he 
knew  perfectly  well  that  the  Sanhedrin  with  the  help  of 
Tertullus  had  failed  utterly  to  make  out  a  case  against 
Paul.  He  could  have  released  Paul  and  probably  would 
have  done  so  but  for  fear  of  offending  the  Jews  whose  ruler 
he  was  and  the  hope  that  Paul  (note  "alms"  in  verse  17) 
might  offer  him  bribes  for  his  liberty.  Deferred  them  (ane- 
baleto  autous).  Second  aorist  middle  indicative  of  anahallo, 
old  verb  (only  here  in  N.T.)  to  throw  or  toss  up,  to  put  back 
or  off,  in  middle  to  put  off  from  one,  to  delay,  to  adjourn. 
Felix  adjourned  the  case  without  a  decision  under  a  plausible 
pretext,  that  he  required  the  presence  of  Lysias  in  person, 
which  was  not  the  case.  Lysias  had  already  said  that  Paul 
was  innocent  and  was  never  summoned  to  Caesarea,  so  far 
as  we  know.  Since  Paul  was  a  Roman  citizen,  Lysias  could 
have  thrown  some  light  on  the  riot,  if  he  had  any.  Shall 
come  down  (kaiabei).  Second  aorist  active  subjunctive  of 
katabaino.  I  will  determine  your  matter  {diagnosomai  ta  kath* 
humds).  Future  middle  of  diaginosko,  old  and  common  verb 
to  know  accurately  or  thoroughly  (dia).  In  the  N.T.  only 
here  (legal  sense)  and  23:15.  "The  things  according  to  you" 
(plural,  the  matters  between  Paul  and  the  Sanhedrin). 

23.  ^nd  should  have  indulgence  {echein  te  anesin).  From 
aniemi,  to  let  loose,  release,  relax.  Old  word,  in  the  N.T.  only 
here  and  H  Thess.  1:7^  H  Cor.  2:13;  7:5;  8:13.    It  is  the 


422      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

opposite  of  strict  confinement,  though  under  guard,  "kept 
in  charge"  {tereisthai) .  Forbid  {koluein).  To  hinder  "no 
one  of  his  friends"  {medena  ton  idion).  No  one  of  Paul's 
"own"  (cf.  4:23;  John  i  :ii)  or  intimates.  Of  these  we  know 
the  names  of  Luke,  Aristarchus,  Trophimus,  Philip  the 
Evangelist. 

24.  With  Drusilla  his  wife  {sun  Drousillei  tei  ididi  gunaiki). 
Felix  had  induced  her  to  leave  her  former  husband  Aziz, 
King  of  Emesa.  She  was  one  of  three  daughters  of  Herod 
Agrippa  I  (Drusilla,  Mariamne,  Bernice).  Her  father  mur- 
dered James,  her  great-uncle  Herod  Antipas  slew  John  the 
Baptist,  her  great-grandfather  (Herod  the  Great)  killed  the 
babes  of  Bethlehem.  Perhaps  the  mention  of  Drusilla  as 
"his  own  wife"  is  to  show  that  it  was  not  a  formal  trial  on 
this  occasion.  Page  thinks  that  she  was  responsible  for  the 
interview  because  of  her  curiosity  to  hear  Paul.  Sent  for 
(metepempsato).  First  aorist  middle  of  metapempd  as  usual 
(Acts    10:5). 

25.  Was  terrified  {emphobos  genomenos) .  Ingressive  aorist 
middle  of  ginomai,  "becoming  terrified."  Emphobos  {en  and 
phobos)  old  word,  in  the  N.T.  only  Luke  24:5;  Acts  10:5; 
24:25;  Rev.  11:13  .  Paul  turned  the  tables  completely 
around  and  expounded  "the  faith  in  Christ  Jesus"  as  it 
applied  to  Felix  and  Drusilla  and  discoursed  {dialegomenou 
autou,  genitive  absolute)  concerning  "righteousness"  {di- 
kaiosunes)  which  they  did  not  possess,  "self-control"  or 
temperance  {egkrateias)  which  they  did  not  exhibit,  and 
"the  judgment  to  come"  {tou  krimatos  ton  mellontos)  which 
was  certain  to  overtake  them.  Felix  was  brought  under  con- 
viction, but  apparently  not  Drusilla.  Like  another  Herodias 
her  resentment  was  to  be  feared  (Knowling).  Go  thy  way  for 
this  time  {to  nun  echon  poreuou).  The  ancient  Greek  has 
this  use  of  to  nun  echon  (Tobit  7:11)  in  the  accusative  of 
time,  "as  for  the  present  or  holding  the  now."  When  I  have 
a  convenient  season  {kairon  metalabon) .    Second  aorist  active 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  423 

participle  of  the  old  verb  metalambano^  to  find  a  share  In,  to 
obtain.  It  was  his  "excuse"  for  dodging  the  personal  turn 
that  Paul  had  given. 

26.  He  hoped  withal  {hama  kai  elpizon).  "At  the  same 
time  also  hoping."  Paul  had  mentioned  the  "alms"  (24:17) 
and  that  excited  the  avarice  of  Felix  for  "money"  {chrematd). 
Roman  law  demanded  exile  and  confiscation  for  a  magistrate 
who  accepted  bribes,  but  it  was  lax  in  the  provinces.  Felix 
had  doubtless  received  them  before.  Josephus  {Ant.  XX. 
8,  9)  represents  Felix  as  greedy  for  money.  The  oftener 
{puknoteron) .  Comparative  adverb  of  puknoSy  old  word, 
in  N.T.  only  here  and  Luke  5:33  which  see  and  I  Tim.  5:23. 
Kin  to  pugme  (Mark  7:3)  which  see  from  puko^  thick,  dense, 
compact.  Paul  kept  on  not  offering  a  bribe,  but  Felix  con- 
tinued to  have  hopes  (present  tense  elpizon) ^  kept  on  sending 
for  him  (present  tense  metapempomenos),  and  kept  on  com- 
muning (imperfect  active  homilei  from  homileo,  old  word 
as  in  Acts  20:11  and  Luke  24:14,  which  see,  only  N.T.  ex- 
amples of  this  word).  But  he  was  doomed  to  disappoint- 
ment.   He  was  never  terrified  again. 

27.  But  when  two  years  were  fulfilled  {dietias  de  plerotheises). 
Genitive-  absolute  first  aorlst  passive  of  pleroo,  common 
verb  to  fill  full.  Dietia,  late  word  in  LXX  and  Philo,  common 
In  the  papyri,  in  N.T.  only  here  and  Acts  28 :30.  Compound 
of  dia,  two  {duo,  dis)  and  etos,  year.  So  Paul  lingered  on  in 
prison  in  Caesarea,  waiting  for  the  second  hearing  under 
Felix  which  never  came.  Caesarea  now  became  the  compul- 
sory headquarters  of  Paul  for  two  years.  With  all  his  travels 
Paul  spent  several  years  each  at  Tarsus,  Antloch,  Corinth, 
Ephesus,  though  not  as  a  prisoner  unless  that  was  true 
part  of  the  time  at  Ephesus  for  which  there  is  some  evidence 
though  not  of  a  convincing  kind.  We  do  not  know  that  Luke 
remained  in  Caesarea  all  this  time.  In  all  probability  he 
came  and  went  with  frequent  visits  with  Philip  the  Evangel- 
ist.   It  was  probably  during  this  period  that  Luke  secured 


424      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

the  material  for  his  Gospel  and  wrote  part  or  all  of  it  be- 
fore going  to  Rome.  He  had  ample  opportunity  to  examine 
the  eyewitnesses  who  heard  Jesus  and  the  first  attempts  at 
writing  including  the  Gospel  of  Mark  (Luke  1:1-4).  ^^^ 
succeeded  by  (elaben  diadochon).  Literally,  "received  as  suc- 
cessor." Diadochos  is  an  old  word  from  diadechomai,  to  re- 
ceive in  succession  (dia,  duo,  two)  and  occurs  here  alone  in 
the  N.T.  Deissmann  (Bible  Studies,  p.  115)  gives  papyri 
examples  where  hoi  diadochoi  means  "higher  officials  at  the 
court  of  the  Ptolemies,"  probably  "deputies,"  a  usage  grow- 
ing out  of  the  "successors"  of  Alexander  the  Great  (Moulton 
and  Milligan's  Vocabulary),  though  here  the  original  notion 
of  "successor"  occurs  (cf.  Josephus,  Ant.  XX.  8,  9).  Luke 
does  not  tell  why  Felix  "received"  a  successor.  The  explana- 
tion is  that  during  these  two  years  the  Jews  and  the  Gentiles 
had  an  open  fight  in  the  market-place  in  Caesarea.  Felix  put 
the  soldiers  on  the  mob  and  many  Jews  were  killed.  The 
Jews  made  formal  complaint  to  the  Emperor  with  the  re- 
sult that  Felix  was  recalled  and  Porcius  Festus  sent  in  his 
stead.  Porcius  Festus  (Porkion  Pheston).  We  know  very 
little  about  this  man.  He  is  usually  considered  a  worthier 
man  than  Felix,  but  Paul  fared  no  better  at  his  hands  and 
he  exhibits  the  same  insincerity  and  eagerness  to  please  the 
Jews.  Josephus  {Ant.  XX.  8,  9)  says  that  "Porcius  Festus 
was  sent  as  a  successor  to  Felix."  The  precise  year  when  this 
change  occurred  is  not  clear.  Albinus  succeeded  Festus  by 
A.D.  62,  so  that  it  is  probable  that  Festus  came  a.d.  58  (or 
59).  Death  cut  short  his  career  in  a  couple  of  years  though 
he  did  more  than  Felix  to  rid  the  country  of  robbers  and 
sicarii.  Some  scholars  argue  for  an  earlier  date  for  the  re- 
call of  Felix.  Nero  became  Emperor  Oct.  13,  a.d.  54.  Pop- 
paea,  his  Jewish  mistress  and  finally  wife,  may  have  had 
something  to  do  with  the  recall  of  Felix  at  the  request  of  the 
Jews.  Desiring  to  gain  favour  with  the  Jews  (thelon  te  charita 
katathesthai  tois  loudaiois).    Reason  for  his  conduct.    Note 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  425 

second  aorist  (ingressive)  middle  infinitive  katathesthai  from 
katatithemij  old  verb  to  place  down,  to  make  a  deposit,  to 
deposit  a  favour  with,  to  do  something  to  win  favour.  Only 
here  and  25:9  in  N.T.,  though  in  some  MSB.  in  Mark  15:46. 
It  is  a  banking  figure.  Left  Paul  in  bonds  {katelipe  ton 
Paulon  dedemenon).  Effective  aorist  active  indicative  of 
kataleipo,  to  leave  behind.  Paul  "in  bonds"  {dedemenony 
perfect  passive  participle  of  deo,  to  bind)  was  the  "deposit" 
{katathesthai)  for  their  favour.  Codex  Bezae  adds  that  Felix 
left  Paul  in  custody  "because  of  Drusilla"  {dia  Drousillan). 
She  disliked  Paul  as  much  as  Herodias  did  John  the  Baptist. 
So  Pilate  surrendered  to  the  Jews  about  the  death  of  Jesus 
when  they  threatened  to  report  him  to  Caesar.  Some  critics 
would  date  the  third  group  of  Paul's  Epistles  (Philippians, 
Philemon,  Colossians,  Ephesians)  to  the  imprisonment  here 
in  Caesarea,  some  even  to  one  in  Ephesus.  But  the  arguments 
for  either  of  these  two  views  are  more  specious  than  convinc- 
ing. Furneaux  would  even  put  II  Tim.  4:9-22  here  in  spite 
of  the  flat  contradiction  with  Acts  21:29  about  Trophimus 
being  in  Jerusalem  instead  of  Miletus  (II  Tim.  4:20),  a  "mis- 
take" which  he  attributes  to  Luke!  That  sort  of  criticism 
can  prove  anything. 


CHAPTER  XXV 

1.  Having  come  into  the  province  {epibas  tei  eparcheidi). 
Second  aorist  active  participle  of  epibaino,  to  set  foot  upon. 
Literally,  "Having  set  foot  upon  his  province."  Eparcheia 
is  a  late  word  for  province,  in  N.T.  only  here  and  23:34. 
Judea  was  not  strictly  a  province,  but  a  department  (Page) 
of  the  province  of  Syria  which  was  under  a  propraetor  {lega- 
tus  Caesaris)  while  Judea  was  under  a  procurator  (epitropos). 
After  three  days  (meta  treis  hemeras).  So  in  Acts  28:17  in 
Rome.  That  is  on  the  third  day,  with  a  day  of  rest  in  be- 
tween. Precisely  the  language  used  of  the  resurrection  of 
Jesus  "after  three  days"  =  "on  the  third  day."  So  by 
common  usage  then  and  now. 

2.  The  principal  men  {hoi  prbtoi).  The  first  men,  the  lead- 
ing men  of  the  city,  besides  the  chief  priests.  In  verse  15  we 
have  "the  chief  priests  and  the  elders."  These  chief  men 
among  the  Jews  would  desire  to  pay  their  respects  to  the 
new  Procurator  on  his  first  visit  to  Jerusalem.  There  was 
another  high  priest  now,  Ishmael  in  place  of  Ananias.  In- 
formed him  against  Paul  (enephanisan  autoi  kata  tou  Paulou). 
"This  renewal  of  the  charge  after  two  years,  on  the  very 
first  opportunity,  is  a  measure,  not  only  of  their  unsleeping 
hatred,  but  of  the  importance  which  they  attached  to  Paul's 
influence"  (Furneaux).  Besought  (parekaloun).  Imperfect 
active,  kept  on  beseeching  as  a  special  favour  to  the  Jews. 

3.  Asking  favour  against  him  (aitoumenoi  charin  kat*  autou). 
A  favour  to  themselves  (middle  voice),  not  to  Paul,  but 
"against"  {kat\  down,  against)  him.  That  he  would  send  for 
(hopos  metapempsetai).  First  aorist  middle  subjunctive  of 
metapempo  (see  24:24,  26)  with  final  particle  hopos  like  hina. 
Aorist  tense  for  single  case.    Laying  wait  (enedran  poiountes). 

426 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  427 

See  on  23:16  for  the  word  enedra.  Old  idiom  (Thucydides) 
for  laying  a  plot  or  ambush  as  here.  Only  these  two  uses  of 
enedra  in  N.T.  Two  years  before  the  Sanhedrin  had  agreed 
to  the  plot  of  the  forty  conspirators.  Now  they  propose  one 
on  their  own  initiative.  On  the  way  (kata  ten  hodon).  Down 
along,  up  and  down  along  the  way.  Plenty  of  opportunity 
would  occur  between  Caesarea  and  Jerusalem  for  ambush 
and  surprise  attacks. 

4.  Howheit  {men  oun).  No  antithesis  expressed,  though 
Page  considers  de  in  verse  6  to  be  one.  They  probably 
argued  that  it  was  easier  for  one  man  (Paul)  to  come  to 
Jerusalem  than  for  many  to  go  down  there.  But  Festus  was 
clearly  suspicious  (verse  6)  and  was  wholly  within  his  rights 
to  insist  that  they  make  their  charges  in  Caesarea  where  he 
held  court.  fFas  kept  in  charge  (tereisthat) .  Present  passive 
infinitive  of  tereo  in  indirect  assertion.  Hoti  with  finite 
verb  is  more  common  after  apokrinomai^  but  the  infinitive 
with  the  accusative  of  general  reference  is  proper  as  here 
(Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  1036).  Shortly  (en  tachei).  In 
quickness,  in  speed.  Old  and  common  usage,  seen  already 
in  Luke  18:8;  Acts  12:7;  22:18.  Festus  is  clearly  within  his 
rights  again  since  his  stay  in  Caesarea  had  been  so  brief. 
He  did  go  down  in  "eight  or  ten  days"  (verse  6).  Luke  did 
not  consider  the  matter  important  enough  to  be  precise. 

5.  Them  therefore  which  are  of  power  among  you  {hoi  oun  en 
humin  dunatoi).  "The  mighty  ones  among  you,"  "the  men 
of  power"  {dunatoi)  and  authority,  "the  first  men,"  the 
Sanhedrin,  in  other  words.  Note  change  here  by  Luke  from 
indirect  discourse  in  verse  4,  to  direct  in  verse  5  {phesin, 
says  he).  Go  down  with  me  {sunkatabantes).  Double  com- 
pound (sun,  kata)  second  aorist  active  participle  of  sunkata- 
baino.  It  was  a  fair  proposal.  //  there  is  anything  amiss  in  the 
man  {ei  ti  estin  en  toi  andri  atopon).  Condition  of  the  first 
class,  assuming  that  there  is  (to  be  courteous  to  them), 
but  not  committing  himself  on  the  merits  of  the  case.  Atopon 


428      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

is  an  old  word,  specially  common  in  Plato,  meaning  "out 
of  place."  In  N.T.  only  here  and  Luke  23:41  which  see; 
Acts  28:6;  II  Thess.  3:2.  Note  present  tense  active  voice 
of  kategoreitbsan  (imperative)  of  kategoreb,  repeat  their 
accusations. 

6.  On  the  morrow  {tei  epaurion).  Locative  case  of  the 
article  with  hemerdi  understood  {epaurion^  adverb,  to- 
morrow). Festus  lost  no  time* for  the  chief  men  had  come 
down  with  him.  Sat  on  the  judgment  seat  (kathisas  epi  tou 
hematos).  A  legal  formality  to  give  weight  to  the  decision. 
Ingressive  aorist  active  participle.  For  this  use  of  hema  for 
judgment  seat  see  on  Matt.  27:19;  John  19:13;  Acts  12:21; 
18:12;  25:10,  17.  Same  phrase  repeated  in  25:17.  To  he 
brought  (achthenai).  First  aorist  passive  infinitive  of  ago 
after  ekeleusen  (commanded).  Same  words  repeated  in 
25:17  by  Festus. 

7.  When  he  was  come  (paragenomenou  autou).  Genitive 
absolute  of  common  verb  paraginomai  (cf.  24:24).  Which 
had  come  down  {hoi  katahehekotes).  Perfect  active  participle 
of  katahainb.  They  had  come  down  on  purpose  at  the  in- 
vitation of  Festus  (verse  5),  and  were  now  ready.  Stood 
round  about  him  {periestesan  auton).  Second  aorist  (ingres- 
sive) active  (intransitive)  of  periistemi,  old  verb,  "Took 
their  stand  around  him,"  ^^periculum  intentantes"  (Bengel). 
Cf.  Luke  23:10  about  Christ.  They  have  no  lawyer  this 
time,  but  they  mass  their  forces  so  as  to  impress  Festus. 
Bringing  against  him  (katapherontes).  Bearing  down  on. 
See  on  20:9  and  26:10,  only  N.T.  examples  of  this  ancient 
verb.  Many  and  grievous  charges  {polla  kai  barea  aitibmata). 
This  word  aitibma  for  old  form  aitiama  is  found  in  one 
papyrus  (Moulton  and  Milligan's  Vocabulary)  in  sense  of 
"blame."  But  the  charges  were  no  "heavier"  than  those 
made  by  Tertullus  (24:5-8).  Paul's  reply  proves  this  and 
they  were  also  probably  on  court  record  (Furneaux).  See 
this  adjective  harus   (heavy)   used  with  lukoi  (wolves)   in 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  429 

20:29.  Which  they  could  not  prove  (ha  ouk  ischuon  apodeixai). 
Imperfect  active  of  ischuOj  to  have  strength  or  power  as  in 
19:16,  20.  Repetition  and  reiteration  and  vehemence  took 
the  place  of  proof  {apodeixai^  first  aorist  active  infinitive  of 
apodeiknumi,  to  show  forth,  old  verb,  in  N.T.  only  here. 
Acts  2:22  which  see  and  I  Cor.  4:9). 

8.  While  Paul  said  in  his  defence  (tou  Paulou  apologou- 
menou).  Genitive  absolute  again,  present  middle  participle 
of  apologeomai,  old  verb  to  make-defence  as  in  19:33;  24:10; 
26:1,  2.  The  recitative  hoti  of  the  Greek  before  a  direct 
quotation  is  not  reproduced  in  English.  Have  I  sinned  at 
all  (ti  hemarton).  Constative  aorist  active  indicative  of 
hamartano,  to  miss,  to  sin.  The  ti  is  cognate  accusative  (or 
adverbial  accusative).  Either  makes  sense.  Paul  sums  up 
the  charges  under  the  three  items  of  law  of  the  Jews,  the 
temple,  the  Roman  state  (Caesar).  This  last  was  the  one  that 
would  interest  Festus  and,  if  proved,  would  render  Paul 
guilty  of  treason  (majestas).  Nero  was  Emperor  a.d.  54-68, 
the  last  of  the  emperors  with  any  hereditary  claim  to  the 
name  "Caesar."  Soon  it  became  merely  a  title  like  Kaiser 
and  Czar  (modern  derivatives).  In  Acts  only  "Caesar" 
and  "Augustus"  are  employed  for  the  Emperor,  not  "King" 
{Basileus)  as  from  the  time  of  Domitian.  Paul's  denial  is 
complete  and  no  proof  had  been  presented.  Luke  was  a|>- 
parently  present  at  the  trial. 

9.  Desiring  to  gain  favour  with  the  Jews  (thelon  tois  lou- 
daiois  charin  katathesthai).  Precisely  the  expression  used  of 
Felix  by  Luke  in  24:27  which  see.  Festus,  like  Felix,  falls  a 
victim  to  fear  of  the  Jews.  Before  me  {ep*  emov).  Same  use 
of  epi  with  the  genitive  as  in  23 :30;  24:19,  21.  Festus,  seeing 
that  it  was  unjust  to  condemn  Paul  and  yet  disadvantageous 
to  absolve  him  (Blass),  now  makes  the  very  proposal  to 
Paul  that  the  rulers  had  made  to  him  in  Jerusalem  (verse 
3).  He  added  the  words  "^/>'  emou*^  (before  me)  as  if  to  in- 
sure Paul  of  justice.    If  Festus  was  unwilling  to  give  Paul 


430     WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

justice  in  Caesarea  where  his  regular  court  held  forth,  what 
assurance  was  there  that  Festus  would  give  it  to  him  at 
Jerusalem  in  the  atmosphere  of  intense  hostility  to  Paul? 
Only  two  years  ago  the  mob,  the  Sanhedrin,  the  forty  con- 
spirators had  tried  to  take  his  life  in  Jerusalem.  Festus  had 
no  more  courage  to  do  right  than  Felix,  however  plausible 
his  language  might  sound.  Festus  also,  while  wanting  Paul 
to  think  that  he  would  in  Jerusalem  "be  judged  of  these 
things  before  me,"  in  reality  probably  intended  to  turn 
Paul  over  to  the  Sanhedrin  in  order  to  please  the  Jews, 
probably  with  Festus  present  also  to  see  that  Paul  received 
justice  (me  presente).  Festus  possibly  was  surprised  to  find 
that  the  charges  were  chiefly  against  Jewish  law,  though 
one  was  against  Caesar.  It  was  not  a  mere  change  of 
venue  that  Paul  sensed,  but  the  utter  unwillingness  of 
Festus  to  do  his  duty  by  him  and  his  willingness  to  con- 
nive at  Jewish  vengeance  on  Paul.  Paul  had  faced  the  mob 
and  the  Sanhedrin  in  Jerusalem,  two  years  of  trickery  at 
the  hands  of  Felix  in  Caesarea,  and  now  he  is  confronted 
by  the  bland  chicanery  of  Festus.  It  is  too  much,  the  last 
straw. 

lo.  /  am  standing  before  Caesar^ s  judgment-seat  (Hestos  epi 
tou  bematos  Kaisaros  eimi).  Periphrastic  present  perfect 
indicative  {hestos  eimi),  second  perfect  participle  hestos  of 
histemi  (intransitive).  Paul  means  to  say  that  he  is  a  Roman 
citizen  before  a  Roman  tribunal.  Festus  was  the  representa- 
tive of  Caesar  and  had  no  right  to  hand  him  over  to  a  Jewish 
tribunal.  Festus  recognized  this  by  saying  to  Paul  "wilt 
thou"  (theleis).  Where  I  ought  to  be  judged  {hou  me  dei 
krinesthai).  Rather,  "Where  I  must  be  judged,"  for  dei 
expresses  necessity  (it  is  necessary).  Paul  exposes  the  con- 
duct of  Festus  with  merciless  precision.  Js  thou  also  very 
well  knowest  {hos  kai  su  kallion  epiginbskeis).  "As  thou  also 
dost  understand  (hast  additional  knowledge,  epiginoskeis) 
better"   (than   thou   art  willing  to  admit).      That   this   is 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  431 

Paul's  meaning  by  the  use  of  the  comparative  kallion  (posi- 
tive kalos)  is  made  plain  by  the  confession  of  Festus  to 
Agrippa  in  verse  18.  Paul  says  that  Festus  knows  that  he 
has  done  no  wrong  to  the  Jews  at  all  {ouden  edikeka)  and 
yet  he  is  trying  to  turn  him  over  to  the  wrath  of  the  Jews  in 
Jerusalem. 

II.  //  /  am  a  wrong-doer  {ei  men  oun  adiko).  Condition  of 
the  first  class  with  ei  and  the  present  active  indicative  of 
adikeo  {a  privative  and  dike):  "If  I  am  in  the  habit  of  doing 
injustice,"  assuming  it  to  be  true  for  the  sake  of  argument. 
And  have  committed  anything  worthy  of  death  {kai  axion 
thanatou  pepracha).  Same  condition  with  the  difference  in 
tense  (pepracha,  perfect  active  indicative)  of  a  single  case 
instead  of  a  general  habit.  Assuming  either  or  both  Paul 
draws  his  conclusion.  /  refuse  not  to  die  {ou  paraitoumai  to 
apothanein).  Old  verb  to  ask  alongside,  to  beg  from,  to 
deprecate,  to  refuse,  to  decline.  See  on  Luke  I4:i8f.  Jose- 
phus  {Life,  29)  has  thanein  ou  paraitoumai.  Here  the  articular 
second  aorist  active  infinitive  is  in  the  accusative  case  the 
object  oi paraitoumai:  "I  do  not  beg  off  dying  from  myself." 
But  if  noni  of  these  things  is  {ei  de  ouden  estin).  De  here  is 
contrasted  with  men  just  before.  No  word  for  "true"  in 
the  Greek.  Estin  ("is")  in  the  Greek  here  means  "exists." 
Same  condition  (first  class,  assumed  as  true).  Whereof  these 
accuse  me  {hon  houtoi  kategorousin  mou).  Genitive  of  relative 
hon  by  attraction  from  ha  (accusative  with  kategorousin)  to 
case  of  the  unexpressed  antecedent  touton{"oi  these  things"). 
Mou  is  genitive  of  person  after  kategorousin.  No  man  can 
give  me  up  to  them  {oudeis  me  dunatai  autois  charisasthai). 
"Can"  legally.  Paul  is  a  Roman  citizen  and  not  even 
Festus  can  make  a  free  gift  {charisasthai)  of  Paul  to  the 
Sanhedrin.  /  appeal  unto  Caesar  {Kaisara  epikaloumai). 
Technical  phrase  like  Latin  Caesarem  appello.  Originally 
the  Roman  law  allowed  an  appeal  from  the  magistrate  to 
the  people  {provocatio  ad  populum),  but  the  emperor  repre- 


432      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

sented  the  people  and  so  the  appeal  to  Caesar  was  the  right 
of  every  Roman  citizen.  Paul  had  crossed  the  Rubicon  on 
this  point  and  so  took  his  case  out  of  the  hands  of  dilatory- 
provincial  justice  (really  injustice).  Roman  citizens  could 
make  this  appeal  In  capital  offences.  There  would  be  ex- 
pense connected  with  it,  but  better  that  with  some  hope  than 
delay  and  certain  death  in  Jerusalem.  Festus  was  no  better 
than  Felix  in  his  vacillation  and  desire  to  curry  favour  with 
the  Jews  at  Paul's  expense.  No  doubt  Paul's  long  desire  to 
see  Rome  (19:21;  Rom.  15:22-28)  and  the  promise  of  Jesus 
that  he  would  see  Rome  (Acts  23:11)  played  some  part  in 
Paul's  decision.  But  he  made  it  reluctantly  for  he  says  in 
Rome  (Acts  28:19):  "I  was  constrained  to  appeal."  But 
acquittal  at  the  hands  of  Festus  with  the  hope  of  going  to 
Rome  as  a  free  man  had  vanished. 

12.  When  he  had  conferred  with  the  council  {sunlalesas 
meta  tou  sumbouliou) .  The  word  sumboulion  in  the  N.T. 
usually  means  "counsel"  as  in  Matt.  12:14,  t>ut  here  alone 
as  an  assembly  of  counsellors  or  council.  But  the  papyri 
(Milligan  and  Moulton's  Vocabulary)  furnish  a  number  of 
instances  of  this  sense  of  the  word  as  "council."  Here  it 
apparently  means  the  chief  officers  and  personal  retinue  of 
the  procurator,  his  assessors  {assessores  consiliarii) .  These 
local  advisers  were  a  necessity.  Some  discretion  was  allowed 
the  governor  about  granting  the  appeal.  If  the  prisoner  were 
a  well-known  robber  or  pirate,  it  could  be  refused.  Thou  hast 
appealed  unto  Caesar  (Kaisara  epikeklesai).  The  same 
technical  word,  but  the  perfect  tense  of  the  indicative. 
Unto  Caesar  thou  shalt  go  {epi  Kaisara  poreusei).  Perhaps 
the  volitive  future  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  874).  Bengel 
thinks  that  Festus  sought  to  frighten  Paul  with  these  words. 
Knowling  suggests  that  "they  may  have  been  uttered,  if 
not  with  a  sneer,  yet  with  the  implication  'thou  little  knowest 
what  an  appeal  to  Caesar  means.'"  But  embarrassment 
will  come  to  Festus.   He  has  refused  to  acquit  this  prisoner. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  433 

Hence  he  must  formulate  charges  against  him  to  go  before 
Caesar. 

13.  When  certain  days  were  passed  {Hemeron  diageno- 
menon).  Genitive  absolute  of  diaginomai,  to  come  between, 
"days  intervening."  Agrippa  the  King  {Agrippas  ho  basi- 
leus).  Agrippa  II  son  of  Agrippa  I  of  Acts  12:20-23.  On  the 
death  of  Herod  King  of  Chalcis  a.d.  48,  Claudius  a.d.  50 
gave  this  Herod  Agrippa  II  the  throne  of  Chalcis  so  that 
Luke  is  correct  in  calling  him  king,  though  he  is  not  king 
of  Judea.  But  he  was  also  given  by  Claudius  the  govern- 
ment of  the  temple  and  the  right  of  appointing  the  high 
priest.  Later  he  was  given  also  the  tetrarchies  of  Philip  and 
Lysanias.  He  was  the  last  Jewish  king  in  Palestine,  though 
not  king  of  Judea.  He  angered  the  Jews  by  building  his 
palace  so  as  to  overlook  the  temple  and  by  frequent  changes 
in  the  high  priesthood.  He  made  his  capital  at  Caesarea 
Philippi  which  he  called  Neronias  in  honour  of  Nero.  Titus 
visited  it  after  the  fall  of  Jerusalem.  Bernice  (Bernike). 
He  was  her  brother  and  yet  she  lived  with  him  in  shameful 
intimacy  in  spite  of  her  marriage  to  her  uncle  Herod  King 
of  Chalcis  and  to  Polemon  King  of  Cilicia  whom  she  left. 
Schuerer  calls  her  both  a  Jewish  bigot  and  a  wanton.  She 
afterwards  became  the  mistress  of  Titus.  Arrived  at  Caesarea 
{katentesan  eis  Kaisarian).  Came  down  (first  aorist  active 
of  katantab)  to  Caesarea  from  Jerusalem,  And  saluted  Festus 
(aspasamenoi  ton  Pheston).  The  Textus  Receptus  has 
aspasomenoi  the  future  participle,  but  the  correct  text  is  the 
aorist  middle  participle  aspasamenoi  which  cannot  possibly 
mean  subsequent  action  as  given  in  the  Canterbury  Revi- 
sion "and  saluted."  It  can  only  mean  contemporaneous 
(simultaneous)  action  "saluting"  or  antecedent  action 
like  the  margin  "having  saluted."  But  antecedent  action 
is  not  possible  here,  so  that  simultaneous  action  is  the  only 
alternative.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  salutation  synchro- 
nized with  the  arrival  in  Caesarea  (note  kata,  down,  the  effec- 


434      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

tive  aorist  tense),  not  with  the  departure  from  Jerusalem, 
nor  with  the  whole  journey.  Rightly  understood  the  aorist 
participle  here  gives  no  trouble  at  all  (Robertson,  Grammar^ 
pp.  861-3). 

14.  Tarried  {dietribon).  Imperfect  active  of  diatriboj 
common  verb  for  spending  time  (Acts  12:19,  etc.).  Many 
days  (pleious  hemeras).  More  days  (than  a  few).  Accusa- 
tive case  for  extent  of  time.  Laid  PauVs  case  {anetluto  ta 
kata  ton  Paulon).  Second  aorist  middle  indicative  of  anati- 
themi,  old  verb  to  set  before,  to  place  up,  as  if  for  consulta- 
tion in  conference.  Only  twice  in  N.T.  here  and  Gal.  2:2. 
The  motive  of  Festus  is  not  given,  though  it  was  natural 
enough  in  view  of  the  quandary  of  Festus  about  Paul  (the 
things  about  Paul)  and  Agrippa's  interest  in  and  responsibil- 
ity for  Jewish  worship  in  the  temple  in  Jerusalem.  It  is  quite 
possible  that  Festus  had  a  bit  of  ennui  over  the  visit  of  these 
Jewish  dignitaries  as  "more  days"  went  by.  Hence  the  tone 
of  Festus  about  Paul  in  this  proposal  for  the  entertainment 
of  Agrippa  and  Bernice  is  certainly  one  of  superficial  and  su- 
premely supercilious  indifference.  Left  a  prisoner  (katalelim- 
menos  desmios).  Perfect  passive  participle  of  kataleipd,  to 
leave  behind.  Paul  is  one  of  Felix's  left  overs  (left  behind), 
a  sort  of  "junk"  left  on  his  hands.  This  cowardly  Roman 
procurator  thus  pictures  the  greatest  of  living  men  and  the 
greatest  preacher  of  all  time  to  this  profligate  pair  (brother 
and  sister)  of  sinners.  Undoubtedly  today  in  certain  circles 
Christ  and  his  preachers  are  held  up  to  like  contempt. 

15.  Informed  (enephanisan).  Same  word  as  in  23:15,  22; 
25 :2  which  see.  Asking  for  sentence  against  him  (aitoumenoi 
kat*  autou  katadiken).  Only  N.T.  example  of  this  old  word 
(penalty,  fine,  condemnation)  from  kata  and  dike  (justice 
against). 

16.  It  is  not  the  custom  of  the  Romans  (hoti  ouk  estin  ethos 
Rbmaiois).  If  a  direct  quotation,  hoti  is  recitative  as  in  Au- 
thorized Version.    Canterbury  Revision  takes  it  as  indirect 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  435 

discourse  after  apekrithen  (I  answered),  itself  in  a  relative 
clause  {pros  hous)  with  the  present  tense  {estin,  is)  pre- 
served as  is  usual.  There  is  a  touch  of  disdain  (Furneaux) 
in  the  tone  of  Festus.  He  may  refer  to  a  demand  of  the  Jews 
before  they  asked  that  Paul  be  brought  to  Jerusalem  (25:3). 
At  any  rate  there  is  a  tone  of  scorn  towards  the  Jews.  Before 
that  the  accused  have  (prin  e  ho  kaiegoroumenos  echoi).  This 
use  of  the  optative  in  this  temporal  clause  with  prin  e  instead 
of  the  subjunctive  an  echei  is  in  conformity  with  literary 
Greek  and  occurs  only  in  Luke's  writings  in  the  N.T.  (Rob- 
ertson, Grammar,  p.  970).  This  sequence  of  modes  is  a  mark 
of  the  literary  style  occasionally  seen  in  Luke.  It  is  interest- 
ing here  to  note  the  succession  of  dependent  clauses  in  verses 
14  to  16.  The  accusers  face  to  face  (kata  prosopon  tous  kate- 
gorous).  Same  word  kategoros  as  in  23:30,  35;  25:18.  This 
all  sounds  fair  enough.  j4nd  have  had  opportunity  to  make 
his  defence  concerning  the  matter  laid  against  him  {topon  te 
apologias  laboi  peri  tou  egklematos).  Literally,  "And  should 
receive  (laboi  optative  for  same  reason  as  echoi  above, 
second  aorist  active  of  lamhano)  opportunity  for  defence 
(objective  genitive)  concerning  the  charge"  {egklematos  in 
N.T.  only  here  and  23:19  which  see). 

17.  When  they  were  come  together  here  {sunelthonton  en- 
thade).  Genitive  absolute  of  second  aorist  active  participle 
of  sunerchomai,  but  without  auton  (they),  merely  under- 
stood. Delay  (anabolen).  Old  word  from  anaballo,  only 
here  in  N.T. 

18.  Brought  (epheron).  Imperfect  active  of />Afro,  referring 
to  their  repeated  charges.  Of  such  evil  things  as  I  supposed 
{Hon  ego  hupenooun  poneron).  Incorporation  of  the  antece- 
dent poneron  into  the  relative  clause  and  change  of  the  case 
of  the  relative  from  the  accusative  ha  object  of  hupenooun 
to  the  genitive  like  poneron  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  719). 
Note  the  imperfect  active  hupenooun  of  huponoeo  to  empha- 
size Festus's  state  of  mind  about  Paul  before  the  trial.  This 


436      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

old  verb  only  three  times  in  the  N.T.  (here,  Acts  13 :25  which 
see;   27:27). 

19.  But  had  {de  eichon).  Descriptive  imperfect  active  of 
echo  and  de  of  contrast  (but).  Concerning  their  own  religion 
{peri  tes  idias  deisidaimonias) .  See  on  17:22  for  discussion 
of  this  word.  Fes.tus  would  hardly  mean  "superstition," 
whatever  he  really  thought,  because  Agrippa  was  a  Jew. 
And  of  one  Jesus  {kai  peri  tinos  lesou).  This  is  the  climax 
of  supercilious  scorn  toward  both  Paul  and  "one  Jesus." 
Who  was  dead  (tethnekotos).  Perfect  active  participle  of 
thnesko  agreeing  with  lesou  (genitive).  As  being  dead. 
Whom  Paul  affirmed  to  he  alive  {hon  ephasken  ho  Paulos 
zein).  Imperfect  active  of  phasko,  old  form  of  phemi  to 
say,  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Acts  24:9;  Rom.  i  :22.  Infini- 
tive zein  in  indirect  discourse  with  hon  (whom)  the  accusa- 
tive of  general  reference.  With  all  his  top-loftical  airs  Festus 
has  here  correctly  stated  the  central  point  of  Paul's  preaching 
about  Jesus  as  no  longer  dead,  but  living. 

20.  Being  perplexed  (aporoumenos).  Present  middle  par- 
ticiple of  the  common  verb  aporeo  {a  privative  and  poros 
way),  to  be  in  doubt  which  way  to  turn,  already  in  Mark  6:20 
which  see  and  Luke  24:4.  The  Textus  Receptus  has  eis 
after  here,  but  critical  text  has  only  the  accusative  which 
this  verb  allows  (Mark  6:20)  as  in  Thucydides  and  Plato. 
How  to  inquire  concerning  these  things  (ten  peri  touton  zetesin). 
Literally,  "as  to  the  inquiry  concerning  these  things." 
This  is  not  the  reason  given  by  Luke  in  verse  9  (wanting  to 
curry  favour  with  the  Jews),  but  doubtless  this  motive  also 
actuated  Festus  as  both  could  be  true.  Whether  he  would  go  to 
Jerusalem  {ei  bouloito  poreuesthai  eis  lerosoluma).  Optative  in 
indirect  question  after  elegon  (asked  or  said)  imperfect  active, 
though  the  present  indicative  could  have  been  retained  with 
change  of  person:  "Dost  thou  wish,  etc.,"  {ei  bouleiy  etc.). 
See  Robertson,  Grammar,  pp.  103 1,  1044.  This  is  the  question 
put  to  Paul  in  verse  9  though  theleis  is  there  used. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  437 

21.  When  Paul  had  appealed  (tou  Paulou  epikalesamenou). 
Genitive  absolute  with  first  aorist  middle  participle  of 
epikaleomaij  the  technical  word  for  appeal  (verses  11  and  12). 
The  first  aorist  passive  infinitive  terethenai  (to  be  kept)  is 
the  object  of  the  participle.  For  the  decision  of  the  emperor 
{eis  ten  tou  Sebastou  diagnosin).  Diagnosin  (cf.  diagnosomai 
24:22,  I  will  determine)  is  the  regular  word  for  a  legal  ex- 
amination (cognitio),  thorough  sifting  (dia),  here  only  in 
N.T.  Instead  of  "the  Emperor"  it  should  be  "the  Augus- 
tus," as  Sebastos  is  simply  the  Greek  translation  of  Augustus^ 
the  adjective  (Revered,  Reverent)  assumed  by  Octavius 
B.C.  27  as  the  agnomen  that  summed  up  all  his  various  offices 
instead  of  Rex  so  offensive  to  the  Romans  having  led  to  the 
death  of  Julius  Caesar.  The  successors  of  Octavius  assumed 
Augustus  as  a  title.  The  Greek  term  Sebastos  has  the  notion 
of  worship  (cf.  sebasma  in  Acts  17:25).  In  the  N.T.  only 
here,  verse  25,  and  27:1  (of  the  legion).  It  was  more  imposing 
than  "Caesar"  which  was  originally  a  family  name  (always 
official  in  the  N.T.)  and  it  fell  in  with  the  tendency  toward 
emperor-worship  which  later  played  such  a  large  part  in 
Roman  life -and  which  Christians  opposed  so  bitterly.  China 
is  having  a  revival  of  this  idea  in  the  insistence  on  bowing 
three  times  to  the  picture  of  Sun-Yat-Sen.  Till  I  should  send 
him  to  Caesar  {heds  an  anapempso  auton  pros  Kaisara).  Here 
anapempso  can  be  either  future  indicative  or  first  aorist 
subjunctive  (identical  in  first  person  singular),  aorist  sub- 
junctive the  usual  construction  with  hebs  for  future  time 
(Robertson,  Grammar ,  p.  876).  Literally,  "send  up"  {ana) 
to  a  superior  (the  emperor).  Common  in  this  sense  in  the 
papyri  and  Koin&  writers.  Here  "Caesar"  is  used  as  the  title 
of  Nero  instead  of  "Augustus"  as  Kurios  (Lord)  occurs  in 
verse  26. 

22.  /  also  could  wish  (eboulomen  kai  autos).  The  imperfect 
for  courtesy,  rather  than  the  blunt  boulomai,  I  wish,  I  want. 
Literally,  "I  myself  also  was  wishing"   (while  you  were 


438      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

talking),  a  compliment  to  the  interesting  story  told  by  Fes- 
tus.  The  use  of  an  with  the  imperfect  would  really  mean 
that  he  does  not  wish  (a  conclusion  of  the  second  class  condi- 
tion, determined  as  unfulfilled).  /4n  with  the  optative  would 
show  only  a  languid  desire.  The  imperfect  is  keen  enough 
and  yet  polite  enough  to  leave  the  decision  with  Festus  if  in- 
convenient for  any  reason  (Robertson,  Grammar,  pp.  885-7). 
Agrippa  may  have  heard  much  about  Christianity. 

23.  When  Agrippa  was  come  and  Bernice  {elthontos  tou 
Agrippa  kai  tes  Bernikes).  Genitive  absolute,  the  participle 
agreeing  in  number  and  gender  (masculine  singular,  elthontos) 
with  Agrippa,  Bernikes  being  added  as  an  afterthought. 
With  great  pomp  (meta  polles  phantasias).  Phantasia  is  a 
Koini  word  (Polybius,  Diodorus,  etc.)  from  the  old  verb 
phantazo  (Heb.  12:21)  and  it  from  phaino,  common  verb  to 
show,  to  make  an  appearance.  This  is  the  only  N.T.  example 
of  phantasia,  though  the  kindred  common  word  phantasma 
(appearance)  occurs  twice  in  the  sense  of  apparition  or 
spectre  (Matt.  14:26;  Mark  6:49).  Herodotus  (VII.  10)  used 
the  verb  phantazo  for  a  showy  parade.  Festus  decided  to 
gratify  the  wish  of  Agrippa  by  making  the  "hearing"  of 
Paul  the  prisoner  (verse  22)  an  occasion  for  paying  a  com- 
pliment to  Agrippa  (Rackham)  by  a  public  gathering  of  the 
notables  in  Caesarea.  Festus  just  assumed  that  Paul  would 
fall  in  with  this  plan  for  a  grand  entertainment  though  he 
did  not  have  to  do  it.  Into  the  place  of  hearing  (eis  to  akroa- 
terion).  From  akroaomai  (to  be  a  hearer)  and,  like  the 
Latin  auditorium,  in  Roman  law  means  the  place  set  aside 
for  hearing,  and  deciding  cases.  Here  only  in  the  N.T.  Late 
word,  several  times  in  Plutarch  and  other  Koini  writers. 
The  hearing  was  "semi-official"  (Page)  as  is  seen  in  verse 
26.  With  the  chief  captains  {sun  te  chiliarchois) .  Chiliarchs, 
each  a  leader  of  a  thousand.  There  were  five  cohorts  of 
soldiers  stationed  in  Caesarea.  And  the  principal  mm  of  the 
city  {kai  andrasin  tois  kat^  exochen).   The  use  of  kat"  cxochen^ 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  439 

like  our  French  phrase  par  excellence,  occurs  here  only  in  the 
N.T.,  and  not  in  the  ancient  Greek,  but  it  is  found  in  in- 
scriptions of  the  first  century  a.d.  (Moulton  and  Milligan's 
Vocabulary).  Exoche  in  medical  writers  is  any  protuberance 
or  swelling.  Cf.  our  phrase  "outstanding  men."  At  the 
command  of  Fesius  {keleusantos  tou  Phestou).  Genitive  ab- 
solute again,  "Festus  having  commanded." 

24.  Which  are  here  present  with  us  {hoi  sunparontes  hemin). 
Present  articular  participle  of  sunpareimi  (only  here  in  N.T.) 
with  associative  instrumental  case  hemin.  Made  suit  to  me 
(enetuchon  moi).  Second  aorist  active  indicative  of  entug- 
chano,  old  verb  to  fall  in  with  a  person,  to  go  to  meet  for 
consultation  or  supplication  as  here.  Common  in  old  Greek 
and  Koine.  Cf.  Rom.  8:27,  34.  See  enteuxis  (petition)  I  Tim. 
2:1.  Papyri  give  many  examples  of  the  technical  sense  of 
enteuxis  as  petition  (Deissmann,  Bible  Studies,  p.  121). 
Some  MSS.  have  plural  here  enetuchon  rather  than  the 
singular  enetuchen.  Crying  (boontes).  Yelling  and  demand- 
ing with  loud  voices.  That  he  ought  not  to  live  any  longer  {me 
dein  auton  zein  meketi).  Indirect  command  (demand)  with 
the  infinitive  dein  for  dei  (it  is  necessary).  The  double  nega- 
tive {me — meketi)  with  zein  intensifies  the  demand. 

25.  But  I  found  {ego  de  katelabomen) .  Second  aorist 
middle  of  katalambano,  to  lay  hold  of,  to  grasp,  to  compre- 
hend as  in  4:13 ;  10:34.  That  he  had  committed  nothing  worthy 
of  death  {meden  axion  auton  thanatou  peprachenai).  Perfect 
active  infinitive  of  prasso  in  indirect  assertion  with  negative 
me  and  accusative  auton  of  general  reference,  the  usual 
idiom.  Verse  25  repeats  the  statement  in  verse  21,  perhaps 
for  the  benefit  of  the  assembled  dignitaries. 

26.  No  certain  thing  {asphales  ti  —  ou).  Nothing  definite 
or  reliable  {a  privative,  sphallo,  to  trip).  All  the  charges  of 
the  Sanhedrin  slipped  away  or  were  tripped  up  by  Paul. 
Festus  confesses  that  he  had  nothing  left  and  thereby  con- 
victs himvself  of  gross  insincerity  in  his  proposal  to  Paul  in 


440     WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

verse  9  about  going  up  to  Jerusalem.  By  his  own  statement 
he  should  have  set  Paul  free.  The  various  details  here  bear 
the  marks  of  the  eyewitness.  Luke  was  surely  present  and 
witnessed  this  grand  spectacle  with  Paul  as  chief  performer. 
Unto  my  lord  {toi  kurioi).  Augustus  (Octavius)  and  Tiberius 
refused  the  title  of  kurios  (lord)  as  too  much  like  rex  (king) 
and  like  master  and  slave,  but  the  servility  of  the  subjects 
gave  it  to  the  other  emperors  who  accepted  it  (Nero  among 
them).  Antoninus  Pius  put  it  on  his  coins.  Deissmann 
{Light  from  the  Ancient  East,  p.  105)  gives  an  ostracon  dated 
Aug.  4,  A.D.  63  with  the  words  "in  the  year  nine  of  Nero 
the  lord"  {enatou  Nerbnos  ton  kuriou).  Deissmann  {op.  cit.y 
pp.  349flF.)  runs  a  most  interesting  parallel  "between  the  cult 
of  Christ  and  the  cult  of  Caesar  in  the  application  of  the 
term  kurios,  lord"  in  ostraca,  papyri,  inscriptions.  Beyond 
a  doubt  Paul  has  all  this  fully  in  mind  when  he  says  in  I  Cor. 
12:3  that  "no  one  is  able  to  say  Kurios  lesous  except  in  the 
Holy  Spirit"  (cf.  also  Phil.  2:11).  The  Christians  claimed  this 
word  for  Christ  and  it  became  the  test  in  the  Roman  perse- 
cutions as  when  Polycarp  steadily  refused  to  say  "Lord 
Caesar"  and  insisted  on  saying  "Lord  Jesus"  when  it  meant 
his  certain  death.  Before  you  {eph*  humon).  The  whole 
company.  In  no  sense  a  new  trial,  but  an  examination  in 
the  presence  of  these  prominent  men  to  secure  data  and  to 
furnish  entertainment  and  pleasure  to  Agrippa  (verse  22). 
Especially  before  thee  {malista  epi  sou).  Out  of  courtesy.  It 
was  the  main  reason  as  verse  22  shows.  Agrippa  was  a  Jew 
and  Festus  was  glad  of  the  chance  to  see  what  he  thought 
of  Paul's  case.  After  examination  had  {tes  anakriseos  geno- 
menes).  Genitive  absolute,  "the  examination  having  taken 
place."  Anakrisis  from  anakrino  (cf.  12:19;  24:8;  28:18) 
is  a  legal  term  for  preliminary  examination.  Only  here  in  the 
N.T.  Inscriptions  and  papyri  give  it  as  examination  of 
slaves  or  other  property.  That  I  may  have  somewhat  to  zvrite 
{hopos  scho  ti  grapso).     Ingressive  aorist  subjunctive  scho 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  441 

(may  get)  with  hopos  (final  particle  like  hina).  Ti  grapso  in 
indirect  question  after  scho  is  either  future  indicative  or 
aorist  subjunctive  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  1045).  Festus 
makes  it  plain  that  this  is  not  a  "trial,"  but  an  examination 
for  his  convenience  to  help  him  out  of  a  predicament. 

27.  Unreasonable  {alogon).  Old  word  from  a  privative  and 
logos  (reason,  speech).  "Without  reason"  as  of  animals 
(Jude  10;  II  Peter  2:12),  "contrary  to  reason"  here.  These 
the  only  N.T.  instances  and  ih  harmony  with  ancient  usage. 
In  sending  {pemponta).  Note  accusative  case  with  the  infini- 
tive semdnai  though  moi  (dative)  just  before.  Cf.  same 
variation  in  I5:22f.;  22:17.  Signify  (semdnai).  First  aorist 
active  infinitive  (not  semenai,  the  old  fojm)  of  semaino,  to 
give  a  sign  (semeion).  The  charges  (tas  aitias).  This  naive 
confession  of  Festus  reveals  how  unjust  has  been  his  whole 
treatment  of  Paul.  He  had  to  send  along  with  the  appeal 
of  Paul  litter ae  dimissoriae  (apostoli)  which  would  give  a 
statement  of  the  case  (Page).  • 


CHAPTER  XXVI 

1.  Thou  art  permitted  {epitrepetai  sot).  Literally,  It  is 
permitted  thee.  As  if  Agrippa  were  master  of  ceremonies 
instead  of  Festus.  Agrippa  as  a  king  and  guest  presides  at 
the  grand  display  while  Festus  has  simply  introduced  Paul. 
for  thyself  (huper  seauiou).  Some  MSS.  have  peri  (concern- 
ing). Paul  is  allowed  to  speak  in  his  own  behalf.  No  charges 
are  made  against  him.  In  fact,  Festus  has  admitted  that  he 
has  no  real  proof  of  any  charges.  Stretched  forth  his  hand 
{ekteinas  ten  cheira).  Dramatic  oratorical  gesture  (not  for 
silence  as  in  12:17;  13:16)  with  the  chain  still  upon  it  (verse 
29)  linking  him  to  the  guard.  First  aorist  active  participle 
of  ekteinOj  to  stretch  out.  Made  his  defence  (apelogeito).  In- 
choative imperfect  of  apologeomai  (middle),  "began  to  make 
his  defence."  This  is  the  fullest  of  all  Paul's  defences.  He 
has  no  word  of  censure  of  his  enemies  or  of  resentment,  but 
seizes  the  opportunity  to  preach  Christ  to  such  a  distin- 
guished company  which  he  does  with  "singular  dignity" 
(Furneaux).  He  is  now  bearing  the  name  of  Christ  "before 
kings"  (Acts  9:15).  In  general  Paul  follows  the  line  of  argu- 
ment of  the  speech  on  the  stairs  (chapter  22). 

2.  /  think  myself  happy  (hegemai  emauton  makarion).  See 
on  Matt.  5:3  for  makarios.  Blass  notes  that  Paul,  like 
Tertullus,  begins  with  captatio  benevolentiae,  but  absque 
adulatione.  He  says  only  what  he  can  truthfully  speak.  For 
hegemai  see  Phil.  3:7;  I  Tim.  6:1  (perfect  middle  indicative 
of  hegeomai)j  I  have  considered.  That  I  am  to  make  my 
defence  {mellon  apologeisthai).  Literally,  "being  about  to 
make  my  defence."  Whereof  I  am  accused  {hon  egkaloumai). 
Genitive  with  egkaloumai  as  in  19:40  or  by  attraction  from 
accusative  of  relative  {ha)  to  case  of  antecedent  (panton). 

442 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  443 

3.  Especially  because  thou  art  expert  {malista  gnosten  onta 
se).  Or  like  the  margin,  "because  thou  art  especially  expert," 
according  as  malista  is  construed.  Gnosten  is  from  ginosko 
and  means  a  knower,  expert,  connoisseur.  Plutarch  uses  it 
and  Deissmann  {Light,  etc.,  p.  367)  restores  it  in  a  papyrus. 
Agrippa  had  the  care  of  the  temple,  the  appointment  of  the 
high  priest,  and  the  care  of  the  sacred  vestments.  But  the 
accusative  onta  se  gives  trouble  here  coming  so  soon  after 
sou  (genitive  with  epi).  Some  MSS.  insert  epistamenos  or 
eidos  (knowing)  but  neither  is  genuine.  Page  takes  it  as 
"governed  by  the  sense  of  thinking  or  considering."  Knowl- 
ing  considers  it  an  anacoluthon.  Buttmann  held  it  to  be  an 
accusative  absolute  after  the  old  Greek  idiom.  Tuchon  is 
such  an  instance  though  used  as  an  adverb  (I  Cor.  16:6). 
It  is  possible  that  one  exists  in  Eph.  i  :i8.  See  other  examples 
discussed  in  Robertson's  Grammar,  pp.  49of.  Customs  and 
questions  (ethon  te  kai  zetematbn).  Both  consuetudinum  in 
practicis  and  quaestionum  in  theoreticis  (Bengel).  Agrippa 
was  qualified  to  give  Paul  an  understanding  and  a  sympa- 
thetic hearing.  Paul  understands  perfectly  the  grand-stand 
play  of  the  whole  performance,  but  he  refused  to  be  silent 
and  chose  to  use  this  opportunity,  slim  as  it  seemed,  to  get  a 
fresh  hearing  for  his  own  case  and  to  present  the  claims  of 
Christ  to  this  influential  man.  His  address  is  a  masterpiece  of 
noble  apologetic.  Patiently  (makrothumos) .  Adverb  from 
makrothumos.  Only  here  in  the  N.T.,  though  makrothumia 
occurs  several  times.  Vulgate  has  longanimiter.  Long  spirit, 
endurance,  opposite  of  impatience.    So  Paul  takes  his  time. 

4.  My  manner  of  life  {ten  men  oun  biosin  mou).  With 
men  oun  Paul  passes  from  the  captatio  benevolentiae  (verses 
I  and  2)  "to  the  narratio  or  statement  of  his  case"  (Page). 
Bibsis  Is  from  biob  (I  Peter  4:2)  and  that  from  bios  (course 
of  life).  This  is  the  only  instance  of  bibsis  yet  found  except 
the  Prologue  (10)  of  Ecclesiasticus  and  an  inscription  given 
in  Ramsay's  Cities  and  Bishoprics  of  Phrygia,  Vol.  IT,  p.  650. 


444      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Know  (isasi).  Literary  form  instead  of  the  vernacular  KoinS 
oidasin.  Paul's  early  life  in  Tarsus  and  Jerusalem  was  an 
open  book  to  all  Jews. 

5.  Having  knowledge  of  me  from  the  first  {proginbskontes  me 
anbthen).  Literally,  "knowing  me  beforehand"  (both  pro 
and  anothen),  from  the  beginning  of  Paul's  public  education 
in  Jerusalem  (Knowling).  Cf.  II  Peter  3:17.  //  they  he 
willing  to  testify  (ean  thelosin  marturein).  Condition  of  third 
class  {ean  and  subjunctive).  A  neat  turning  of  the  tables 
on  the  distinguished  audience  about  Paul's  Jerusalem  repu- 
tation before  his  conversion.  After  the  straitest  sect  {ten 
akrihestaten  hairesin).  This  is  a  true  superlative  (not  ela- 
tive)  and  one  of  the  three  (also  hagiotatos,  Jude  20,  timiotatos 
Rev.  18:12;  21  :ii)  superlatives  in -tatos  in  the  N.T.  (Robert- 
son, Grammar,  pp.  279f.,  670),  though  common  enough  in 
the  LXX  and  the  papyri.  Hairesin  (choosing)  is  properly 
used  here  with  Pharisees  (Josephus,  Life,  38).  Religion 
{threskeias).  From  threskeub  and  this  from  threskos  (James 
1 :26),  old  word  for  religious  worship  or  discipline,  common  in 
the  papyri  and  inscriptions  (Moulton  and  Milligah's  Vocab- 
ulary) for  reverent  worship,  not  mere  external  ritual.  In 
N.T.  only  here,  James  i:26f.;  Col.  2:18.  /  lived  a  Pharisee 
{ezesa  Pharisaios).  Emphatic  position.  Paul  kneW  the  rules 
of  the  Pharisees  and  played  the  game  to  the  full  (Gal.  1:14; 
Phil.  3:5f.).  The  Talmud  makes  it  plain  what  the  life  of  a 
Pharisee  was.  Paul  had  become  one  of  the  leaders  and  stars 
of  hope  for  his  sect. 

6.  And  now  {kai  nun).  Sharp  comparison  between  his 
youth  and  the  present.  To  be  judged  for  the  hope  {ep^  elpidi  — 
krinomenos).  The  hope  of  the  resurrection  and  of  the  prom- 
ised Messiah  (13:32).  Page  calls  verses  6  to  8  a  parenthesis 
in  the  course  of  Paul's  argument  by  which  he  shows  that 
his  life  in  Christ  is  a  real  development  of  the  best  in  Phari- 
saism. He  does  resume  his  narrative  in  verse  9,  but  verses 
6  to  8  are  the  core  of  his  defence  already  presented  in  Gal.  3 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  445 

and  Rom.  9  to  1 1  where  he  proves  that  the  children  of  faith 
are  the  real  seed  of  Abraham. 

7.  Our  twelve  tribes  {to  dodekaphulon  hemon).  A  word 
found  only  here  in  N.T.  and  in  Christian  and  Jewish  writ- 
ings, though  dodekamenon  (twelve  month)  is  common  in  the 
papyri  and  dekaphulos  (ten  tribes)  in  Herodotus.  Paul's 
use  of  this  word  for  the  Jewish  people,  like  James  1:1  {tats 
dodeka  phulais,  the  twelve  tribes),  shows  that  Paul  had  no 
knowledge  of  any  "lost  ten  tribes."  There  is  a  certain  na- 
tional pride  and  sense  of  unity  in  spite  of  the  dispersion 
(Page).  Earnestly  {en  ekteneidi).  A  late  word  from  ekteinb, 
to  stretch  out,  only  here  in  N.T.,  but  in  papyri  and  in- 
scriptions. Page  refers  to  Simeon  and  Anna  (Luke  2:25-28) 
as  instances  of  Jews  looking  for  the  coming  of  the  Messiah. 
Note  the  accusative  of  nukta  kai  hemeran  as  in  20:31.  Hope 
to  attain  {elpizei  katantesai) .  This  Messianic  hope  had  been 
the  red  thread  running  through  Jewish  history.  Today,  alas, 
it  is  a  sadly  worn  thread  for  Jews  who  refuse  to  see  the  Mes- 
siah in  Jesus.  /  am  accused  by  Jews  {egkaloumai  hupo  lou- 
daion).  The  very  word  used  in  23:28  {enekaloun)  which  see, 
and  by  Jews  of  all  people  in  the  world  whose  mainspring 
was  this  very  "hope."    It  is  a  tremendously  effective  turn. 

8.  Incredible  with  you  {apiston  par''  humin).  This  old 
word  apiston  {a  privative  and  pistos)  means  either  unfaith- 
ful (Luke  12:46),  unbelieving  (John  20:27),  or  unbelievable 
as  here).  Paul  turns  suddenly  from  Agrippa  to  the  audience 
{par^  humin,  plural),  most  of  whom  were  probably  Gentiles 
and  scouted  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  as  at  Athens 
(17:32).  //  God  doth  raise  the  dead  {ei  ho  theos  nekrous  egeirei). 
Condition  of  the  first  class  assuming  that  God  does  raise 
dead  people.  Only  God  can  do  it.  This  rhetorical  question 
needs  no  answer,  though  the  narrative  resumed  in  verse  9 
does  it  in  a  way. 

9.  /  verily  thought  with  myself  {ego  men  oun  edoxa  emautoi). 
Personal    construction  instead  of  the  impersonal,  a  touch 


446      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

of  the  literary  style.  Paul's  "egoism"  is  deceived  as  so  often 
happens.  /  ought  (dein).  Infinitive  the  usual  construction 
with  dokeb.  Necessity  and  a  sense  of  duty  drove  Paul  on 
even  in  this  great  sin  (see  on  23:1),  a  common  failing  with 
persecutors.  Contrary  {enantia).  Old  word  (adjective), 
over  against,  opposite  (Acts  27:4),  then  hostile  to  as  here. 

10.  /  both  shut  up  many  {pollous  te  katekleisa).  Effective 
aorist  active  of  katakleio,  old  word  to  shut  down  like  a  trap 
door,  in  N.T.  only  here  and  Luke  3:20.  Double  use  of  te 
(both — and).  Having  received  authority  from  the  chief  priests 
{ten  para  ton  archiereon  exousian  labbn).  "The  authority," 
he  says,  Paul  was  the  official  persecutor  of  the  saints  under 
the  direction  of  the  Sanhedrin.  He  mentions  "chief  priests" 
(Sadducees),  though  a  Pharisee  himself.  Both  parties  were 
co-operating  against  the  saints.  And  when  they  were  put  to 
death  {anairoumenon  te  auton).  Genitive  absolute  with 
present  passive  participle  of  anaireo.  I  gave  my  vote  against 
them  {katenegka  psephon).  "I  cast  down  my  pebble"  (a 
black  one).  The  ancient  Greeks  used  white  pebbles  for 
acquittal  (Rev.  2:17),  black  ones  for  condemnation  as  here 
(the  only  two  uses  of  the  word  in  the N.T.). Paul's  phrase 
(not  found  elsewhere)  is  more  vivid  than  the  usual  katapse- 
phizo  for  voting.  They  literally  cast  the  pebbles  into  the  urn. 
Cf.  sumps ephizo  in  Acts  19:19,  sugkatapsephizo  in  Acts 
I  '.26.  If  Paul's  language  is  taken  literally  here,  he  was  a 
member  of  the  Sanhedrin  and  so  married  when  he  led  the 
persecution.  That  is  quite  possible,  though  he  was  not 
married  when  he  wrote  I  Cor.  7:7f.,  but  a  widower.  It  is 
possible  to  take  the  language  figuratively  for  approval,  but 
not  so  natural. 

11.  Punishing  (timoron).  Old  word  timoreo  originally 
to  render  help,  to  succor  {timoros,  from  time  and  ouros)^ 
then  to  avenge  (for  honour).  In  N.T.  only  here  and  22:5. 
/  strove  to  make  them  blaspheme  (enagkazon  blasphemein). 
Conative  imperfect  active  of  anagkazo,  old  verb  from  anagke 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  447 

(necessity,  compulsion).  The  tense,  like  the  imperfect  in 
Matt.  3:14;  Luke  1:59,  leaves  room  to  hope  that  Paul  was 
not  successful  in  this  effort,  for  he  had  already  said  that  he 
brought  many  "unto  death"  (22:4).  /  persecuted  (ediokon). 
Imperfect  active  again,  repeated  attempts.  The  old  verb 
dioko  was  used  to  run  after  or  chase  game  and  then  to  chase 
enemies.  The  word  "persecute"  is  the  Latin  persequor^ 
to  follow  through  or  after.  It  is  a  vivid  picture  that  Paul 
here  paints  of  his  success  in  hunting  big  game,  a  grand 
heresy  hunt.  Even  unto  foreign  cities  (kai  eis  exo  poleis). 
We  know  of  Damascus,  and  Paul  evidently  planned  to  go 
to  other  cities  outside  of  Palestine  and  may  even  have  done 
so  before  the  fateful  journey  to  Damascus. 

12.  Whereupon  {en  hois).  "In  which  things"  (affairs  of 
persecution),  "on  which  errand."  Cf.  24:18.  Paul  made 
them  leave  Palestine  (11:19)  ^^^  followed  them  beyond  it 
(9:2).  With  the  authority  and  commission  (met^  exousias.  kai 
epitropes).  Not  merely  "authority"  {exousia),  but  express 
appointment  {epitrope,  old  word,  but  here  only  in  N.T.,  de- 
rived from  epitropos,  steward,  and  that  iroin^pitrepd,  to  turn 
over  to,  to  commit). 

13.  At  midday  {hemeras  meses).  Genitive  of  time  and 
idiomatic  use  of  mesos,  in  the  middle  of  the  day,  more  vivid 
than  mesembrian  (22:6).  Above  the  brightness  of  the  sun 
{huper  ten  lamproteta  tou  heliou).  Here  alone  not  in  Acts 
9  or  22,  though  implied  in  9:3  and  22:6,  "indicating  the 
supernatural  character  of  the  light"  (Knowling).  Luke 
makes  no  effort  to  harmonize  the  exact  phrases  here  with 
those  in  the  other  accounts  and  Paul  here  (verse  16)  blends 
together  what  Jesus  said  to  him  directly  and  the  message 
of  Jesus  through  Ananias  (9:15).  The  word  lamprotes,  old 
word,  is  here  alone  in  the  N.T.  Shining  round  about  me 
{perilampsan  me).  First  aorist  active  participle  of  perilampo, 
common  KoinS  verb,  in  N.T.  only  here  and  Luke  2  :g. 

14.  When  we  were  all  fallen  (panton  katapesonton  hemon). 


448      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Genitive  absolute  with  second  aorist  active  participle  of 
katapipto.  In  the  Hebrew  language  {tei  Ebraidi  dialektoi). 
Natural  addition  here,  for  Paul  is  speaking  in  Greek,  not 
Aramaic  as  in  22:2.  It  is  hard  for  thee  to  kick  against  the  goad 
{skleron  soi  pros  kentra  laktizein).  Genuine  here,  but  not  in 
chapters  9  and  22.  A  common  proverb  as  Aeschylus  Ag. 
1624:  Pros  kentra  me  laktize.  "It  is  taken  from  an  ox  that 
being  pricked  with  a  goad  kicks  and  receives  a  severer 
wound"  (Page).  Cf.  the  parables  of  Jesus  (Matt.  13:35). 
Blass  observes  that  Paul's  mention  of  this  Greek  and  Latin 
proverb  is  an  indication  of  his  culture.  Besides  he  mentions 
(not  invents)  it  here  rather  than  in  chapter  22  because  of 
the  culture  of  this  audience.  Kentron  means  either  sting  as 
of  bees  (II  Mace.  14:19)  and  so  of  death  (I  Cor.  15:55)  or  an 
iron  goad  in  the  ploughman's  hand  as  here  (the  only  two 
N.T.  examples).  Note  plural  here  (goads)  and  laktizein  is 
present  active  infinitive  so  that  the  idea  is  "to  keep  on  kick- 
ing against  goads."  This  old  verb  means  to  kick  with  the 
heel  (adverb  lax,  with  the  heel),  but  only  here  in  the  N.T. 
There  is  a  papyrus  example  of  kicking  {laktizo)  with  the  feet 
against  the  door. 

16.  Arise  and  stand  (anastethi  kai  stetht).  "Emphatic 
assonance"  (Page).  Second  aorist  active  imperative  of 
compound  verb  (anistemi)  and  simplex  {histemi).  "Stand 
up  and  take  a  stand."  Have  I  appeared  unto  thee  (ophthen 
sot).  First  aorist  passive  indicative  of  horao.  See  on  Luke 
22:43.  To  appoint  thee  (procheirisasthai  se).  See  3:30  and 
22:14  for  this  verb.  Both  of  the  things  wherein  thou  hast 
seen  me  {hon  te  eides  me).  The  reading  me  (not  In  all  MSS.) 
makes  it  the  object  of  eides  (didst  see)  and  hon  is  genitive 
of  ha  (accusative  of  general  reference)  attracted  to  the  case 
of  the  unexpressed  antecedent  touton.  Paul  is  thus  a  personal 
eyewitness  of  the  Risen  Christ  (Luke  1:1;  I  Cor.  4:1;  9:1). 
And  of  the  things  wherein  I  will  appear  unto  thee  {hon  te 
ophthesomai  soi).    Here  again  hon  is  genitive  of  the  accusa- 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  449 

tive  (general  reference)  relative  ha  attracted  to  the  case  of 
the  antecedent  touton  or  ekeinon  as  before.  But  ophthesomai 
is  first  future  passive  of  horao  and  cannot  be  treated  as 
active  or  middle.  Page  takes  it  to  mean  "the  visions  in  which 
I  shall  be  seen  by  you,"  the  passive  form  bringing  out  the 
agency  of  God.  See  those  in  Acts  18:9;  23:11;  II  Cor.  12:2. 
The  passive  voice,  however,  like  apekrithen  and  ephobetheuj 
did  become  sometimes  .transitive  in  the  KoinS  (Robertson, 
Grammar,  p.  819). 

17.  Delivering  thee  (exairoumenos  se).  Present  middle  par- 
ticiple of  exaireo,  old  verb  and  usually  so  rendered,  but  the 
old  Greek  also  uses  it  for  "choose"  as  also  in  LXX  (Isa. 
48:10).  The  papyri  give  examples  of  both  meanings  and 
either  makes  good  sense  here.  God  was  continually  rescuing 
Paul  "out  of  the  hands  of  Jews  and  Gentiles  and  Paul  was 
a  chosen  vessel"  (9:15).    Modern  scholars  are  also  divided. 

18.  To  open  (anoixai).  First  aorist  active  infinitive  of 
purpose.  That  they  may  turn  {tou  epistrepsai) .  Another  infin- 
itive of  purpose  first  aorist  active  (genitive  case  and  articu- 
lar), epexegetic  to  anoixai.  That  they  may  receive  {tou  labein). 
Another  genitive  articular  infinitive  of  purpose  subordinate 
(epexegetic)  to  tou  epistrepsai.  Sanctified  hy  faith  in  me 
(hegiasmenois  pistei  tei  eis  eme).  Perfect  passive  participle 
of  hagiazo,  instrumental  case  of  pistei,  article  before  eis  eme 
("by  faith,  that  in  me").  These  important  words  of  Jesus  to 
Paul  give  his  justification  to  this  cultured  audience  for  his 
response  to  the  command  of  Jesus.  This  was  the  turning 
point  in  Paul's  career  and  it  was  a  step  forward  and  up- 
ward. 

19.  Wherefore  {hothen).  This  relatival  adverb  (cf.  14:26; 
28:13)  gathers  up  all  that  Paul  has  said.  /  was  not  disobedient 
{ouk  egenomen  apeithes).  Litotes  again,  "I  did  not  become 
(second  aorist  middle  indicative  of  ginomai)  disobedient" 
{apeithes,  old  word  already  in  Luke  i  :i7).  Unto  the  heavenly 
vision  {tei  ouranioi  optasidi).     A  later  form  of  opsis,  from 


450      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

optazo,  in  LXX,  and  in  N.T.  (Luke  1:22;  24:23;  Acts  26:19; 
II  Cor.  12:1).  Only  time  that  Paul  uses  it  about  seeing  Christ 
on  the  Damascus  road,  but  no  reflection  on  the  reality  of  the 
event. 

20.  But  declared  {alia  apeggellon).  Imperfect  active  of 
apaggelloj  repeatedly.  Throughout  all  the  country  of  Judea 
{pdsan  te  ten  chbran  tes  loudaias).  The  accusative  here  in 
the  midst  of  the  datives  {tois  en  Damask oi,  lerosolumois,  tois 
ethnesin)  seems  strange  and  Page  feels  certain  that  eis 
should  be  here  even  though  absent  in  Aleph  A  B.  But  the 
accusative  of  extent  of  space  will  explain  it  (Robertson, 
Grammar,  p.  469).  Doing  works  worthy  of  repentance  (axia 
tes  metanoias  erga  prassontas).  Accusative  case  of  present 
active  participle  prassontas  because  of  the  implied  autous 
with  the  present  infinitive  metanoein  (repent)  and  epis- 
trephein  (turn),  though  the  dative  prassousin  could  have 
been  used  to  agree  with  ethnesin  (Gentiles).  Cf.  Matt  3:8 
for  similar  language  used  of  the  Baptist.  Paul,  the  greatest 
of  theologians,  was  an  interesting  practical  preacher. 

21.  Assayed  to  kill  me  {epeironto  diacheirisasthai).  Con- 
ative  imperfect  middle  of  peirao,  the  old  form  of  the 
later  Koini  peirazo  so  common  in  the  KoinS,  but  in  N.T. 
here  only.  Some  MSS.  have  it  in  Acts  9:26  and  Heb.  4:15. 
The  old  verb  diacheirizo,  to  take  in  hand,  middle  to  lay 
hands  on,  to  slay,  occurs  in  N.T.  only  here  and  5:30  which 
see. 

22.  Having  therefore  obtained  (oun  tuchon).  Second  aorist 
active  participle  of  old  verb  tugchano.  The  help  that  is  from 
God  {epikourias  tes  apo  tou  theou).  Old  word  from  epikoureOj 
to  aid,  and  that  from  epikouros,  ally,  assister.  Only  here  in 
N.T.  God  is  Paul's  ally.  All  of  the  plots  of  the  Jews  against 
Paul  had  failed  so  far.  /  stand  (hesteka).  Second  perfect 
of  histemi,  to  place,  intransitive  to  stand.  Picturesque  word 
(Page)  of  Paul's  stability  and  fidelity  (cf.  Phil.  4:1;  Eph. 
6:13).   Both  to  small  and  great  (mikroi  te  kai  megaloi).  Dative 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  451 

singular  (rather  than  instrumental,  taking  marturoumenos 
middle,  not  passive)  and  use  of  te  kai  links  the  two  adjec- 
tives together  in  an  inclusive  way.  These  two  adjectives 
in  the  singular  (representative  singular  rather  than  plural) 
can  apply  to  age  (young  and  old)  or  to  rank  (Rev.  ii:i8) 
as  is  specially  suitable  here  with  Festus  and  Agrippa  present. 
In  Acts  8:10  (Heb.  8:11)  the  phrase  explains  pantes  (all). 
Saying  nothing  but  what  {ouden  ektos  legon  hon).  "Saying 
nothing  outside  of  those  things  which."  The  ablative  rela- 
tive hon  is  attracted  into  the  case  of  the  unexpressed  antece- 
dent teuton  and  so  ablative  after  ektos  (adverbial  preposition 
common  in  LXX,  the  papyri.  In  N.T.  here  and  I  Cor.  6:18; 
15:27;  II  Cor.  I2:2f.).  Cf.  Luke  16:29  about  Moses  and  the 
prophets. 

23.  How  that  the  Christ  must  suffer  {ei  pathetos  ho  Christos). 
Literally,  "if  the  Messiah  is  subject  to  suffering."  Ei  can 
here  mean  "whether"  as  in  Heb.  7:15.  This  use  of  a  verbal 
in  -tos  for  capability  or  possibility  occurs  in  the  N.T.  alone  in 
pathetos  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  157).  This  word  occurs  in 
Plutarch  in  this  sense.  It  is  like  the  Latin  patihilis  and  is 
from  pascho.  Here  alone  in  N.T.  Paul  is  speaking  from  the 
Jewish  point  of  view.  Most  rabbis  had  not  rightly  under- 
stood Isa.  53.  When  the  Baptist  called  Jesus  "the  Lamb  of 
God "  (John  i  :29)  it  was  a  startling  idea.  It  is  not  then 
"must  suffer"  here,  but  "can  suffer."  The  Cross  of  Christ 
was  a  stumbling-block  to  the  rabbis.  How  that  he  first  by  the 
resurrection  of  the  dead  {ei  protos  ex  anastaseos  nekrbn). 
Same  construction  with  ei  (whether).  This  point  Paul  had 
often  discussed  with  the  Jews:  "whether  he  (the  Messiah) 
by  a  resurrection  of  dead  people."  Others  had  been  raised 
from  the  dead,  but  Christ  is  the  first  {protos)  who  arose  from 
the  dead  and  no  longer  dies  (Rom.  6:19)  and  proclaims  light 
{phbs  mellei  kataggellein) .  Paul  is  still  speaking  from  the 
Jewish  standpoint:  "is  about  to  (going  to)  proclaim  light." 
See  verse  18  for  "light"  and  Luke  2:32.    Both  to  the  people 


452      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

and  to  the  Gentile^  (toi  te  laoi  kai  tots  ethnesin).  See  verse  17. 
It  was  at  the  word  Gentiles  (ethne)  that  the  mob  lost  con- 
trol of  themselves  in  the  speech  from  the  stairs  (22:2if.). 
So  it  is  here,  only  not  because  of  that  word,  but  because 
of  the  word  "resurrection"  (anastasis). 

24.  ^s  he  thus  made  his  defence  {tauta  autou  apologou- 
menou).  Genitive  absolute  again  with  present  middle 
participle.  Paul  was  still  speaking  when  Festus  interrupted 
him  in  great  excitement.  With  a  loud  voice  {megalei  tei 
phonei).  Associative  instrumental  case  showing  manner 
(Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  530)  and  the  predicate  use  of  the 
adjective,  "with  the  voice  loud"  (elevated).  Thou  art 
mad  (mainei).  Old  verb  for  raving.  See  also  John  10:20; 
Acts  12:15;  ^  ^o'"-  H'23-  The  enthusiasm  of  Paul  was  too 
much  for  Festus  and  then  he  had  spoken  of  visions  and  resur- 
rection from  the  dead  (verse  8).  "Thou  art  going  mad" 
(linear  present),  Festus  means.  Thy  much  learning  doth 
turn  thee  to  madness  {ta  polla  se  grammata  eis  manian  peri- 
trepei).  "Is  turning  thee  round."  Old  verb  peritrepo,  but 
only  here  in  N.T.  Festus  thought  that  Paul's  "much  learn- 
ing" (  =  "many  letters,"  cf.  John  7:15  of  Jesus)  of  the  He- 
brew Scriptures  to  which  he  had  referred  was  turning  his 
head  to  madness  (wheels  in  his  head)  and  he  was  going  mad 
right  before  them  all.  The  old  word  mania  (our  mania, 
frenzy,  cf.  maniac)  occurs  here  only  in  N.T.  Note  un- 
usual position  of  se  between  polla  and  grammata  (Robertson, 
Grammar,  pp.  418,  420) 

25.  But  speak  forth  [alia  apophtheggomai).  Verb  for  digni- 
fied and  elevated  discourse,  a  word  from  the  literary  KoinSj 
not  the  vernacular.  In  N.T.  only  here  and  2:4,  14  which  see. 
It  occurs  three  times  in  Vettius  Valens  in  a  "mantic"  sense. 
Paul  was  not  ruffled  by  the  rude  and  excited  interruption 
of  Festus,  but  speaks  with  perfect  courtesy  in  his  reply 
"words  of  truth  and  soberness."  The  old  word  sophrosune 
(soundness  of  mind)  from  sophron  (and  that  from  sos  and 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  453 

phren)  is  directly  opposed  to  "madness"  {mania)  and  in 
N.T.  occurs  only  here  and  I  Tim.  2:15. 

26.  For  the  king  knoweth  of  these  things  {epistatai  gar 
peri  touton  ho  basileus).  Epistatai  (present  middle  probably 
Ionic  form  of  ephistemi)  is  a  literary  word  and  suits  well 
here  (cf.  24:10).  Freely  (parresiazomenos).  Present  middle 
participle,  speaking  fully,  making  a  clean  breast  of  it.  From 
parresia  {pan,  rhesis)  (cf.  13:46).  Is  hidden  from  him  {Ian- 
thanein  auton).  Escapes  his  notice.  Infinitive  in  indirect 
discourse  after  peithomai  (I  am  persuaded). 

27.  /  know  that  thou  believest  {oida  hoti  pisteueis).  Paul 
had  "cornered"  Agrippa  by  this  direct  challenge.  As  the 
Jew  in  charge  of  the  temple  he  was  bound  to  confess  his 
faith  in  the  prophets.  But  Paul  had  interpreted  the  prophets 
about  the  Messiah  in  a  way  that  fell  in  with  his  claim  that 
Jesus  was  the  Messiah  risen  from  the  dead.  To  say,  "Yes" 
would  place  himself  in  Paul's  hands.  To  say  "No"  would 
mean  that  he  did  not  believe  the  prophets.  Agrippa  had 
listened  with  the  keenest  interest,  but  he  slipped  out  of  the 
coils  with  adroitness  and  a  touch  of  humour. 

28.  With  but  little  persuasion  thou  wouldest  fain  make  me 
a  Christian  {en  oligoi  me  peitheis  Christianon  poiesai).  The 
Authorized  rendering  is  impossible:  "Almost  thou  per- 
suadest  me  to  be  a  Christian."  En  oligoi  does  not  mean 
"almost."  That  would  require  oligou,  par^  oligon,  or  dei 
oligou.  It  is  not  clear,  however,  precisely  what  en  oligoi  does 
mean.  It  may  refer  to  time  (in  little  time)  or  a  short  cut, 
but  that  does  not  suit  well  en  megaloi  in  verse  29.  Tyndale 
and  Crammer  rendered  it  "somewhat"  (in  small  measure 
or  degree).  There  are,  alas,  many  "somewhat"  Christians. 
Most  likely  the  idea  is  "in  (or  with)  small  effort  you  are  try- 
ing to  persuade  {peitheis,  conative  present  active  indicative) 
me  in  order  to  make  me  a  Christian."  This  takes  the  infini- 
tive poiesai  to  be  purpose  (Page  renders  it  by  "so  as")  and 
thus  avoids  trying  to  make  poiesai  like  genesthai  (become). 


454      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

The  aorist  is  punctiliar  action  for  single  act,  not  "perfect." 
The  tone  of  Agrippa  is  ironical,  but  not  unpleasant.  He 
pushes  it  aside  with  a  shrug  of  the  shoulders.  The  use  of 
"Christian"  is  natural  here  as  in  the  other  two  instances 
(11:26;  I  Peter  4:16). 

29.  /  would  to  God  {euxaimen  an  toi  theoi).  Conclusion  of 
fourth-class  condition  (optative  with  an),  undetermined  with 
less  likelihood,  the  so-called  potential  optative  (Robertson, 
Grammar,  p.  102 1).  Polite  and  courteous  wish  (first  aorist 
middle  optative  of  euchomai).  Whether  with  little  or  with 
much  {kai  en  mikroi  kai  en  megaloi).  Literally,  "both  in 
little  and  in  great,"  or  "both  with  little  and  with  great 
pains"  or  "both  in  some  measure  and  in  great  measure." 
Paul  takes  kindly  the  sarcasm  of  Agrippa.  Such  as  I  am 
(toioutous  hopoios  kai  ego  eimi).  Accusative  toioutous  with 
the  infinitive  genesthai.  Paul  uses  these  two  qualitative 
pronouns  instead  of  repeating  the  word  "Christian."  Ex- 
cept these  bonds  {parekios  ton  desmon  touton).  Ablative  case 
with  parektos  (late  preposition  for  the  old  parek).  Paul  lifts 
his  right  manacled  hand  with  exquisite  grace  and  good  feel- 
ing. 

30.  Rose  up  (aneste).  Second  aorist  active  of  anistemi  (in- 
transitive), agreeing  only  with  "the  king"  {ho  basileus). 
The  entertainment  was  over. 

31.  They  spake  one  to  another  {elaloun  pros  allelous). 
Imperfect  active,  describing  the  eager  conversation  of  the 
dignitaries  about  Paul's  wonderful  speech.  Nothing  worthy 
of  death  or  bonds  {ouden  thanatou  e  desmon  axion).  This  is 
the  unanimous  conclusion  of  all  these  dignitaries  (Romans, 
Jews,  Greeks)  as  it  was  of  Festus  before  (25:25).  But  Paul 
had  not  won  any  of  them  to  Christ.  The  conclusion  leaves 
Festus  in  a  predicament.  Why  had  he  not  set  Paul  free 
before   this.^ 

32.  This  man  might  have  been  set  at  liberty  {Apolelusthai 
edunato  ho  anthrbpos  houtos).   Conclusion  of  the  second  class 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  455 

condition  (detennined  as  unfulfilled)  without  an  as  in  24:19 
because  of  edunato  (verb  of  possibility,  Robertson,  Grammar^ 
p.  1014).  Note  perfect  passive  infinitive  apolelusthai  from 
apoluo.  He  certainly  "could  have  been  set  free."  Why  was 
it  not  done  ?  If  he  had  not  appealed  unto  Caesar  {ei  me  epekek- 
leto  Kaisara).  Condition  of  the  second  class  with  the  past 
perfect  middle  indicative  (pp.  cit.,  p.  1015)  of  epikaleo  (cf. 
25:1  if.).  But  Paul  only  appealed  to  Caesar  after  Festiis  had 
tried  to  shift  him  back  to  Jerusalem  and  had  refused  to  set 
him  free  in  Caesarea.  Festus  comes  out  with  no  honour  in  the 
case.  Since  Agrippa  was  a  favourite  at  court  perhaps  Festus 
would  be  willing  to  write  favourably  to  Caesar. 


CHAPTER  XXVII 

I.  That  we  should  sail  {tou  apoplein  hemds).  This  genitive 
articular  infinitive  with  ekrithe  like  the  LXX  construction 
translating  the  Hebrew  infinitive  construct  is  awkward  in 
Greek.  Several  similar  examples  in  Luke  17:1;  Acts  10:25; 
20:3  (Robertson,  Grammar ^  p.  1068).  Luke  alone  uses  this 
old  verb  in  N.T.  He  uses  nine  compounds  of  pled,  to  sail. 
Note  the  reappearance  of  "we"  in  the  narrative.  It  is 
possible,  of  course,  that  Luke  was  not  with  Paul  during  the 
series  of  trials  at  Caesarea,  or  at  least,  not  all  the  time.  But 
it  is  natural  for  Luke  to  use  "we"  again  because  he  and 
Aristarchus  are  travelling  with  Paul.  In  Caesarea  Paul 
was  the  centre  of  the  action  all  the  time  whether  Luke  was 
present  or  not.  The  great  detail  and  minute  accuracy  of 
Luke's  account  of  this  voyage  and  shipwreck  throw  more 
light  upon  ancient  seafaring  than  everything  else  put  to- 
gether. Smith's  Voyage  and  Shipwreck  of  St.  Paul  is  still 
a  classic  on  the  subject.  Though  so  accurate  in  his  use  of 
sea  terms,  yet  Luke  writes  like  a  landsman,  not  like  a  sailor. 
Besides,  the  character  of  Paul  is  here  revealed  in  a  remark- 
able fashion.  They  delivered  (paredidoun).  Imperfect  active 
omega  form  rather  than  the  old  -mi  form  paredidosan  as  in 
4:33,  from  paradidbmi.  Perhaps  the  imperfect  notes  the  con- 
tinuance of  the  handing  over.  Certain  other  prisoners  (iinas 
heterous  desmbtas).  Bound  {desmbtas)  like  Paul,  but  not 
necessarily  appellants  to  Caesar,  perhaps  some  of  them  con- 
demned criminals  to  amuse  the  Roman  populace  in  the 
gladiatorial  shows,  most  likely  pagans  though  heterous  does 
not  have  to  mean  different  kind  of  prisoners  from  Paul. 
Of  the  Augustan  band  {speires  Sehastes).  Note  Ionic  genitive 
speires,  not  speiras.   See  on  Matt.  27:1;  Acts  10:1.   Cohortis 

456 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  457 

Augustae.  We  do  not  really  know  why  this  cohort  is  called 
"Augustan."  It  may  be  that  it  is  part  of  the  imperial 
commissariat  (frumentarii)  since  Julius  assumes  chief 
authority  in  the  grain  ship  (verse  11).  These  legionary 
centurions  when  in  Rome  were  called  peregrini  (foreigners) 
because  their  work  was  chiefly  in  the  provinces.  This  man 
Julius  may  have  been  one  of  them. 

2.  In  a  ship  of  Adramyttium  (plotoi  Hadramuntenoi).  A 
boat  belonging  to  Adramyttium,  a  city  in  Mysia  in  the 
province  of  Asia.  Probably  a  small  coasting  vessel  on  its 
way  home  for  the  winter  stopping  at  various  places  (topous). 
Julius  would  take  his  chances  to  catch  another  ship  for 
Rome.  The  usual  way  to  go  to  Rome  was  to  go  to  Alexan- 
dria and  so  to  Rome,  but  no  large  ship  for  Alexandria  was 
at  hand.  JVe  put  to  sea  (anechthemen) .  First  aorist  passive 
of  anago,  usual  word  in  Luke.  Aristarchus,  a  Macedonian  oj 
Thessalonica,  being  with  us  {ontos  sun  hemin  Aristarchou 
Makedonos  Thessalonikeos).  Genitive  absolute.  Ramsay 
suggests  that  Luke  and  Aristarchus  accompanied  Paul  as 
his  slaves  since  they  would  not  be  allowed  to  go  as  his 
friends.  But  Luke  was  Paul's  physician  and  may  have 
gained  permission  on  that  score. 

3.  The  next  day  {tei  heterdi).  Locative  case  with  hemerdi 
understood.  We  touched  ikatechthemen).  First  aorist  passive 
of  katago,  the  usual  term  for  "coming  down"  from  the  seas 
as  anago  above  (and  verse  4)  is  for  "going  up"  to  sea.  So  it 
looks  to  sailors.  Sidon  was  67  miles  from  Caesarea,  the  rival 
of  Tyre,  with  a  splendid  harbour.  The  ship  stopped  here  for 
trade.  Treated  Paul  kindly  {philanthropos  toi  Pauloi  chresa- 
menos).  "Using  {chresamenos,  first  aorist  middle  participle 
of  chraomaij  to  use)  Paul  (instrumental  case  used  with  this 
verb)  kindly"  {philanthropos ^  "philanthropically,"  adverb 
from  phil-anthropos,  love  of  mankind).  He  was  kindly  to 
Paul  throughout  the  voyage  (verse  43;  28:16),  taking  a 
personal  interest  in  his  welfare.    Refresh  himself  {epimeleias 


4S8      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

tuchein).  Second  aorist  active  infinitive  of  tugchano  (to 
obtain)  with  the  genitive  epimeleias,  old  word  from  epimeleSy 
careful,  only  here  in  the  N.T.  Whether  it  was  mere  hospital- 
ity we  do  not  know.  It  may  have  been  medical  attention  re- 
quired because  of  Paul's  long  confinement.  This  is  Paul's 
first  visit  to  Sidon,  but  Christians  were  already  in  Phoenicia 
(11:19)  and  so  Paul  had  "friends"  here. 

4.  We  sailed  under  the  lee  of  Cyprus  {hup epleus amen  ten 
Kupron).  First  aorist  active  indicative  of  hupopleo,  to  sail 
under,  Cyprus  was  thus  on  the  left  between  the  ship  and 
the  wind  from  the  northwest,  under  the  protection  of  Cyprus. 
Because  the  winds  were  contrary  idia  to  tous  anemous  einai 
enantious).  The  articular  infinitive  after  dia  and  the  accusa- 
tive of  general  reference  {anemous)  with  predicate  accusa- 
tive {enantious,  facing  them,  in  their  very  teeth  if  they  went 
that  way).  The  Etesian  winds  were  blowing  from  the' north- 
west so  that  they  could  not  cut  straight  across  from  Sidon  to 
Patara  with  Cyprus  on  the  right.  They  must  run  behind 
Cyprus  and  hug  the  shore  of  Cilicia  and  Pamphylia. 

5.  When  we  had  sailed  across  {diapleus antes).  First  aorist 
active  participle  of  diapleo  (another  compound  of  pled). 
The  sea  which  is  off  Cilicia  and  Pamphylia  {to  pelagos  to  kata 
ten  Kilikian  kai  Pamphulian).  Pelagos  is  properly  the  high 
sea  as  here.  In  Matt.  18:6  (which  see)  Jesus  uses  it  of  "the 
depth  of  the  sea."  Only  these  examples  in  the  N.T.  The 
current  runs  westward  along  the  coast  of  Cilicia  and  Pam- 
phylia and  the  land  would  protect  from  the  wind.  We  came 
to  Myra  of  Lycia  {katelthamen  eis  Murra  tes  Lukias).  Liter- 
ally, "We  came  down."  This  town  was  two  and  a  half 
miles  from  the  coast  of  Lycia.  The  port  Andriace  had  a  fine 
harbour  and  did  a  large  grain  business.  No  disciples  are 
mentioned  here  nor  at  Lasea,  Melita,  Syracuse,  Rhegium. 

6.  Sailing  for  Italy  {pleon  eis  ten  Italian).  This  was  the 
opportunity  for  which  Lysias  had  been  looking.  So  he  put 
{enehihasen,  first  aorist  active  of  emhihazo,  to  cause  to  enter. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  459 

Cf.  epibantes  in  verse  2)  prisoners  and  soldiers  on  board. 
This  was  a  ship  of  Alexandria  bound  for  Rome,  a  grain 
ship  (38)  out  of  its  course  because  of  the  wind.  Such  grain 
ships  usually  carried  passengers. 

7.  When  we  had  sailed  slowly  (braduploountes) .  Present 
active  participle  of  hraduploeo  (bradusy  slow,  pious ,  voyage). 
Literally,  "sailing  slowly,"  not  "having  or  had  sailed 
slowly."  Only  here  and  in  Artemidorus  (sec.  cent.  a.d.). 
It  may  mean  "tacking"  before  the  wind.  Polybius  uses 
tachuploeo,  to  sail  swiftly.  Many  days  {en  hikanais  hemerais). 
See  on  Luke  7:6  for  hikanos.  Literally,  "in  considerable 
days."  With  difficulty  {molis).  Used  in  old  Greek,  like  mogis 
(Luke  9:39)  from  moloSj  toil  (see  Acts  14:18).  Over  against 
Cnidus  (kata  ten  Knidon).  "Down  along  Cnidus."  A 
hundred  and  thirty  miles  from  Myra,  the  southwest  point 
of  Asia  Minor  and  the  western  coast.  Here  the  protection 
of  the  land  from  the  northwest  wind  ceased.  The  wind  not 
further  suffering  us  {me  prose ontos  hemds  tou  anemou). 
Genitive  absolute  with  present  active  participle  of  proseao, 
one  of  the  few  words  still  "not  found  elsewhere"  (Thayer). 
Regular  negative  me  with  participles.  They  could  not  go  on 
west  as  they  had  been  doing  since  leaving  Myra,  We  sailed 
under  the  lee  of  Crete  {hupepleusamen  ten  Kreten).  See  under 
verse  4.  Instead  of  going  to  the  right  of  Crete  as  the  straight 
course  would  have  been  they  sailed  southwest  with  Crete 
to  their  right  and  got  some  protection  against  the  wind  there. 
Over  against  Salmone  {kata  Salmonen).  Off  Cape  Sal- 
mone,  a  promontory  on  the  east  of  the  island. 

8.  Coasting  along  {paralegomenot).  Present  middle  par- 
ticiple of  par  ale  go  y  to  lay  beside,  not  from  lego,  to  collect  or 
lego,  to  say.  Diodorus  Siculus  uses  paralegomai  in  precisely 
this  sense  of  coasting  along,  like  Latin  legere  oram.  In  N.T. 
only  here  and  verse  13.  Fair  Havens  {Kalous  Limenas). 
This  harbour  is  named  Kalus  Limeonas,  a  small  bay  two 
miles  east  of  Cape  Matala.   It  opens  to  the  East  and  South- 


460      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

east,  but  is  not  fit  to  winter  in.  This  harbour  would  protect 
them  for  a  time  from  the  winds.  The  city  of  Lasea  {polis 
Lasea).  Neither  Lasea  nor  Fair  Havens  is  mentioned  by 
any  ancient  writer,  two  of  the  hundred  cities  of  Crete. 

9.  Where  much  time  was  spent  {Hikanou  chronou  diageno- 
menou).  Genitive  absolute  again  with  second  aorist  middle 
participle  of  diaginomai,  to  come  in  between  (dia).  "Con- 
siderable time  intervening,"  since  they  became  weather- 
bound in  this  harbour,  though  some  take  it  since  they  left 
Caesarea.  ^nd  the  voyage  was  now  dangerous  (kai  onios  ede 
episphalous).  Genitive  absolute,  "and  the  voyage  being 
already  (^J?  =  Latin  jam)  dangerous"  (old  word  from  epi 
and  sphalloj  to  trip,  to  fall,  and  so  prone  to  fall,  here  only  in 
N.T.).  Because  the  Fast  was  now  already  gone  by  [dia  to  kai 
ten  nesteian  ede  pareleluthenai) .  Accusative  (after  dia) 
of  the  articular  infinitive  perfect  active  of  parerchomaiy  to 
pass  by,  with  the  accusative  of  general  reference  {nesteian, 
the  great  day  of  atonement  of  the  Jews,  Lev.  16:29!!".) 
occurring  about  the  end  of  September.  The  ancients  con- 
sidered navigation  on  the  Mediterranean  unsafe  from  early 
October  till  the  middle  of  March.  In  a.d.  59  the  Fast  oc- 
curred on  Oct.  5.  There  is  nothing  strange  in  Luke  using  this 
Jewish  note  of  time  as  in  20:6  though  a  Gentile  Christian. 
Paul  did  it  also  (I  Cor.  16:8).  It  is  no  proof  that  Luke  was 
a  Jewish  proselyte.  We  do  not  know  precisely  when  the  party 
left  Caesarea  (possibly  in  August),  but  in  ample  time  to 
arrive  in  Rome  before  October  if  conditions  had  been  more 
favourable.  But  the  contrary  winds  had  made  the  voyage 
very  slow  and  difficult  all  the  way  (verse  7)  besides  the  long 
delay  here  in  this  harbour  of  Fair  Havens.  Paul  admonished 
them  {pareinei  ho  Paulos).  Imperfect  active  of  paraineo,  old 
word  to  exhort  from  para  and  aineo,  to  praise  (3:8),  only 
here  and  verse  22  in  N.T.  It  is  remarkable  that  a  prisoner 
like  Paul  should  venture  to  give  advice  at  all  and  to  keep 
on  doing  it  (imperfect  tense  inchoative,  began  to  admonish 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  461 

and  kept  on  at  it).  Paul  had  clearly  won  the  respect  of  the 
centurion  and  officers  and  also  felt  it  to  be  his  duty  to  give 
this  unasked  for  warning.  /  perceive  {the or 0).  Old  word 
from  theoros,  a  spectator.  See  Luke  10:18.  Paul  does  not 
here  claim  prophecy,  but  he  had  plenty  of  experience  with 
three  shipwrecks  already  (II  Cor.  11 :25)  to  justify  his  appre- 
hension. Will  be  (mellein  esesthai).  Infinitive  in  indirect 
assertion  followed  by  future  infinitive  after  mellein  in  spite 
of  hoti  which  would  naturally  call  for  present  indicative 
mellei,  an  anacoluthon  due  to  the  long  sentence  (Robertson, 
Grammar  J  p.  438).  With  injury  {meta  hubreos).  An  old  word 
from  huper  (above,  upper,  like  our  "uppishness")  and  so 
pride,  insult,  personal  injury,  the  legal  word  for  personal 
assault  (Page).  Josephus  (Jnt.  III.  6,  4)  uses  it  of  the  injury 
of  the  elements.  Loss  (zemian).  Old  word,  opposite  of 
kerdosy  gain  or  profit  (Phil,  jryf.)*  Nowhere  else  in  N.T. 
Lading  {phortiou).  Diminutive  of  phortos  (from  phero,  to 
bear)  only  in  form.  Common  word,  but  in  N.T.  only  here  in 
literal  sense,  as  metaphor  in  Matt.  11:30;  23:4;  Luke  11:46; 
Gdl.  6:5.  But  also  of  our  lives  {alia  kai  ton  psuchon).  Common 
use  of  psuche  for  life,  originally  "breath  of  life"  (Acts  20:10), 
and  also  "soul"  (14:2).  Fortunately  no  lives  were  lost, 
though  all  else  was.  But  this  outcome  was  due  to  the  special 
mercy  of  God  for  the  sake  of  Paul  (verse  24),  not  to  the 
wisdom  of  the  officers  in  rejecting  Paul's  advice.  Paul 
begins  now  to  occupy  the  leading  role  in  this  marvellous 
voyage. 

II.  Gave  more  heed  {mdllon  epeitheto).  Imperfect  middle 
of  peithOf  to  yield  to  (with  the  dative  case).  The  "Frumen- 
tarian"  centurion  ranked  above  the  captain  and  owner. 
As  a  military  officer  the  centurion  was  responsible  for  the 
soldiers,  the  prisoners,  and  the  cargo  of  wheat.  It  was  a 
government  ship.  Though  the  season  was  not  advanced, 
the  centurion  probably  feared  to  risk  criticism  in  Rome  for 
timidity  when  the  wheat  was  so  much  needed  in  Rome 


462      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

(Knowling).  To  the  master  {toi  kubernetei) .  Old  word  from 
kubernao,  to  steer,  and  so  steersman,  pilot,  sailing-master. 
Common  in  this  sense  in  the  papyri.  In  N.T.  only  here  and 
Rev.  18:17.  And  to  the  owner  of  the  ship  {kai  toi  naukleroi). 
Old  word  compounded  of  naus  and  kleros  and  used  for  owner 
of  the  ship  who  acted  as  his  own  skipper  or  captain.  The 
papyri  examples  (Moulton  and  Milligan's  Vocabulary)  all 
have  the  meaning  "captain"  rather  than  "owner." 

12.  Because  the  haven  was  not  commodious  to  winter  in 
{aneuthetou  tou  limenos  huparchontos  pros  paracheimasian). 
Genitive  absolute  again  present  tense  of  huparcho:  "The 
harbour  being  unfit  {aneuthetou,  this  compound  not  yet 
found  elsewhere,  simplex  in  Luke  9:62;  14:35;  Heb.  6:7)  for 
wintering"  (paracheimasia,  only  here  in  N.T.,  but  in  Po- 
lybius  and  Diodorus,  in  an  inscription  a.d.  48,  from  parachei- 
mazo).  The  more  part  advised  (hoi  pleiones  ethento  boulen). 
Second  aorist  middle  indicative  of  tithemi,  ancient  idiom  with 
boulen,  to  take  counsel,  give  counsel.  Lysias  held  a  council 
of  the  officers  of  the  ship  on  the  issue  raised  by  Paul.  //  by 
any  means  they  could  reach  Phoenix  and  winter  there  [ei  pds 
dunainto  katantesantes  eis  Phoinika  paracheimasai).  The 
optative  dunainto  (present  middle  of  dunamai)  here  with 
ei  is  a  condition  of  the  fourth  class  with  the  notion  of  pur- 
pose implied  and  indirect  discourse  (Robertson,  Grammar^ 
p.  1021).  "We  vote  for  going  on  the  chance  that  we  may 
be  able"  (Page).  Phoenix  is  the  town  of  palms  (John  12:13), 
the  modern  Lutro,  the  only  town  in  Crete  on  the  southern 
coast  with  a  harbour  fit  for  wintering,  though  Wordsworth 
and  Page  argue  for  Phineka  which  suits  Luke's  description 
better.  The  verb  paracheimazo ,  to  winter,  is  from  para  and 
cheimon  (see  also  28:11).  Used  in  several  KoinS  writers. 
Looking  northeast  and  southeast  (bleponta  kata  liba  kai  kata 
choron).  There  are  two  ways  of  interpreting  this  language. 
Lips  means  the  southwest  wind  and  choros  the  northwest 
wind.   But  what  is  the  effect  of  )^fl^<3  with  these  words?  Does 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  463 

it  mean  "facing"  the  wind?  If  so,  we  must  read  "looking 
southwest  and  northwest."  But  kata  can  mean  down  the 
line  of  the  wind  (the  way  the  wind  is  blowing).  If  so,  then 
it  is  proper  to  translate  "looking  northeast  and  southeast." 
This  translation  suits  Lutro,  the  other  suits  Phoenike.  Ram- 
say takes  it  to  be  Lutro,  and  suggests  that  sailors  describe 
the  harbour  by  the  way  it  looks  as  they  go  into  it  (the  sub- 
jectivity of  the  sailors)  and  that  Luke  so  speaks  and  means 
Lutro  which  faces  northeast  and  southeast.  On  the  whole 
Lutro  has  the  best  of  the  argument. 

13.  When  the  south  wind  blew  softly  {hupopneusantos  notou). 
Genitive  absolute  with  aorist  active  participle  of  hupopneo, 
old  verb  to  blow  under,  then  to  blow  gently,  here  only  in 
N.T.  "A  south  wind  having  blown  gently,"  in  marked  con- 
trast to  the  violent  northwest  wind  that  they  had  faced  so 
long.  They  were  so  sure  of  the  wisdom  of  their  decision 
that  they  did  not  even  draw  up  the  small  boat  attached  by 
a  rope  to  the  vessel's  stern  (verse  16).  It  was  only  some  forty 
miles  to  Lutro.  Their  purpose  {tes  protheseos,  set  before  them, 
from  protithemi) ,  genitive  after  krated  (kekratekenai,  perfect 
active  infinitive  in  indirect  discourse).  They  weighed  anchor 
{arantes)'.  First  aorist  active  participle  of  airOy  old  verb 
used  in  technical  sense  with  tas  agkuras  (anchors)  under- 
stood as  in  Thucydides  I.  52;  II.  23,  "having  lifted  the  an- 
chors." Page  takes  it  simply  as  "moving."  Sailed  along 
Crete  {parelegonto  ten  Kreten).  Imperfect  middle.  See 
verse  8,  "were  coasting  along  Crete."  Close  in  shore  (dsson). 
Comparative  adverb  of  agki^  near,  and  so  "nearer"  to  shore. 
Only  here  in  N.T. 

14.  Jfter  no  long  time  (mef  ou  polu).  Litotes  again.  Beat 
dotvnfrom  it  {ehalen  kat^  autes).  Second  aorist  active  indica- 
tive of  balloy  to  throw.  Here  "dashed"  (intransitive).  Autes 
is  in  the  ablative,  not  genitive  case,  beat  "down  from  it" 
(Crete),  not  "against  it  or  on  it."  (Robertson,  Grammar ^ 
p.  606).    Auies  cannot  refer  to  ploion  (boat)  which  is  neuter. 


464      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

So  the  ablative  case  with  kaia  as  in  Mark  5:13,  Homer  also. 
The  Cretan  mountains  are  over  7,000  feet  high.  A  tempestu- 
ous wind  which  is  called  Euraquilo  {anemos  tuphonikos  ho 
kaloumenos  Eurakulon).  Tuphon  =  Tuphos  was  used  for  the 
typhoon,  a  violent  whirlwind  (turbo)  or  squall.  This  word 
gives  the  character  of  the  wind.  The  Eurakulon  (reading 
of  Aleph  A  B  against  the  Textus  Receptus  Eurokludbn)  has 
not  been  found  elsewhere.  Blass  calls  it  a  hybrid  word  com- 
pounded of  the  Greek  euros  (east  wind)  and  the  Latin 
aquilo  (northeast).  It  is  made  like  euronotos  (southeast). 
The  Vulgate  has  euroaquilo.  It  is  thus  the  east  north  east 
wind.  Page  considers  Euroclydon  to  be  a  corruption  of 
Euraquilo.  Here  the  name  gives  the  direction  of  the 
wind. 

15.  When  the  ship  was  caught  (sunarpasthentos  tou  ploiou). 
Genitive  absolute  again  with  first  aorist  passive  of  sunar- 
pazOf  old  word,  in  N.T.  only  Luke  8:29;  Acts  6:12;  19:29, 
and  here.  Graphic  picture  as  if  the  ship  was  seized  by  a 
great  monster.  Face  the  wind  (antophthalmein  toi  anemoi). 
Dative  case  with  the  vivid  infimtive  of  antophthalmedirom  an- 
tophthalmos,  looking  in  the  eye,  or  eye  to  eye  (anti,  facing  and 
opthalmos,  eye).  Eyes  were  painted  on  the  prows  of  vessels. 
The  ship  could  not  face  the  wind  enough  to  get  to  Phoenix. 
Modern  sailors  talk  of  sailing  into  the  eye  of  the  wind.  We 
were  not  able  to  look  the  wind  in  the  eye.  KoinS  verb  used 
by  Polybius.  SomeMSS.  have  it  in  Acts  6:11,  but  only  here 
in  N.T.  In  Wisdom  of  Sol.  12:14  i^  is  used  of  a  prince  who 
cannot  look  God  in  the  face.  Clement  of  Rome  34  uses  it 
of  an  idle  workman  not  able  to  look  his  employer  in  the  face 
(Milligan  andMoulton's  Vocabulary).  We  gave  way  (epidon- 
tes).  Second  aorist  active  participle  of  epididomi,  giving  way 
to  the  wind.  Were  driven  (epherometha).  Imperfect  passive 
oi  phero,  "we  were  being  borne  along."  We  "scudded  be- 
fore the  gale"  (Page).  "The  suddenness  of  the  hurricane 
gave  no  time  to  furl  the  great  mainsail"  (Furneaux). 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  465 

16.  Running  under  the  lee  of  (hupodramontes).  Second 
aorist  active  participle  of  hupotrecho.  Same  use  of  hupo  as  in 
hupepleusamen  (verses  4,  8)  for  "under  the  lee",  under  the 
protection  of.  Nesion  is  diminutive  of  nesos,  a  small  island* 
The  MSS.  vary  between  Cauda  (B)  and  Clauda  (Aleph). 
To  secure  the  hoot  (perikrateis  genesthai  tes  skaphes).  "To 
become  masters  {perikrateis  from  peri  and  kratos,  power 
over,  found  in  Susannah  and  ecclesiastical  writers,  and  here 
only  in  N.T.)  of  the  boat  ("dug  out,"  like  Indian  boats, 
literally,  from  skapto,  to  dig,  old  word,  here  only  in  N.T.  and 
verses  30,  32).  The  smooth  water  behind  the  little  island 
enabled  them  to  do  this.  When  they  had  hoisted  it  up  {hen 
drantes).  "  Which  (the  little  boat)  having  hoisted  up  {ar antes, 
verse  13)."  Even  so  it  was  "with  difficulty"  {molis).  Per- 
haps the  little  boat  was  waterlogged.  Used  helps  {boetheiais 
echronto).  Imperfect  middle  of  chraomai  with  instrumental 
case.  The  "helps"  were  ropes  or  chains,  no  doubt.  Under- 
girding  the  ship  {hupozonnuntes  to  ploion).  Present  active 
participle  of  hupozbnnumi.  Old  verb,  here  only  in  N.T. 
Probably  cables  {hupozomata)  or  ropes  were  used  under  the 
hull  of  the  ship  laterally  or  even  longitudinally,  tightly  se- 
cured on  deck.  This  "frapping"  was  more  necessary  for 
ancient  vessels  because  of  the  heavy  mast.  The  little  island 
made  it  possible  to  do  this  also.  Lest  we  be  cast  upon  the 
Syrtis  {me  eis  ten  Surtin  ekpesosin).  Final  clause  after  verb 
of  fearing  {phoboumenoi)  with  me  and  the  second  aorist  active 
subjunctive  of  ekpipto,  old  verb  to  fall  out  or  off,  to  be  cast 
away.  So  here  and  verses  26,  29,  a  classical  use  of  the  verb 
for  a  ship  driven  out  of  its  course  on  to  shoals  or  rocks  (Page 
who  cites  Xenophon,  Anab.  VII.  5,  12).  The  Syrtis  was  the 
name  for  two  quicksands  between  Carthage  and  Cyrenaica, 
this  clearly  being  the  Syrtis  Major  most  dangerous  because 
of  the  sandbanks  {surtis,  from  suro).  The  wind  would  drive 
the  ship  right  into  this  peril  if  something  were  not  done. 
They  lowered  the  gear  {chalasantes  to  skeuos).     First  aorist 


466     WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

active  participle  of  ckalao  (cf.  Luke  5:4  for  lowering  the 
nets).  Skeuos  means  vessel  or  gear.  They  slackened  or  re- 
duced sail,  especially  the  mainsail,  but  leaving  enough  to 
keep  the  ship's  head  as  close  to  the  wind  as  was  practicable. 
So  were  driven  {houtos  epheronto).  Imperfect  passive  indica- 
tive again  as  in  verse  15  with  the  addition  of  houtos  (thus). 
The  ship  was  now  fixed  as  near  to  the  wind  (E  N  E)  as 
possible  (seven  points).  That  would  enable  the  ship  to  go 
actually  W  by  N  and  so  avoid  the  quicksands.  J.  Smith  has 
shown  that,  a  day  being  lost  around  Cauda,  the  ship  going 
36  miles  in  24  hours  in  13  days  would  make  468  miles.  The 
Island  of  Malta  (Melita)  is  precisely  in  that  direction  (W  by 
N)  from  Cauda  and  is  480  miles.  Page  sees  a  difficulty  about 
this  explanation  of  the  steady  drift  of  the  ship  in  the  word 
diapheromenon  in  verse  27,  but  that  was  at  the  end  of  the 
drifting  and  the  varied  winds  could  have  come  then  and  not 
before.  The  whole  narrative  as  explained  carefully  in  Smith's 
Voyage  and  Skipzvreck  of  St.  Paul  is  a  masterpiece  of  precise 
and  accurate  scholarship.  A  resume  of  his  results  appears 
in  my  Luke  the  Historian  in  the  Light  of  Research. 

18.  As  we  laboured  exceedingly  with  the  storm  (sphodros  chei- 
mazomenon  hemon).  Genitive  absolute  with  present  passive 
participle  of  cheimazo,  old  verb  to  afilict  with  a  tempest 
{cheima,  stormy  weather),  to  toss  upon  the  waves,  here  alone 
in  N.T.  They  began  to  throw  overboard  (ekbalen  epoiounto). 
Literally,  "They  began  to  make  (inchoative  imperfect 
middle  of  poieo)  a  casting  out"  {ekbolen  from  ekballo,  to  cast 
out,  old  word,  only  here  in  N.T.).  Cf.  Latin  jacturam  facere. 
This  to  lighten  the  ship  by  throwing  overboard  the  cargo. 
The  grain  in  the  ship  would  shift  and  make  it  list  and  so 
added  to  the  danger.  They  cast  out  (eripsan).  Third  person 
plural  aorist  active  of  ripto,  not  eripsamen  as  Textus  Recepr 
tus.  With  their  own  hands  (autocheires).  Old  word  {autoSy 
cheir)  but  here  alone  in  N.T.  Vivid  and  graphic  touch  by 
Luke  who,  of  course,  watched  every  movement  day  by  day. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  467 

Thf  tackling  (ten  skeuen).     The  furniture  of  the  ship  that 
could  be  spared.    It  was  becoming  desperate. 

20.  When  neither  sun  nor  stars  shone  upon  us  {mete  heliou 
mete  astron  epiphainonton).  Genitive  absolute  again.  For 
many  days  {epi  pleionas  hemeras).  For  more  days  than  a  few. 
No  small  tempest  {cheimonos  ouk  oligou).  Litotes  again.  All 
hope  that  we  should  he  saved  was  now  taken  away  {loipon 
perieireito  elpis  pdsa  tou  sozesthai  hemds).  "For  the  rest 
(or  future)  there  began  to  be  taken  from  around  us  {periei- 
reito inchoative  imperfect  and  see  use  of  the  verb  in  II  Cor. 
13  :i6  of  the  veil)  all  hope  of  the  being  saved  so  far  as  we  were 
concerned."  Despair  was  beginning  to  settle  like  a  fog  on  all 
their  hopes.    Had  Paul  lost  hope.'' 

21.  When  they  had  been  long  without  food  {polles  te  asitias 
hupar chouses).  Genitive  absolute,  the  old  word  asitia  from 
asitos  (verse  33)  a  privative  and  sitos^  food,  here  alone  in  N.T. 
Literally,  "There  being  much  abstinence  from  food."  They 
had  plenty  of  grain  on  board,  but  no  appetite  to  eat  (sea- 
sickness) and  no  fires  to  cook  it  (Page).  "Little  heart  being 
left  for  food"  (Randall).  Galen  and  other  medical  writers 
use  asitia  and  asitos  for  want  of  appetite.  Stood  forth  {sta- 
theis).  As  in  1:15;  2:14;  17:22.  Pictorial  word  (Page)  that 
sets  forth  the  vividness  and  solemnity  of  the  scene  (Knowl- 
ing).  Ye  should  have  hearkened  unto  me  {edei  men  peitharche- 
santas  moi).  Literally,  "It  was  necessary  for  you  hearkening 
unto  me  not  to  set  sail  {me  anagesthai)^  It  was  not  the 
"I  told  you  so"  of  a  small  nature,  "but  a  reference  to  the 
wisdom  of  his  former  counsel  in  order  to  induce  acceptance 
of  his  present  advice"  (Furneaux).  The  first  aorist  active 
participle  is  in  the  accusative  of  general  reference  with  the 
present  infinitive  anagesthai.  And  have  gotten  this  injury 
and  loss  {kerdesai  te  ten  huhrin  tauten  kai  ten  zemian).  This 
Ionic  form  kerdesai  {irom  kerdao)  tather  than  kerdenai  or 
kerddnai  is  common  in  late  Greek  (Robertson,  Grammar^ 
p.  349).  The  Revised  Version  thus  carries  over  the  negative 


468      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

me  to  this  first  aorist  active  infinitive  kerdesai  from  kerdao 
(cf.  on  Matt.  16:26).  But  Page  follows  Thayer  in  urging  that 
this  is  not  exact,  that  Paul  means  that  by  taking  his  advice 
they  ought  to  have  escaped  this  injury  and  loss.  "A  person 
is  said  in  Greek  *to  gain  a  loss*  when,  being  in  danger  of 
incurring  it,  he  by  his  conduct  saves  himself  from  doing  so." 
This  is  probably  Paul's  idea  here. 

22.  And  now  {kai  ta  nun).  Accusative  plural  neuter 
article  of  general  reference  in  contrast  with  men  in  verse  21. 
Paul  shows  modesty  (Bengel)  in  the  mild  contrast.  No  loss 
of  life  {apobole  psuches  oudemia).  Old  word  from  apoballo,  to 
throw  away,  only  twice  in  N.T.  Romans  11:15  (rejection) 
and  here.  He  had  foretold  such  loss  of  life  as  likely  (verse 
10),  but  he  now  gives  his  reason  for  his  changed  view. 

23.  For  there  stood  by  me  {pareste  gar  mot).  Second  aorist 
active  (intransitive)  indicative  of  paristemi  with  the  locative 
case  (beside  me).  The  very  form  used  by  Paul  of  his  trial 
(II  Tim.  4:17)  when  "the  Lord  stood  by  me"  {ho  de  kurios 
moi  pareste)  when  others  deserted  him.  This  angel  of  the 
God  whom  Paul  serves  (in  distinction  from  the  heathen  gods) 
is  the  reason  for  Paul's  present  confidence. 

24.  Thou  must  stand  before  Caesar  {Kaisari  se  dei  paraS' 
tenai).  Note  the  same  dei  (must)  as  in  23:11  when  Jesus 
appeared  to  Paul  in  Jerusalem  and  the  same  verb  parastenai 
(second  aorist  active  infinitive)  used  in  verse  23.  Hatk 
granted  thee  {kecharistai  soi).  Perfect  middle  indicative  of 
charizomai  and  that  from  charis,  a  gift  or  grace.  The  lives 
of  those  that  sailed  with  Paul  God  had  spared  as  a  gift 
(char is)  to  Paul. 

25.  fP^herefore  be  of  good  cheer  (dio  euthumeite).  God  had 
spoken.  That  was  enough.  This  old  verb  from  euthumos  in 
the  N.T.  only  here,  verse  25,  and  James  5:13.  See  the  adjec- 
tive 27:36.  For  I  believe  God  (pisteuo  gar  toi  theoi).  This  is 
Paul's  reason  for  his  own  good  cheer  and  for  his  exhortation 
to  confidence  in  spite  of  circumstances  so  untoward.    Paul 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  469 

had  doubtless  prayed  for  his  own  life  and  for  the  lives  of  all. 
He  was  sure  that  he  was  to  bear  his  witness  in  Rome. 

26.  We  must  be  cast  {dei  hemds  ekpesein).  It  is  necessary 
for  us  to  fall  out  {ekpesein,  second  aorist  active  infinitive  of 
ekpipto).  It  was  not  revealed  to  Paul  what  island  it  would 
be. 

27.  As  we  were  driven  to  and  fro  (diapheromenon  hemon). 
Genitive  absolute  with  present  passive  participle  of  diaphero, 
old  verb  to  bear  different  ways  {dia  =  duo,  two),  this  way 
and  that.  Continued  to  be  tossed  to  and  fro  in  the  rough 
seas.  It  would  seem  so  to  those  on  board.  It  does  not  neces- 
sarily mean  that  the  wind  had  changed.  The  fourteenth 
night  is  reckoned  from  the  time  they  left  Fair  Havens.  In 
the  sea  of  Adria  {en  toi  Hadridi).  Not  the  Adriatic  Sea  as  we 
now  call  the  sea  between  Italy  and  the  mainland  of  Illyricum, 
but  all  the  lower  Mediterranean  between  Italy  and  Greece. 
Luke's  usage  is  Hke  that  of  Strabo.  Surmised  {hupenooun). 
Imperfect  active  indicative  of  huponoed,  inchoative,  began 
to  suspect.  That  they  were  drawing  near  to  some  country 
{prosagein  tina  autois  choran).  Infinitive  with  accusative 
of  general  reference  in  indirect  assertion.  Prosago  is  here 
used  intransitively  and  Luke  writes  from  the  sailor's  stand- 
point that  a  certain  land  was  drawing  near  to  them  {autois, 
dative).  The  sailors  heard  the  sound  of  breakers  and  grew 
uneasy. 

28.  They  sounded  {bolisantes).  First  aorist  active  participle 
of  holizo  rare  verb  only  here  and  in  Eustathius  who  says  it 
was  familiar  in  ancient  Greek.  Apparently  from  holis,  a  mis- 
sile or  dart,  and  so  to  throw  down  the  lead  into  the  sea,  to 
heave  the  lead,  to  take  soundings.  The  inscriptions  give 
^o/i  wo  J- for ''leaden. "  Twenty  fathoms  {or  guias  eikosi).  This 
old  word,  from  orego,  to  stretch,  means  the  distance  from 
one  outstretched  middle  finger  tip  to  the  other  likewise  out- 
stretched. After  a  little  space  {brachu  diastes antes).  Literally, 
"standing  apart  a  little"  (second  aorist  active  participle  of 


470      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

diistemt),  that  is,  the  ship  going  a  short  distance  further  on. 
A  ship  today  approaching  St.  Paul's  Bay  by  the  rocky  point 
of  Koura  would  pass  first  twenty,  then  fifteen  fathoms 
(Furneaux). 

29.  Lest  haply  we  should  be  cast  ashore  on  rocky  ground  {me 
pou  kata  tracheis  topous  ekpesbmen).  The  usual  construction 
after  a  verb  of  fearing  {me  and  the  aorist  subjunctive  ekpeso- 
men).  Literally,  "Lest  somewhere  {pov)  we  should  fall  out 
down  against  {kata)  rocky  places."  The  change  in  the  sound- 
ings made  it  a  very  real  fear.  Tracheis  (rough)  is  old  adjec- 
tive, but  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and  Luke  3 :5  (from  Isa.  40:4). 
Four  anchors  {agkuras  tessaras).  Old  word  from  agke.  In 
N.T.  only  in  this  chapter,  with  rhipto  here,  with  ekteino  in 
verse  30,  with  periaireo  in  verse  40;  and  Heb.  6:19  (figura- 
tively of  hope).  From  the  stern  {ek  prumnes).  Old  word, 
but  in  N.T.  only  in  Mark  4:38;  here  and  41  in  contrast  with 
prbira  (prow).  The  usual  practice  was  and  is  to  anchor  by 
the  bows.  "With  a  view  to  running  the  ship  ashore  anchor- 
ing from  the  stern  would,  it  is  said,  be  best"  (Page).  Nelson 
is  quoted  as  saying  that  he  had  been  reading  Acts  27  the 
morning  of  the  Battle  of  Copenhagen  (April,  1801)  where 
he  anchored  his  ships  from  the  stern.  Wished  for  the  day 
{euchonto).  Imperfect  middle,  kept  on  praying  for  "day  to 
come"  {hemeran  genesthai)  before  the  anchors  broke  under 
the  strain  of  the  storm  or  began  to  drag.  If  the  ship  had  been 
anchored  from  the  prow,  it  would  have  swung  round  and 
snapped  the  anchors  or  the  stem  would  have  faced  the 
beach. 

30.  The  sailors  {ton  nautbn).  Old  word  from  naus  (ship), 
in  N.T.  only  here,  verse  30,  and  Rev.  18:17.  ^^^^  seeking 
{zetounton).  Genitive  absolute  again  with  present  active 
participle  of  zeteo  to  seek.  Had  lowered  {chalasanton). 
Aorist  active  participle  of  chalazo.  Under  colour  {prophasei). 
Possibly  the  same  word  as  "prophecy"  (from  pro-phemi,  to 
speak  forth),  but  here  pretence,  pretext,  although  it  may 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  471 

come  from  propkainOj  to  show  forth.  The  use  here  is  an  old 
one  and  appears  also  in  Mark  12:40;  Luke  20:47;  I  Thess. 
2:5;  Phil.  1:18.  As  though  (hos).  The  alleged  reason,  a  com- 
mon Greek  idiom  with  hos  and  the  participle  (Robertson, 
Grammar  J  p.  966).  Here  with  mellonton.  From  the  fore  ship 
{ek  proires).  Old  word  for  prow  of  the  ship.  In  the  N.T. 
only  here  and  verse  41.  Note  here  ekteinein  (lay  out,  stretch 
out)  rather  than  rhipsantes  (casting)  in  verse  29,  for  they 
pretended  to  need  the  small  boat  to  stretch  out  or  lay  out 
the  anchors  in  front. 

31.  Except  these  abide  in  the  ship  {Ban  me  houtoi  meinosin 
en  toi  ploioi).  Condition  of  the  third  class  (undetermined, 
but  with  hope,  etc.).  Paul  has  no  hesitancy  in  saying  this 
in  spite  of  his  strong  language  in  verse  24  about  God's 
promise.  He  has  no  notion  of  lying  supinely  down  and  leav- 
ing God  to  do  it  all.  Without  the  sailors  the  ship  could  not 
be  properly  beached. 

32.  The  ropes  {ta  schoinia).  Diminutive  of  schoinos,  old 
word,  but  in  N.T.  only  here  and  John  2:15.  Paul  is  now 
saviour  of  the  ship  and  the  soldiers  quickly  cut  loose  the  skiff 
and  "let  her  fall  off"  {eiasan  auten  ekpesein)  rather  than  be 
the  means  of  the  escape  of  the  sailors  who  were  needed. 
This  dastardly  scheme  of  the  sailors  would  have  brought 
frightful  loss  of  life. 

33.  While  the  day  was  coming  on  (achri  hou  hemera  emellen 
ginesthai).  More  likely  here  achri  hou  (for  achri  toutou  hoi) 
with  the  imperfect  emellen^  has  its  usual  meaning,  "until 
which  time  day  was  about  to  come  on  {ginesthai,  present 
middle  infinitive,  linear  action)."  That  is  Paul  kept  on 
exhorting  or  beseeching  (parekalei,  imperfect  active)  them 
until  dawn  began  to  come  on  (cf.  verse  39  when  day  came). 
In  Heb.  3:13  achri  hou  with  the  present  indicative  has  to 
mean  "  so  long  as  "  or  while,  but  that  is  not  true  here  (Robert- 
son, Grammar,  p.  975).  See  on  Acts  2:46  for  the  same  phrase 
for  partaking  food  {metalambano  trophes,  genitive  case)  as 


472      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

also  in  27:34.  Paul  wanted  them  to  be  ready  for  action  when 
day  really  came.  "Fourteenth  day"  repeated  (verse  27), 
only  here  in  the  accusative  of  duration  of  time  {hemeran). 
It  is  not  clear  whether  the  "waiting"  (prosdokontes,  present 
active  participle  predicate  nominative  complementary  par- 
ticiple after  diateleite,  Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  1121)  means 
fourteen  days  of  continuous  fasting  or  only  fourteen  succes- 
sive nights  of  eager  watching  without  food.  Galen  and  Dio- 
nysius  of  Halicamassus  employ  the  very  idiom  used  here  by 
Luke  (asitos  diateleo).  Having  taken  nothing  {methen  prosla- 
bomenoi).  Second  aorist  middle  participle  of  proslambano 
with  the  accusative  methen  rather  than  the  more  usual 
meden.  Probably  Paul  means  that  they  had  taken  no  regular 
meals,  only  bits  of  food  now  and  then. 

34.  For  this  is  for  your  safety  (touto  gar  pros  tes  humeteras 
soterias  huparchex).  Note  soteria  in  sense  of  "safety," 
literal  meaning,  not  spiritual  salvation.  This  is  the  only 
instance  in  the  N.T.  of  the  use  of  pros  with  the  ablative 
meaning  "from  the  side  of"  your  safety,  though  a  classic 
idiom  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  623),  an  example  of  Luke's 
literary  style.  Perish  (apoleitai).  Future  middle  (intransi- 
tive) of  apollumi  {-uo),  to  destroy.  So  the  oldest  MSS.  rather 
than  peseitai  from  pipto,  to  fall.  This  proverbial  expression 
occurs  also  in  Luke  21:18  which  see  and  in  I  Sam.  14:45; 
II  Sam.  14:11;  I  King,  1:52. 

35.  Gave  thanks  to  God  (eucharistesen  tot  theoi).  First 
aorist  active  indicative  of  eucharisteb  from  which  our  word 
"Eucharist"  comes.  It  was  saying  grace  like  the  head  of  a 
Hebrew  family  and  the  example  of  Paul  would  encourage  the 
others  to  eat.  Probably  Paul,  Luke,  and  Aristarchus  had 
memories  of  the  Lord's  supper  (Acts  2:42)  while  to  others 
it  was  only  an  ordinary  meal  (Luke  24:30). 

36.  Then  were  they  all  of  good  cheer  {euthumoi  de  genomenox). 
More  exactly,  "Then  all  becoming  cheerful,"  because  of 
Paul's  words  and  conduct.    Took  food  (proselabonto  trophes). 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  473 

Partitive  genitive  here  (some  food),  not  accusative  as  verse 
33.     Paul's  courage  was  contagious. 

37.  Two  hundred  three-score  and  sixteen  souls  {diakosiai 
hehdomekonta  hex).  The  Vatican  Manuscript  (B)  has  hbs  in 
place  of  diakosiai  (two  hundred)  which  Westcott  and  Hort 
put  in  the  margin.  But  Alford  is  probably  correct  in  suggest- 
ing that  the  scribe  of  B  wrote  hos  by  repeating  the  omega 
in  ploioi  with  s  =  2CX)  (Greek  numeral).  If  the  number  276 
seems  large,  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  we  do  not  know  the 
size  of  the  ship.  Josephus  (Lifey  3)  says  that  there  were  600 
on  the  ship  that  took  him  to  Italy.  The  grain  ships  were  of 
considerable  size.  The  number  included  sailors,  soldiers,  and 
prisoners.    A  muster  or  roll  call  may  have  been  made. 

38.  fFhen  they  had  eaten  enough  (koresthentes  trophes). 
First  aorist  passive  of  korennumij  old  verb  to  satisfy,  to 
satiate,  with  the  genitive.  Literally,  ''Having  been  satisfied 
with  food."  Here  only  in  the  N.T.  They  lightened  (ekouphi- 
zon).  Inchoative  imperfect  active,  began  to  lighten.  Old 
verb  from  kouphos  and  originally  to  be  light,  but  transitive 
to  lighten,  as"  here,  from  Hippocrates  on.  Throwing  out  the 
wheat  {ekballomenoi  ton  siton).  The  cargo  of  wheat.  The 
second  ekbole  (verse  18)  or  casting  out  and  overboard  which 
was  only  partially  done  at  first. 

39.  They  knew  not  (ouk  epeginoskon).  Imperfect  active  of 
epiginosko,  to  recognize.  Probably  conative,  tried  to  recog- 
nize and  could  not  (Conybeare  and  Howson).  The  island  was 
well-known  (28:1,  epegnomen),  but  St.  Paul's  Bay  where  the 
wreck  took  place  was  some  distance  from  the  main  harbour 
(Valetta)  of  Melita  (Malta).  They  perceived  (katenooun). 
Imperfect  active  of  katanoeo,  gradually  perceived  after  some 
effort  as  in  Ii:i6.  This  beach  seemed  their  only  hope.  They 
took  counsel  (ebouleuonto) .  Imperfect  middle  showing  the 
process  of  deliberation  and  doubt.  The  bay  "having  a 
beach"  (echonta  aigialon)  is  a  phrase  found  in  Xenophon's 
Anabasis  VI.  4,  4.     Whether  they  could  drive  (ei  dunainto 


474     WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

eksosat).  This  use  of  the  optative  with  ei  in  questions  of  this 
sort  (implied  indirect)  is  a  neat  Greek  idiom  (Robertson, 
Grammar,  p.  1021).  B  C  Bohairic  read  eksosat  (first  aorist 
active  infinitive  of  €ksdzd),to  save  out  (so  Westcott  and  Hort), 
instead  of  exosai  (from  exothed,  to  push  out,  as  Textus  Recep- 
tus). 

40.  Casting  off  {perielonies).  Second  aorist  active  of  per- 
iaireo.  Literally,  "Having  taken  away  from  around,"  that 
is  all  four  anchors  from  around  the  stem.  Cf.  the  other 
verbs  with  agkuras  in  verse  29  and  30.  They  left  them  in  the 
sea  (eion  eis  ten  thalassan).  Imperfect  active  of  eao,  either 
descriptive  or  inchoative.  They  let  the  anchors  go  and  the 
ropes  fell  down  into  the  sea.  At  the  same  time  loosing  the 
hands  of  the  rudders  {hama  anentes  tas  zeukterias  ton  pedalion). 
On  the  use  of  hama  with  the  participle,  old  Greek  idiom  see 
Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  1139.  The  second  aorist  active 
participle  of  aniemi,  to  relax,  loosen  up.  Old  verb,  in  N.T. 
Acts  16:26;  27:40;  Eph.  6:9;  Heb.  13:5.  Thayer  notes  that 
zeukterias  (bands)  occurs  nowhere  else,  but  several  papyri 
use  it  of  yokes  and  waterwheels  (Moulton  and  Milligan's 
Vocabulary).  The  word  for  rudders  {pedalion)  is  an  old  one 
(from  pedon,  the  blade  of  an  oar),  but  in  the  N.T.  only  here 
and  James  3  \\.  Page  notes  that  the  ancient  ships  had  a  pair 
of  paddle  rudders  like  those  of  the  early  northmen,  one  on 
each  quarter.  The  paddle  rudders  had  been  fastened  while 
the  ship  was  anchored.  Hoisting  up  the  foresail  to  the  wind 
[eparantes  ton  artemona  tei  pneousei).  Supply  aurdi  (breeze) 
after  pneousei  (blowing).  It  Is  not  clear  what  "sail"  is 
meant  by  "artemona.^*  No  other  example  in  Greek  is  known, 
though  the  scholiast  to  Juvenal  XII.  68  explains  velo  prora 
suo  by  artemone  solo.  Hence  *' foresail"  is  probably  correct. 
They  made  for  the  beach  {kateidhon  eis  ton  aigialon).  Imperfect 
active  of  katecho,  to  hold  down,  perhaps  inchoative.  "They 
began  to  hold  the  ship  steadily  for  the  beach." 

41.  But  lighting  upon  (peripesontes  de).    Second  aorist  ac- 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  475 

tive  participle  of  peripiptd,  old  verb  to  fall  into  and  so  be 
encompassed  by  as  in  Luke  10:30;  James  1:2.  There  is  a 
current  on  one  side  of  St.  Paul's  Bay  between  a  little  island 
(Salmonetta)  and  Malta  which  makes  a  sand  bank  between 
the  two  currents.  Unexpectedly  the  ship  stuck  in  this  sand- 
bar. Where  two  seas  met  {dithalasson).  Used  in  Strabo  and 
Dio  Chrysostom  for  divided  seas  {dis,  thalassa).  They  ran 
the  vessel  aground  (epekeilan  ten  naun).  First  aorist  active 
indicative  of  old  verb  epikello,  to  run  a  ship  ashore.  Only 
here  in  N.T.  Here  also  we  have  the  only  N.T.  use  of  naus 
for  ship  (from  nao,  neb,  to  swim)  so  common  in  ancient  Greek. 
Our  word  navy  is  from  this  word  through  the  Latin.  Struck 
{ereisasa).  First  aorist  active  participle  of  ereido,  old  verb 
to  fix  firmly.  Only  here  in  N.T.  UnmoveaUe  (asaleutos). 
From  a  privative  and  saleuo  to  shake.  Old  word.  In  N.T. 
only  here  and  Heb.  12:28.  Began  to  break  up  {elueto).  Inchoa- 
tive imperfect  passive  of  the  old  verb  luo,  to  loosen.  The 
prow  was  stuck  in  the  sand-bar,  and  the  stern  was  breaking 
to  pieces  by  the  opposing  waves  lashing  on  both  sides.  It 
was  a  critical  moment. 

42.  Counsel  was  to  kill  {boule  egeneto  hina — apokteinbsin). 
The  soldiers  did  not  relish  the  idea  of  the  escape  of  the 
prisoners.  Hence  there  came  this  "counsel"  (boule).  Regular 
Greek  idiom  for  purpose  (hina  and  aorist  active  subjunctive 
of  apokteino,  to  kill).  Soldiers  were  responsible  for  the  lives 
of  prisoners  (Acts  12:19).  Swim  out  {ekkolumbesas).  First 
aorist  active  participle  of  ekkolumbao,  old  verb  to  swim  out 
and  so  away.  Escape  (diaphugei).  Second  aorist  (effective) 
active  subjunctive  of  diapheugo,  to  make  a  clean  (dia)  escape. 

43.  To  save  Paul  {diasbsai  ton  Paulon).  Effective  first 
aorist  active  infinitive  of  diasbzb.  And  no  wonder  for  the 
centurion  knew  now  how  much  they  all  owed  to  Paul. 
Stayed  them  from  their  purpose  [ekbleusen  autous  tou  boule- 
matos.)  Ablative  case  of  boulema  after  ekbleusen  (from 
kbleub,  to  hinder,  common  verb),  ^nd  get  first  to  land  {prbtous 


476      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

eis  ten  gen  exienai).  This  classic  verb  exeimi  occurs  four  times 
in  Acts  (13:42;  17:15;  20:7;  27:32)  and  nowhere  else  in  the 
N.T.    It  was  a  wise  command. 

44.  Some  on  planks  {hous  men  epi  sanisin).  Common 
Greek  idiom  {hous  men — hous  de)  for  "some — some." 
The  only  N.T.  instance  of  the  old  Greek  word  sanis  for 
board  or  plank.  The  breaking  of  the  ship  gave  scraps  of 
timber  which  some  used.  They  all  escaped  safe  {pantas 
diasothenai).  First  aorist  passive  infinitive  of  diasozo  (the 
very  word  used  for  the  desire  of  the  centurion  about  Paul) 
with  accusative  of  general  reference,  the  clause  being  subject 
of  egeneto.  So  Luke  in  this  marvellous  narrative,  worthy  of 
any  historian  in  any  age,  shows  how  Paul's  promise  was  ful- 
filled (verse  24).  Paul  the  prisoner  is  the  hero  of  the  voyage 
and  shipwreck,  a  wonderful  example  of  God's  providential 
care. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII 

1.  Then  we  knew  {tote  epegnomen).  Second  aorist  (in- 
gressive)  active  indicative  of  epiginosko.  Then  we  recognized. 
See  27:39.  Was  called  (kaleitai).  Present  passive  indicative 
retained  in  indirect  discourse.  Melita  {M elite).  Not  Miletene 
as  only  B  reads,  a  clerical  error,  but  retained  in  the  text  of 
Westcott  and  Hort  because  of  B.  Page  notes  that  the  island 
was  Malta  as  is  shown  from  the  name,  the  location,  the 
presence  of  a  ship  from  Alexandria  bound  for  Rome  winter- 
ing there  (verse  11),  and  the  mention  of  Syracuse  as  the  next 
stop  after  leaving  (verse  12). 

2.  The  barbarians  (hoi  barbaroi).  The  Greeks  called  all  men 
"barbarians"  who  did  not  speak  Greek  (Rom.  1:14),  not 
"barbarians"  in  our  sense  of  rude  and  uncivilized,  but  simply 
"foreign  folk."  Diodorus  Siculus  (V.  12)  says  that  it  was  a 
colony  of  the  Phoenicians  and  so  their  language  was  Punic 
(Page).  The  word  originally  meant  an  uncouth  repetition 
(barbar)  not  understood  by  others  (I  Cor.  14:11).  In  Col. 
3:11  Paul  couples  it  with  Scythian  as  certainly  not  Christian. 
These  are  (with  verse  4  below)  the  only  N.T.  instances. 
Showed  us  (pareichan).  Imperfect  active  of  parecho  with  -an 
instead  of  -on  as  eichan  in  Mark  8  '.7  (Robertson,  Grammar, 
p.  339).  It  was  their  habit  on  this  occasion,  Luke  means, 
they  kept  on  showing.  No  common  kindness  (ou  ten  tuchousan 
philanthrbpian) .  The  old  word  philanthrbpia  {philos,  an- 
thropos),  love  of  mankind,  occurs  in  the  N.T.  only  here  and 
Titus  3:4  (adverb  in  27:3).  See  on  19:11  for  this  use  of  ow  <?n 
tuchousan,  "not  the  kindness  that  happens  every  day." 
They  were  not  "wreckers"  to  take  advantage  of  the  calam- 
ity. They  kindled  afire  (hapsantes  puran).  The  only  N.T. 
example  and  verse  3  of  the  old  word  pura  (from  pur,  fire), 
a  pile  of  burning  fuel  (sticks).    First  aorist  active  participle 

477 


478      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

of  haptOf  to  set  fire  to,  to  kindle.  Cf.  anapto  in  Luke  12:49. 
Received  us  all  {proselabonto  pantas  hemds).  Second  aorist 
middle  (indirect  indicative  of  proslamhano.  They  took  us 
all  to  themselves  (cf.  Acts  18:26).  The  present  {ton  ephestota). 
Second  perfect  active  participle  (intransitive)  of  ephistemi^ 
"the  rain  that  stood  upon  them"  (the  pouring  rain).  Only 
in  Luke  and  Paul  in  N.T. 

3.  fVhen  Paul  had  gathered  (sustrepsantos  tou  Paulou). 
Genitive  absolute  with  first  aorist  active  participle  of  sus- 
trepho,  old  verb  to  twist  or  turn  together  or  roll  into  a  bundle. 
In  N.T.  only  here  and  Matt.  17:22.  A  bundle  of  sticks  {phru- 
ganon  ti  plethos).  "Some  multitude  (or  pile)  of  dry  twigs" 
{phruganon  from  phrugo  or  phrusso,  to  dry.  Only  here  in 
N.T.).  Laid  {epithentos) .  So  genitive  absolute  again  with 
second  aorist  active  participle  of  epitithemi,  to  place  upon. 
Few  things  show  Paul  to  better  advantage  than  this  incident. 
By  reason  of  the  heat  {apo  tes  thermes).  Old  word,  only  here 
in  N.T.  Ablative  case  with  apo  (from  the  heat).  The  viper 
was  in  a  state  of  torpor  in  the  bundle  of  sticks.  The  heat 
wakened  him.  A  viper  (echidna).  The  old  word  used  by  the 
Baptist  of  the  Pharisees  (Matt.  3:7  =  Luke  3:7)  and  by 
Jesus  also  (Matt.  12:34;  23:33).  It  is  objected  that  there 
is  little  wood  in  the  island  today  and  no  vipers,  though 
Lewin  as  late  as  1853  believes  that  he  saw  a  viper  near  St. 
Paul's  Bay.  But  the  island  now  has  1,200  people  to  the 
square  mile  and  snakes  of  any  kind  have  a  poor  chance. 
The  viper  has  also  disappeared  from  Arran  as  the  island 
became  more  frequented  (Knowling).  Ramsay  thinks  that 
the  small  constrictor  {Coronella  Austriaca)  which  still  exists 
in  the  island  may  be  the  "viper,"  though  it  has  no  poison 
fangs,  but  clings  and  bites.  The  natives  thought  that  it  was 
a  poisonous  viper.  Fastened  on  his  hand  (kathepse  tes  cheiros 
autou).  First  aorist  active  indicative  of  kathaptOy  to  fasten 
down  on  with  the  genitive  case.  Old  verb,  here  only  in  N.T. 
Cf.  Mark  16:18. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  479 

4.  The  beast  (to  therion).  Diminutive  of  ther  and  so  little 
beast.  See  on  Mark  i  rij.  Aristotle  and  the  medical  writers 
apply  the  word  to  venomous  serpents,  the  viper  in  particular 
(Knowling),  as  Luke  does  here.  Vincent  calls  attention  to  the 
curious  history  of  our  word  "treacle"  for  molasses  (Latin 
theriaca)  from  theriak},  an  antidote  made  from  the  flesh  of 
vipers.  Coverdale  translates  Jer.  8:22:  "There  is  no  more 
treacle  in  Gilead."  Jeremy  Taylor:  "We  kill  the  viper  and 
make  treacle  of  him."  Hanging  from  his  hand  {kremamenon 
ek  tes  cheiros  autou).  Vivid  picture  of  the  snake  dangling 
from  Paul's  hand.  Present  middle  participle  of  kremamaiy 
late  form  for  kremannumi,  to  hang  up,  to  suspend  (cf.  Gal. 
3  :i3).  No  doubt  {pantos).  Literally,  By  all  means,  old  adverb. 
Cf.  21:22;  Luke  4:23;  I  Cor.  9:22.  Only  by  Luke  and  Paul 
in  the  N.T.  "They  knew  that  he  was  a  prisoner  being  taken 
to  Rome  on  some  grave  charge,  and  inferred  that  the  charge 
was  murder"  (Page).  Though  he  hath  escaped  (diasothenta). 
First  aorist  passive  participle  of  diasozo  (same  verb  used  in 
24:43,  44  and  28:1),  so-called  concessive  use  of  the  participle 
(Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  1 129).  Yet  Justice  (dike).  An 
abstraction  personified  like  the  Latin  Justitia  (Page).  The 
natives  speak  of  Dike  as  a  goddess,  but  we  know  nothing 
of  such  actual  worship  in  Malta,  though  the  Greeks  wor- 
shipped abstractions  as  in  Athens.  Hath  not  suffered  (ouk 
eiasen).  Did  not  suffer.  They  look  on  Paul  as  a  doomed  man 
as  good  as  dead.  These  people  thought  that  calamity  was 
proof  of  guilt,  poor  philosophy  and  worse  theology. 

5.  Shook  off  (apotinaxas) .  First  aorist  active  participle 
of  apotinasso,  to  shake  off.  Rare  word  (Euripides,  Galen, 
LXX).    In  N.T.  only  here  and  Luke  9:5. 

6.  But  they  expected  {hoi  de  prosedokon).  Imperfect  active, 
were  expecting,  continued  to  expect.  That  he  would  have 
swollen  {auton  mellein  pimprasthai).  More  exactly,  "Expect- 
ing him  to  be  about  (or  that  he  was  about)  to  swell  up." 
Pimprasthai  is  present  middle  infinitive  from  pimpremi,  to 


48o     WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

blow,  to  bum,  to  inflame,  to  cause  to  swell.  Prethb^  to  swell, 
seems  connected  and  both  use  the  aorist  epresa.  Our  word 
"inflammation"  likewise  means  a  burning  and  a  swelling. 
This  verb  is  a  common  medical  term  used  as  Luke  has  it. 
It  occurs  here  only  in  N.T.  Or  fallen  down  dead  suddenly 
{}  katapiptein  aphno  nekron).  Rather,  "or  was  about  to  fall 
down  dead  suddenly."  The  two  common  results  of  a  bite 
by  a  viper  or  other  poisonous  snake,  both  medical  terms 
used  by  Luke.  But  when  they  were  long  in  expectation  {epi 
polu  de  auton  prosdokonton).  Genitive  absolute.  "But  while 
they  were  expecting  for  much  time."  Nothing  amiss  come 
to  him  (meden  atopon  eis  auton  ginomenon).  "Nothing  out 
of  place  coming  to  him"  (present  middle  participle).  Meden 
the  usual  negative  of  the  participle  and  the  accusative  case 
the  object  of  theorounton  (genitive  absolute).  Changed  their 
minds  (metabalomenot).  Aorist  middle  (direct)  participle  of 
metaballo,  old  verb  to  turn  about  or  around,  turning  them- 
selves about,  changing  their  minds.  Plato  uses  this  very 
verb  in  middle  voice  for  changing  the  mind.  That  he  was  a 
god  {auton  einai  theon).  Accusative  and  infinitive  in  indirect 
discourse.  At  Lystra  Paul  was  first  received  as  a  god  (Mer- 
cury) and  then  they  stoned  him  to  kill  him  (Acts  14:11, 
19).    So  fickle  is  popular  favour. 

7.  To  the  chief  man  of  the  island  (toi  protoi  tes  nesou). 
An  official  title  correct  in  Malta  (Ramsay,  St.  Paul,  p.  343). 
An  inscription  in  Malta  calls  Prudens  "Primate  of  the 
Maltese"  {protos  Melitaion).  Here  it  is  plainly  a  title  and 
not  the  common  use  seen  in  13:50;  25:2;  28:17.  Puhlius 
(Poplioi).  This  Greek  name  (praenomen)  can  be  derived 
either  from  Popilius  or  Publius  (cf.  publicus  for  populicus 
from  populus).  Entertained  us  (exenisen  hemds).  Paul  and 
his  companions  (Luke  and  Aristarchus).  Was  Julius  in- 
cluded.^ On  xenizo  see  Acts  10:23.  Courteously  (philo- 
phronos).  This  old  adverb  from  philophron  (philos,  phren, 
friendly  mind)  occurs  here  alone  in  the  N.T.     In  a  kindly 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  48 1 

or  friendly  manner,  all  the  more  so  because  of  the  original 
suspicion  of  Paul  as  a  criminal. 

8.  Lay  {katakeisthai).  Common  verb  for  the  sick  (Mark 
1:30;  John  5:6).  Sick  {sunechomenon).  "Held  together." 
Common  verb  again  for  the  sick  as  in  Luke  4:38.  Of  fever 
(puretois).  Instrumental  case,  and  plural  "fevers,"  medical 
term  for  intermittent  attacks  of  fever  (Demosthenes,  Lucian, 
medical  writers).  Dysentery  {dusenteridi).  Instrumental 
case  also.  Late  form  of  the  older  dusenteria  and  only  here  in 
N.T.  Our  very  word  dysentery.  Another  medical  term  of 
which  Luke  uses  so  many.  Hippocrates  often  mentions 
these  two  diseases  together.  Laying  his  hands  on  him  healed 
him  {epitheis  tas  cheiras  autoi  iasato  auton).  Either  like  the 
laying  on  of  hands  in  James  5:14,  the  gift  of  healing  (I  Cor. 
I2:9f.),  or  the  tender  interest  of  Jesus  when  he  took  hold  of 
the  hand  of  Peter's  mother-in-law  (Mark  1:31).  Ramsay 
argues  that  iaomai  is  employed  here  of  the  miraculous  heal- 
ing by  Paul  while  therapeud  is  used  of  the  cures  by  Luke  the 
physician  (verse  9).  This  is  a  general  distinction  and  it  is 
probably  observed  here,  but  in  Luke  6:18  (which  see)  both 
verbs  are  employed  of  the  healings  by  Jesus.  Came  and  were 
healed  (proserchonto  kai  etherapeuonto).  Imperfect  middle 
and  imperfect  passive.  A  regular  stream  of  patients  came 
during  these  months.  Luke  had  his  share  in  the  honours, 
"us"  {hemds)f  and  no  doubt  his  share  in  the  cures.  With 
many  honours  (pollais  timais).  Instrumental  case.  The  word 
was  often  applied  to  payment  for  professional  services  as 
we  today  speak  of  an  honorarium.  They  put  on  board  {epe- 
thento).  Second  aorist  middle  indicative  of  epitithemi,  to 
put  on.  The  idea  of  "on  board"  is  merely  suggested  by 
anagomenois  (when  we  sailed)  "the  things  for  our  needs" 
{ta  pros  tas  chreias). 

II.  Which  had  wintered  (parakecheimakott).  Perfect  active 
participle  of  paracheimazo,  to  pass  the  winter.  Old  verb, 
inN.T.  only  27:12;  28:11;  I  Cor.  16:6; Titus  3:12.  Theloca- 


482      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAiMENT 

tive  case  agreeing  with  ploibi.  Navigation  in  the  Mediter- 
ranean usually  opened  up  in  February  (always  by  March), 
spring  beginning  on  Feb.  9  (Page).  Whose  sign  was  the  Twin 
Brothers  (parasemoi  Dioskourois).  The  word  parasemoi  can 
be  either  a  substantive  (as  Revised  Version  has  it)  or  an 
adjective  "marked  by  the  sign,"  examples  of  both  uses 
common  in  ancient  Greek.  Dioskourois  is  in  apposition  with 
parasemoi.  The  word  means  the  twin  sons  (kouros  or  koros) 
of  Zeus  {Dios^  genitive  of  Zeus)  and  Leda,  viz..  Castor  and 
Pollux.  The  Attic  used  the  dual,  to  Dioskoro.  Castor  and 
Pollux  were  the  tutelary  deities  of  sailors  whose  figures 
were  painted  one  on  each  side  of  the  prow  of  the  ship.  This 
sign  was  the  name  of  the  ship.  So  they  start  in  another  grain 
ship  of  Alexandria  bound  for  Rome. 

12.  Touching  (katachthentes).  First  aorist  passive  parti- 
ciple of  katago,  to  go  down  to  land,  just  the  opposite  of  anech- 
themen  in  verse  1 1  from  anago^  to  go  up  to  sea.  At  Syracuse 
{eis  Surakousas).  The  chief  city  of  Sicily  and  eighty  miles 
from  Malta.  Perhaps  open  weather  and  a  southerly  wind 
helped  them  across.  Here  it  was  that  Alcibiades  wrecked 
the  power  and  glory  of  Athens.  Why  the  ship  spent  three 
days  we  do  not  know. 

13.  We  made  a  circuit  (perielthontes) .  Second  aorist  active 
of  perierchomaij  to  go  around,  old  verb,  already  in  19:13. 
See  also  Heb.  11:37;  I  Tim.  5:13.  But  Westcott  and  Hort 
read  perielontes  after  Aleph  B  (from  periaireo)  as  in  27:40, 
though  here  it  could  only  mean  casting  loose,  for  which  no 
other  authority  exists.  At  any  rate  the  ship  had  to  tack  to 
reach  Rhegium  and  was  not  able  to  make  a  straight  course 
(enthudromeo,  16:11).  Rhegium  (Rhegion)  is  from  rhegnumiy 
to  break  off,  the  place  where  the  land  breaks  off,  the  southern 
entrance  to  the  straits  of  Messina.  A  south  wind  sprang  up 
(epigenomenou  notou).  Genitive  absolute  again,  and  for  all 
the  world  like  that  fatal  south  wind  in  27:13,  but  with  no 
bad  results  this  time,  though  the  weather  was  plainly  treach- 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  483 

erous  at  this  early  season.  On  the  second  day  {deuteraioi). 
This  is  the  classical  use  of  the  predicate  adjective,  "  We 
second  day  men"  as  in  Luke  24:22;  John  11:39;  Phil.  3:5 
instead  of  the  adverb  (Robertson,  Grammar ,  p.  657).  To 
Puteoli  {eis  Potiolous).  It  was  182  miles  from  Rhegium  and 
would  require  26  hours  (Page).  It  was  eight  miles  northwest 
from  Neapolis  (Naples)  and  the  chief  port  of  Rome,  the  regu- 
lar harbour  for  the  Alexandrian  ships  from  Rome.  Portions 
of  the  great  mole  are  said  to  be  still  visible. 

14.  Where  we  found  brethren  {hou  heurontes  adelphous). 
Possibly  from  Alexandria,  but,  as  Blass  observes,  it  is  no 
more  strange  to  find  "brethren"  in  Christ  in  Puteoli  when 
Paul  arrives  than  in  Rome.  There  was  a  large  Jewish  quarter. 
Seven  days  {hemeras  hepta).  Accusative  of  extent  of  time. 
Paul  and  his  party  remained  so  long  at  the  urgent  request 
of  the  brethren.  He  was  still  a  prisoner,  but  clearly  Julius 
was  only  too  glad  to  show  another  courtesy  to  Paul  to  whom 
they  all  owed  their  lives.  It  was  130  miles  by  land  from 
Puteoli  to  Rome  over  one  of  the  great  Roman  roads.  And  so 
we  came  to  Rome  {kai  houtos  eis  ten  Romen  elthamen).  So  at 
last.  Luke  is  exultant  as  Page  observes:  Paulus  Romae 
captivus:  triumphus  unicus.  It  is  the  climax  of  the  book  of 
Acts  (19:21 ;  23 :i i),  but  not  the  close  of  Paul's  career.  Page 
rightly  remarks  that  a  new  paragraph  should  begin  with 
verse  15,  for  brethren  came  from  Rome  and  this  part  of  the 
journey  is  touched  with  the  flavour  of  that  incident.  The 
great  event  is  that  Paul  reached  Rome,  but  not  as  he  had 
once  hoped  (Rom.  15:22-29). 

1 5.  When  they  heard  of  us  {akousantes  ta  peri  hemon).  How 
"they  heard  the  things  concerning  us"  we  do  not  know. 
Good  news  had  its  way  of  travel  even  before  the  days  of 
telegraph,  telephone,  daily  papers.  Possibly  Julius  had  to 
send  on  special  couriers  with  news  of  his  arrival  after  the 
shipwreck.  Possibly  some  of  the  brethren  in  Puteoli  at  once 
(beginning  of  the  week)  sent  on  news  to  the  brethren  in 


484      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Rome.  The  church  in  Rome  had  long  ago  received  Paul's 
letter  from  Corinth  at  the  hands  of  Phoebe.  To  meet  us  (eis 
apantesin  hemin).  Idiomatic  phrase,  "for  meeting  with  us" 
(associative  instrumental  case).  Koine  word  apantesis  from 
verb  apantao,  to  meet,  in  N.T.  only  here;  Matt.  25:6;  I  Tim. 
4:17.  Use  after  eis  rather  than  infinitive  like  a  translation 
Hebraism  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  91).  As  far  as  the  Market 
of  Appius  {achri  Appiou  Phorou).  The  Forum  of  Appius, 
90  miles  from  Puteoli,  40  from  Rome,  on  the  great  Appian 
Way.  The  Censor  Appius  Claudius  had  constructed  this 
part  of  the  road,  b.c.  312.  Paul  probably  struck  the  Appian 
Way  at  Capua.  Portions  of  this  great  stone  highway  are 
still  in  use.  If  one  wishes  to  tread  where  Paul  trod,  he  can  do 
it  here.  Appii  Forum  had  a  bad  reputation,  the  haunt  of 
thieves,  thugs,  and  swindlers.  What  would  this  motley 
crowd  think  of  Paul  chained  to  a  soldier.^  Three  Taverns 
{Trion  Tabernon).  Genitive  case  after  achri  like  Appiou 
Phorou.  About  30  miles  from  Rome.  Tres  Tabernae.  Whom 
(hous).  Two  groups  of  the  disciples  came  (one  Gentile,  one 
Jewish,  Rackham  thinks),  one  to  Appii  Forum,  the  other 
to  Three  Taverns.  It  was  a  joyous  time  and  Julius  would 
not  interfere.  Took  courage  (elabe  tharsos).  The  old  sub- 
stantive tharsos  is  here  alone  in  the  N.T.  Jesus  himself  had 
exhorted  Paul  to  be  of  good  courage  (tharsei  Acts  23:11)  as 
he  had  done  the  disciples  (John  16:33).  Paul  had  passed 
through  enough  to  cause  depression,  whether  he  was  de- 
pressed or  not,  but  he  deeply  appreciated  this  kindly  sym- 
pathy. 

16.  Paul  was  suffered  to  abide  by  himself  {epetrape  tot 
Paulbi  menein  kath*  heauton).  Second  aorist  passive  of 
epitrepo,  to  permit  or  allow.  Literally,  "It  was  permitted  to 
Paul  to  abide  by  himself."  Some  late  documents  (Textus 
Receptus)  here  add:  "The  centurion  delivered  the  prisoners 
to  the  captain  of  the  guard"  (or  the  stratopedarch).  This 
officer  used  to  be  considered  Burrus  who  was  Prefect  of  the 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  485 

Praetorian  Guard  a.d.  51-62.  But  it  is  by  no  means  certain 
that  Julius  turned  the  prisoners  over  to  this  officer.  It  seems 
more  likely  that  Julius  would  report  to  the  captain  of  the 
Peregrini.  If  so,  we  may  be  sure  that  Julius  would  give  a 
good  report  of  Paul  to  this  officer  who  would  be  kindly  dis- 
posed and  would  allow  Paul  comparative  freedom  (living 
by  himself,  in  his  lodging,  verse  23,  his  own  hired  house 
verse  30,  though  still  chained  to  a  soldier).  With  the  soldier 
that  guarded  him  {sun  tot  phulassonti  auton  stratiotei).  Prob- 
ably a  new  soldier  every  day  or  night,  but  always  with  this 
soldier  chained  to  his  right  hand  day  and  night.  Now  that 
Paul  is  in  Rome  what  can  he  do  for  Christ  while  he  awaits  the 
outcome  of  his  own  appeal  to  Nero? 

17.  Those  that  were  the  chief  of  the  Jews  (tous  ontas  ton 
loudaion  protous).  This  use  of  protos  for  the  leading  men  of 
a  city  or  among  the  Jews  we  have  already  had  in  13:50; 
25:2;  Luke  19:47.  Literally,  "Those  that  were  first  among 
the  Jews."  The  position  of  the  participle  ontas  between  the 
article  and  the  adjective  protous  is  regular  (Robertson, 
Grammar,  p.  777).  When  they  were  come  together  {sunelthon- 
ton  auton).  Genitive  absolute  again.  Paul  could  not  go  to 
the  synagogue,  as  his  custom  was,  being  a  bound  prisoner. 
So  he  invited  the  Jewish  leaders  to  come  to  his  lodging  and 
hear  his  explanation  of  his  presence  in  Rome  as  a  prisoner 
with  an  appeal  to  Caesar.  He  is  anxious  that  they  may  un- 
derstand that  this  appeal  was  forced  upon  him  by  Festus 
following  Felix  and  not  because  he  has  come  to  make  an 
attack  on  the  Jewish  people.  He  was  sure  that  false  reports 
had  come  to  Rome.  These  non-Christian  Jews  accepted 
Paul's  invitation.  Nothing  against  {ouden  enantion).  Adjec- 
tive here  as  in  26:9,  not  preposition  as  in  7:10;  8:32.  From 
en  and  antios  (anti),  face  to  face.  Concessive  participle 
poiesas  as  in  verse  4  (diasothenta)  which  see.  Yet  was  I  de- 
livered prisoner  from  Jerusalem  into  the  hands  of  the  Romans 
{desmios  ex  lerosolumon  paredothen  eis  tas  cheiras  ton  Rom- 


486      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

aion).  This  condensed  statement  does  not  explain  how  he 
"was  delivered,"  for  in  fact  the  Jews  were  trying  to  kill 
him  when  Lysias  rescued  him  from  the  mob  (22:27-36). 
The  Jews  were  responsible  for  his  being  in  the  hands  of  the 
Romans,  though  they  had  hoped  to  kill  him  first. 

18.  When  they  had  examined  me  (anakrinantes  me).  First 
aorist  active  participle  of  anakrino,  the  same  verb  used 
already  in  24:8;  25:6,  26  of  the  judicial  examinations  by  Felix 
and  Festus.  Desired  (eboulonto).  Imperfect  middle  of  at- 
tempted action  or  picture  of  their  real  attitude.  This  is  a 
correct  statement  as  the  words  of  both  Felix  and  Festus  show. 
Because  there  was  {dia  to  —  huparchein).  Accusative  case 
with  dia  (causal  use)  with  the  articular  infinitive,  "Because 
of  the  being  no  cause  of  death  in  me"  {en  emoiy  in  my  case, 
aitia,  usual  word  for  crime  or  charge  of  crime). 

19.  fFhen  the  Jews  spake  against  it  {antilegonton  ton  lou- 
daion).  Genitive  absolute  again,  antilegonton  (aniilego) 
common  verb  for  speaking  against  as  in  13:45.  Clementer 
dicit  (Bengal).  "The  word  is  a  mild  one  to  describe  the  bitter 
enmity  of  the  Jews"  (Knowling).  /  was  constrained  (enag- 
kasthen).  "T  was  compelled,"  first  aorist  passive  indicative 
of  anagkazo,  the  very  word  used  of  Paul's  efforts  to  get  the 
Christians  to  blaspheme  (26:11)  which  see.  Paul  was  com- 
pelled to  appeal  to  Caesar  (see  25:1 1  and  12  for  this  phrase), 
unless  Paul  was  willing  to  be  the  victim  of  Jewish  hate  when 
he  had  done  no  wrong.  Not  thai  I  had  aught  to  accuse  my  na- 
tion of  {ouch  hos  tou  ethnous  mou  echon  ti  kategorein).  This 
use  of  hos  with  a  participle  {echon)  is  common  in  Greek  for 
the  alleged  reason.  The  genitive  case  with  the  infinitive 
kategorein  is  regular.  Paul  says  ethnos  instead  of  laos  as  in 
24:17;   26:4. 

20.  Did  I  intreat  {parekalesa).  Did  I  invite  you.  Because 
of  the  hope  of  Israel  {heineken  tes  elpidos  tou  Israel).  Genitive 
with  preposition  heineken.  The  hope  of  the  Messiah  is  his 
point  as  in  26:6.    /  am  bound  with  this  chain  {ten  halusin  tau- 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  487 

t?n  perikeimai) .  This  old  verb  means  to  lie  around  as  in 
Luke  17:2;  Heb.  12:1.  But  it  is  also  used  as  the  passive  of 
peritithemi^  to  place  around  with  the  accusative  of  periti- 
themi  retained.  It  is  a  transitive  passive.  Paul  does  not  lie 
around  the  chain,  but  the  chain  lies  around  him,  a  curious 
reversal  of  the  imagery  (Robertson,  Grammar,  p.  815). 

21.  LetUrs  {grammata).  Official  documents  from  the  San- 
hedrin  about  the  charges  against  Paul.  Any  harm  of  thee 
{ti  peri  sou  poneron).  Eml  (poneron).  The  three  aorists 
{edexametha,  apeggeilen,  elalesen)  cover  the  past.  These 
Jews  do  not  mean  to  say  that  they  had  never  heard  of  Paul. 
It  is  hardly  likely  that  they  had  heard  of  his  appeal  to 
Caesar,  "for  how  could  the  news  have  reached  Rome  be- 
fore Paul.?"  (Page). 

22.  But  we  desire  (axioumen  de).  Old  verb  axioo,  to  deem 
worthy,  to  think  right  or  proper  as  in  15:38  which  see.  They 
think  it  only  fair  to  hear  Paul's  side  of  his  case.  Concerning 
this  sect  (peri  tes  haireseos  tautes\.  Paul  had  identified  Chris- 
tianity with  Judaism  (verse  20)  in  its  Messianic  hope.  The 
language  seems  to  imply  that  the  number  of  Christians  in 
Rome  was  comparatively  small  and  mainly  Gentile.  If  the 
edict  of  Claudius  for  the  expulsion  of  the  Jews  from  Rome 
(Acts  18:2)  was  due  to  disturbance  over  Christ  {Chrestus), 
then  even  in  Rome  the  Jews  had  special  reason  for  hostility 
towards  Christians.  Everywhere  spoken  against  (pantachou 
antilegetai).  Cf.  verse  19.  The  line  of  cleavage  between  Jew 
and  Christian  was  now  sharply  drawn  everywhere, 

23.  Appointed  (taxamenoi).  First  aorist  middle  participle 
of  tasso.  Formal  arrangement  as  in  Matt.  28:16  when  Jesus 
appointed  the  mountain  for  his  meeting  in  Galilee.  In  great 
number  (pleiones).  Comparative  of  polus,  "more  than  a 
few."  Expounded  (exetitheto).  Imperfect  middle  of  ektit- 
hemi,  to  set  forth,  as  in  1 1 :4;  18 :26.  He  did  it  with  detail  and 
care  and  spent  all  day  at  it,  "from  morning  till  evening" 
{apo  proi  heds  hesperas).    In  N.T.  only  here,  4:3  and  Luke 


488      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

24:29,  though  common  word.  Persuading  them  concerning 
Jesus  (peithon  autous  peri  tou  lesou).  Conative  present 
active  participle,  trying  to  persuade.  It  was  only  about 
Jesus  that  he  could  make  good  his  claim  concerning  the  hope 
of  Israel  (verse  20).  It  was  Paul's  great  opportunity.  So  he 
appealed  both  to  Moses  and  to  the  prophets  for  proof  as  it 
was  his  custom  to  do. 

24.  Some  believed  {hoi  men  epeithonto).  Imperfect  passive 
indicative  of  peitho.  More  exactly,  "some  began  to  be 
persuaded"  (inchoative).  Some  disbelieved  {hoi  de  epistoun). 
Imperfect  active  of  apisted,  to  disbelieve,  continued  to  dis- 
believe.    It  is  usually  so. 

25.  When  they  agreed  not  {asumphonoi  ontes).  Old  adjec- 
tive, only  here  in  N.T.,  double  compound  {a  privative,  sum, 
phone),  without  symphony,  out  of  harmony,  dissonant,  dis- 
cordant. It  was  a  triumph  to  gain  adherents  at  all  in  such 
an  audience.  They  departed  {apeluonto).  Imperfect  middle 
(direct)  indicative,  "They  loosed  themselves  from  Paul." 
Graphic  close.  After  that  Paul  had  spoken  one  word  {eipontos 
tou  Paulou  rhema  hen).  Genitive  absolute.  One  last  word 
(like  a  preacher)  after  the  all  day  exposition.  Well  {kalos). 
Cf.  Matt.  14:7;  Mark  7:6,  9  (irony).  Here  strong  indigna- 
tion in  the  very  position  of  the  word  (Page).  To  your  fathers 
{pros  tous  pateras  humon).  So  Aleph  A  B  instead  of  hembn 
(our)  like  Stephen  in  7:52  whose  words  Paul  had  heard.  By 
mentioning  the  Holy  Spirit  Paul  shows  (Knowling)  that 
they  are  resisting  God  (7:52). 

26.  Say  {eipon).  Second  aorist  active  imperative  instead  of 
the  old  form  eipe.  The  quotation  is  from  Isa.  6:9  and  10. 
This  very  passage  is  quoted  by  Jesus  (Matt.  13:14  and 
15  =  Mark  4:12  =  Luke  8:10)  in  explanation  of  his  use  of 
parables  and  in  John  12:40  the  very  point  made  by  Paul 
here,  "the  disbelief  of  the  Jews  in  Jesus"  (Page).  See  on 
Matthew  for  discussion  of  the  language  used.  Here  the 
first  time  ("go  to  this  people  and  say")  does  not  occur  in 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  489 

Matthew.  It  is  a  solemn  dirge  of  the  doom  of  the  Jews  for 
their  rejection  of  the  Messiah  foreseen  so  long  ago  by  Isaiah. 

28.  This  salvation  (touto  to  soterion).  Adjective  from 
s5ter  (Saviour),  saving,  bringing  salvation.  Common  in  the 
old  Greek.  The  neuter  as  here  often  in  LXX  (as  Psa.  67:2) 
as  substantive  like  soteria  (cf.  Luke  3:6).  They  will  also 
hear  (autoi  kai  akousontai).  Autoi  as  opposed  to  the  rejection 
by  the  Jews,  "vivid  and  antithetical"  (Page). 

30.  Two  whole  years  (dietian  holen).  Only  here  in  N.T. 
and  24:27  which  see.  During  these  busy  years  in  Rome  Paul 
wrote  Philippians,  Philemon,  Colossians,  Ephesians,  Epistles 
that  would  immortalize  any  man,  unless,  forsooth,  one  or 
more  of  them  was  written  from  Ephesus  or  Caesarea,  which 
has  not  yet  been  proven.  In  his  own  hired  dwelling  {en  ididi 
misthomati).  Old  word,  here  only  in  N.T.,  that  which  is 
hired  for  a  price  (from  misthoo  and  that  from  misthosy  hire). 
Received  (apedecheto) .  Imperfect  middle  of  apodechomai, 
received  from  time  to  time  as  they  came,  all  that  came 
ieisporeuomenous)  from  time  to  time.  Preaching  (kerusson), 
teaching  (didaskon),  the  two  things  that  concerned  Paul 
most,  doing  both  as  if  his  right  hand  was  not  in  chains,  to 
the  amazement  of  those  in  Rome  and  in  Philippi  (Phil. 
1:12-14).  None  forbidding  him  (akolutos).  Old  adverb  from 
a  privative  and  the  verbal  adjective  kolutos  (from  koluo,  to 
hinder),  here  only  in  the  N.T.  Page  comments  on  "the 
rhythmic  cadence  of  the  concluding  words."  Page  rejects 
the  notion  that  the  book  is  an  unfinished  work.  It  closes 
with  the  style  of  a  concluded  work.  I  agree  with  Harnack 
that  Luke  wrote  the  Acts  during  this  period  of  two  years  in 
Rome  and  carried  events  no  further  because  they  had  gone 
no  further.  Paul  was  still  a  prisoner  in  Rome  when  Luke 
completed  the  book.  But  he  had  carried  Paul  to  "Rome, 
the  capital  of  the  world,  Urhi  et  Orbi"  (Page).  The  gospel 
of  Christ  has  reached  Rome.  For  the  fate  of  Paul  we  must 
turn  elsewhere.    But  Luke  had  the  presence  of  Paul  while 


490      WORD  PICTURES  IN  NEW  TESTAMENT 

he  carried  the  Acts  to  its  triumphant  conclusion.  Ramsay- 
can  give  a  good  deal  in  proof  of  his  claim  that  Luke  is  the 
greatest  of  all  historians.  Beyond  a  doubt  his  rank  is  high 
and  the  world  can  never  repay  its  debt  to  this  cultured 
physician  who  wrote  the  Gospel  and  the  Acts. 


A.  T.  Robertson 

A.  T.  Robertson,  professor  of  inter- 
pretation of  the  Greek  New  Testament 
at  Southern  Baptist  Theological  Semi- 
nary for  nearly  a  half  century,  was  one 
of  the  most  brilliant  and  popular  Bible 
scholars  of  his  day. 

A  world-famous  authority  on  the 
Greek  New  Testament,  Dr.  Robertson 
was  a  powerful  preacher  and  lecturer, 
and  a  prolific  writer  with  forty-five  vol- 
umes on  both  popular  and  profound 
subjects  to  his  credit.  A  Grammar  of 
the  Greek  New  Testament  in  the  Light 
of  Historical  Research  was  his  greatest 
contribution  to  the  serious  Bible  stu- 
dent, but  his  many  more  concise  New 
Testament  interpretations  have  been 
equally  helpful  to  the  average  Chris- 
tian. 

Among  his  most  popular  works  are: 
A  Harmony  of  the  Gospels  for  Students 
of  the  Life  of  Christ,  Paul  and  the  In- 
tellectuals, Studies  in  Mark's  Gospel, 
Studies  in  the  Epistle  of  James,  Epochs 
in  the  Life  of  Jesus,  and  Epochs  in  the 
Life  of  Paul. 


Other  Aids  in 
New  Testament  Study 


THE  MEANING  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Barclay  M.  Newman 

What  relationship,  if  any,  do  the  New  Testament  books  have 
to  the  social,  economic,  and  intellectual  conditions  of  the  time 
in  which  they  were  written?  How  can  an  understanding  of  this 
relationship  add  to  our  appreciation  of  the  New  Testament?  This 
illuminating  survey  provides  sound  and  satisfying  answers  to 
these  and  other  questions.  It  also  contains  a  brief  history  of  the 
New  Testament  canon  and  a  discussion  of  its  inspiration  and  au- 
thority. Has  numerous  maps,  drawings,  and  photographs.. 


NEW  TESTAMENT  THEOLOGY 

Frank  Stagg 

This  study  emphasizes  the  New  Testament's  unity  of  thought 
and  defines  its  basic  concern  as  proclaiming  the  story  of  sal- 
vation. Dealing  with  various  New  Testament  theological  ques- 
tions—Christ, salvation,  the  church,  ordinances,  escatology,  and 
others— Dr.  Stagg  gives  fresh  meaning  and  understanding  of 
the  Bible  for  today. 


THE  NEW  TESTAMENT  WORLD 

H.  E.  Dana 

Pictures  the  life  and  world  in  the  days  of  Jesus  and  Paul. 
Briefly  sets  forth  the  Jewish  thinking  and  writing,  the  poHtical 
parties,  institutions,  home  life,  and  other  pertinent  aspects  of 
that  day.  Also  contains  a  good  summary  of  the  two  great  streams 
of  thought  during  the  time— Judaism  and  Hellenism. 


BROADMAN  PRESS 


